EPISCOPACY (As established by Law in England) NOT PREJUDICIAL TO REGAL POWER.

A Treatise written in the time of the Long Parliament,

By the special Command of the late KING.

And now published by the Right Reverend Father in God ROBERT SANDERSON Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for Timothy Garthwait in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1661.

TO THE Most High and Mighty King CHARLES the IId, By the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THat I take the boldness humbly to present this short discourse to your
Majesty's Sacred hand and piercing eye; it is upon this one and only account,
that how mean soever the performance be, the undertaking was in obedience to
the command of a most Gracious Master, your Majesty's Royal Father of Blessed
Memory. The Occasion this. When the Army had gotten the King into their own
custody out of the hands of those that had long holden him in durance at
Holdenby: to put a blind upon the world, they made a show of much good toward
him, which (as soon after appeared) they never meant him. Amongst other the
pompous civilities, wherewith (the better to cloak their hypocrisy) they
entertained him; it was their pleasure to vouchsafe him the attendance of some
of his own Chaplains: which, though it could merit little (for such a kindness
could not with justice have been denied to a far meaner person;) was yet a boon
his former Goalers thought too big for him. In that Summer Progress (such as it
was) four of us of his own naming, with the Clerk of his Closet, were suffered
to wait upon him. In which time of waiting, (which was in August MDCXLVII.) His
Majesty, being then at Hampton Court, one day called me to him, and told me he
had a little work for me to do. Some about him, it seems, had been often
discoursing with him about EPISCOPACY, as it was claimed and exercised by the
Bishops within this Realm. Which (whether out of their good will to him, or
their no-good-will to the Church, I am not able to say,) they had endeavored
to represent unto him, as not a little derogatory to the REGAL AUTHORITY, as
well in the point of Supremacy, as of Prerogative: in the one, by claiming the
function as of Divine Right; in the other, by exercising the Jurisdiction in
their own names. His Majesty said farther, that he did not believe the
Church Government by Bishops as it was by Law established in this Realm, to be
in either of the aforesaid respects, or any other way prejudicial to his Crown;
and that he was in his own judgment fully satisfied concerning the same: yet
signified his pleasure withal, that for the satisfaction of others I should
take these two Objections into consideration, and give him an Answer thereunto
in writing. In Obedience to which his Majesty's Royal pleasure, after my return
home, I forthwith (according to my bounden duty) addressed my self to the work;
and was drawing up an Answer to both the Objections, as well as I was able;
with a purpose to present the same (as soon as it should be finished) to his
Majesty in writing, upon the first offered opportunity. But behold, before I
could bring the business ad umbilicum, and quite finish what was under my hand,
the Scene of affairs was strangely changed. The King trepanned into the Isle of
Wight; the mask of Hypocrisy, by long wearing now grown so thin and useless,
that it was fit for nothing but to be thrown by; no kind of impiety and
villainy, but durst appear barefaced and in the open Sun; high insolences to
the contempt of Authority every where committed; Majesty it self trampled upon
by the vilest of the People; and the hearts of all loyal honest men sadly
oppressed with griefs and fears. Yet had the men who steered the Public as
they listed, (that they might give themselves the more recreation, amuse the
world anew, and grace the black Tragedy they were acting with the more
variety,) a mind to play one game more the next year; to wit, the Treaty at the
aforesaid Isle of Wight. Where, as soon as I understood, that by his Majesty 's
nomination, I was to give my attendance; I looked out the old Papers which I
had laid aside a good while before; made up what was then left unfinished, and
took the Copy with me to the Isle; thinking that when the Treaty should be
ended (for whilst it lasted his Majesty was taken up with other thoughts and
debates of higher concern) I might possibly have the opportunity to give his
Majesty an account thereof. What became of that Treaty, and what after ensued,
is so well known to the world, that there is no need, and withal so sad, that
it can be no pleasure, to remember. But thenceforward were those Papers laid
aside once again, and destined to perpetual silence, had not a debate lately
started, concerning one of the principal points therein handled, occasioned
some persons of eminent place and esteem in the Church (and one of them
conscious to the aforesaid command laid upon me by the late King,) to desire a
sight of those Papers. Which being by their encouragement now made public
(though having little other to commend them, either to the world but Truth and
Plainness, or to your Majesty but that they had their first rise from his
command whose Throne and Virtues you inherit;) I humbly beseech your Majesty
graciously to accept; together with the Prayers of

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject and devoted Servant ROBERT LINCOLN.
LONDON, August 10. MDCLXI.
By the KING.
A PROCLAMATION, Declaring that the proceedings of his Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Courts and Ministers, are according to the Laws of the Realm.
WHereas in some of the Libellous books and Pamphlets lately published, The
most Reverend Fathers in God, the Lords Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm,
are said to have usurped upon his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and to have
proceeded in the high Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts, contrary to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; It was ordered by his Majesty's high Court
of Star Chamber, the Twelfth day of June last, that the opinion of the two
Lords chief Justices, the Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges and
Barons should be had and certified in those particulars, viz. Whether Processes
may not issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the Name of the Bishops.
Whether a Patent under the great Seal be necessary for the keeping of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, and enabling Citations, Suspensions, Excommunications,
and other censures of the Church. And whether Citations ought to be in the
Kings name, and under his Seal of Arms, and the like for Institutions and
Inductions to Benefices, and Correction of Ecclesiastical offenses. Whether
Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical persons may or ought to keep any
visitation at any time unless they have express Commission or Patent under the
great Seal of England to do it, and that as his Majesty's Uisitors only, and in
his name and Right alone.

Whereupon, his Majesty's said Judges having taken the same into their serious
consideration, did unanimously concur and agree in opinion, and the first day
of July last certified under their hands as follows, That Processes may issue
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the name of the Bishops; and that a Patent
under the great Seal is not necessary for the keeping of the said
Ecclesiastical Courts, or for enabling of Citations, Suspensions,
Excommunications and other Censures of the Church; And that it is not necessary
that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the said Courts,
or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or correction of Ecclesiastical
offenses by Censure in those Courts, be in the Kings name or with the style of
the King, or under the Kings Seal, or that their Seals of Office have in them
the Kings Arms; And that the Statute of Primo Edvardi Sexti, cap. secundo,
which enacted the contrary, is not now in force: And that the Bishops,
Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical persons, may keep their Uisitations as
usually they have done, without Commission under the great Seal of England so
to do: which opinions and resolutions being declared under the hands of all his
Majesty's said Judges, and so certified into his Court of Star Chamber, were
there recorded: and it was by that Court further ordered the fourth day of the
said month of July, that the said certificate should be enrolled in all other
his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and in the High Commission, and other
Ecclesiastical Courts, for the satisfaction of all men, That the proceedings in
the High Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts are agreeable to the Laws
and Statutes of the Realm.

And his Royal Majesty has thought sit, with advice of his Council, that a
public Declaration of these the opinions and resolutions of his Reverend and
Learned Judges, being agreeable to the Judgment and Resolutions of former
times, should be made known to all his Subjects, as well to vindicate the legal
proceedings of His Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers, from the unjust and
scandalous imputation of invading or entrenching on his Royal Prerogative, as
to settle the minds and stop the mouths of all unquiet Spirits, that for the
future they presume not to censure his Ecclesiastical Courts or Ministers in
these their Just and warranted proceedings: And hereof his Majesty admonishes
all his Subjects to take warning as they shall answer the contrary at their
perils.

Given at the Court at Lyndhurst the 18. day of August, in the 13. year of his
Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and by the Assigns of John Bill, 1637.

Primo Julii 1637. The Judges Certificate concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order made in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber
the Twelfth of May last, we have taken consideration of the particulars,
wherein our Opinions are required by the said Order, and we have all agreed,

That Processes may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the name of
Bishops, and that a Patent under the great Seal is not necessary for the
keeping of the said Ecclesiastical Courts, or for the enabling of Citations,
Suspensions, Excommunications or other Censures of the Church. And that it is
not necessary that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the
said Courts, or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or Correction of
Ecclesiastical offenses by censure in those Courts, be in the Kings name, or
with the Style of the King, or under the Kings Seal, or that their Seals of
Office have in them the Kings Arms. And that the Statute of Primo Edvardi Sexti
Cap. 2. which enacted the contrary, is not now in force.

We are also of opinion, That the Bishops, Archdeacons and other Ecclesiastical
persons may keep their Visitations as usually they have done without Commission
under the great Seal of England so to do.

Io. Bramstone. Io. Finch. Humfrey Davenport. Will. Jones. Io. Dinham. Richard
Hutton. George Croke. Tho. Trevor. George Vernon. To. Berkley. Fr. Crawley.
Ric. Weston.

Enrolled in the Courts of Exchequer, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and Registered
in the Courts of High Commission and Star Chamber.
EPISCOPACY not Prejudicial to Regal Power.
SECT. I.
The two great Objections proposed.
I. HE that shall take the pains to inform himself rightly, what power the
Kings of England have from time to time claimed and exercised in Causes and
over Persons Ecclesiastical; as also by whom, how, and how far forth their said
Power has been from time to time either opposed, or maintained: shall
undoubtedly find that no persons in the world have more freely acknowledged,
and both by their writings and actions more zealously, judiciously and
effectually asserted the Sovereign Ecclesiastical power of Kings, then the
Protestant Bishops and Divines (whom our new Masters have been pleased of late
to call the Prelatical party) in the Church of England have done. Yet so far
has prejudice (or something else) prevailed with some persons of quality in
these times of so much looseness and distraction; as to suffer themselves to be
led into a belief, or at leastwise to be willing the people should be deceived
into the belief of these two things. First, that the Opinion which maintains
the Ius divinum of Episcopacy is destructive of the Regal power. And secondly,
that Episcopal Jurisdiction, as it was exercised before and at the beginning of
this present Parliament, was derogatory from the honor of the King, and
prejudicial to the just Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown

II. Truly, they that know any thing of the practices and proceedings of the
Anti-prelatical party, cannot be ignorant, that their aims (these or whatsoever
other pretensions notwithstanding) are clearly to enlarge their own power by
lessening the Kings, and to raise their own estates upon the ruins of the
Bishops. And therefore howsoever the aforesaid pretensions may seem at the
first appearance to proceed from a sense of Loyalty, and a tenderness of
suffering any thing to be continued in the kingdom which might tend to the
least diminution of his Majesty's just power and greatness. yet, (till their
actions look otherwise then for some time past they have done) the pretenders
must give us leave to think that their meaning therein is rather to do the
Bishops hurt, then to do the King service; and that their affections (so far as
by what is visible we are able to judge thereof) are much what alike the same
toward them both. But to leave their Hearts to the judgment of him to whom
they must stand or fall: for the just defense of truth, and that (so far as we
can help it) the people be not abused in this particular also, as in sundry
others they have been, by such men, as are content to use the Kings name when
it may help on their own designs; I shall first set forth the two main
Objections severally to the best advantage of the Objectors; and then endeavor
by a clear and satisfactory answer to discover the weakness and vanity of them
both.

III. The former objection. Whereas in the Oath of Supremacy the supreme power
Ecclesistical is acknowledged to be in the King alone; and by the Statute of 1.
Eliz. All jurisdictions and preeminencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical within
the Realm of England are restored to the Crown as the ancient right thereof,
and forever united and annexed thereunto: the Bishops claiming their power and
jurisdiction to belong unto them as of divine right, seems to be a manifest
violation of the said Oath and Statute, and a real diminution of the Regal
power in and by the said Oath and Statute acknowledged and confirmed. For
whatsoever power is of divine right, is immediately derived from God, and
depends not upon any earthly King or Potentate whatsoever as superior
thereunto. These two terms, to be from Heaven, and to be of Men, being used in
the Scriptures as terms opposite and inconsistent, and such as cannot be both
truly affirmed of the same thing.

IV. The latter objection. Setting aside the dispute of jus divinum, and
whatsoever might be said either for or against the same: the very exercising of
Episcopal jurisdiction in such a manner as it was with us, the Bishops issuing
out their Summens, giving Censures, and acting every other thing in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, in their own and not in the Kings name, seems to
derogate very much from the Regal power in the point of Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty. For whereas the Judges in the Kings Bench, Common Plees, and other
Common-Law-Courts do issue out their Writts, and make all their Judgments,
Orders, Decrees, etc. in the Kings name; thereby acknowledging both their Power
to be depending upon, and derived from the Kings authority, and themselves in
the exercise of that Power to be but his Ministers sent and authorzied by him;
and so give him the just honor of his Supremacy temporal: The Bishops on the
other side exercise a spiritual power or jurisdiction in their own names, and
as it were by their own authority, without any the least acknowledgment of the
effluxe or emanation of that power or jurisdiction from the King. Which custom
as it had undoubtedly its first rise, and after-growth from the exorbitant
greatness of the Bishops of Rome, who have usurped an unjust authority as well
over Kings and Princes, as over their Fellow-Bishops, labored all they could
to lessen the authority of Kings, especially in matters Ecclesiastical: so is
the continuance thereof no otherwise to be esteemed then as a rag or relic of
that Antichristian tyranny, which was retained (as some other things also of
evil consequence were) in those imperfect beginnings of Reformation, when the
Popes power was first abrogated under King Henry the Eighth. But it was
afterward in a more mature and perfect reformation taken in to consideration
in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth: and remedy provided there-against by an
Act of Parliament made in the first year of his Reign. Wherein it was enacted,
that all Summons, Citations, and other Processes Ecclesiastical should be made
in the Kings name and with the style of the King, as it is in Writts original
and judicial at the Common Laws; and that the Test thereof only should be in
the name of the Bishop.

V. It is true indeed that this Statute of King Edward was within a few years
after repealed, and so the old usage and form again restored primo Mariae, and
has ever since so continued during the Raigns of the said Queen, of Queen
Elizabeth, of K. James, and of his Majesty that now is until this present
Parliament, without any alteration or interruption. But the repealing of the
Statute of primo Edw. 6. and the reception of the former usage ensuing
thereupon, ought not to be alleged by the Bishops, or to sway with any
Protestant: inasmuch as that repeal was made by Queen Mary, who was a professed
Papist, and who together with that form of proceeding in the Ecclesiastical
Courts restored also the whole Popish Religion, whereof that was a branch.
Neither ought the un-interrupted continuance of the said form under Queen
Elizabeth and the succeeding Kings, (whether it happened through inadvertency
in the State, or through the incessant artifices and practices of the more
active Bishops, some or other whereof had always a prevalent power with those
Princes in their several Raigns) to hinder; but that, as the said manner of
proceeding was in the said first year of Edward 6. by the King and the three
Estates in Parliament adjudged to favor the usurped power of the Bishops of
Rome, and to trench upon the Kings just and acknowledged authority in matters
Ecclesiastical (as by the preamble of the said Act does sufficiently appear;)
so it ought to be still no otherwise esteemed then as a branch of the Papal
usurpation, highly derogatory to the honor of the King, and the rights of his
Crown. This is (as I conceive) the sum of all that has been, and the utmost of
what (I suppose) can be said in this matter.

THE II. SECTION
In answer to the former Objection.
I. WHereunto I make answer as follows. To the former Objection, I say first,
that it is evidently of no force at all against those Divines, who for the
maintenance of Episcopacy lay their claim under another notion, and not under
that of Ius Divinum. Which expression, for that it is (by reason of the
ambiguity thereof) subject to be mistaken, and that captious men are so willing
to mistake it for their own advantage; might peradventure without loss of
Truth, or prejudice to the Cause, b^ with as much prudence laid aside a^ used,
as in this, so in sundry other disputes and controversies of these Times.

II. If it shall be replied, that then belike the Proctors for Episcopacy are
not yet well agreed among themselves by what title they hold: and that is a
shrewd prejudice against them, that they have no good title. For it is ever
supposed he that has a good title, knows what it is: and we are to presume
the power to be usurped, when he that uses it cannot well tell how he came by
it. I say therefore secondly, that the difference between the Advocates for
Episcopacy is rather in the different manner of expressing the same thing, then
in their different judgment upon the substance of the matter. The one sort
making choice of an expression which he knows he is able to make good against
all gainsayers, if they will but understand him aright: the other out of
wariness or condescension forbearing an expression, (no necessity requiring the
use of it,) which he sees to have been subject to so much mis-construction.

III. For the truth is, all this ado about Ius divinum is in the last result no
more then a mere verbal nicety: that term being not always taken in one and
the same latitude of signification. Sometimes it imports a divine precept
(which is indeed the primary and most proper signification:) when it appears
by some clear express and peremptory command of God in his word, to be the will
of God that the thing so commanded should be perpetually and universally
observed. Of which sort, setting aside the Articles of the Creed, and the Moral
duties of the Law (which are not much pertinent to the present enquiry) there
are, as I take it, very few things that can be properly said to be of divine
positive right under the New Testament. The Preaching of the Gospel, and
administration of the Sacraments are two: which when I have named, I think I
have named all.

IV. But there is a secondary and more extended signification of that term,
which is also of frequent use among Divines. In which sense such things, as
having no express command in the word, are yet found to have authority and
warrant from the institution, example, or approbation either of Christ himself,
or his Apostles; and have (in regard of the importance and usefulness of the
things themselves) been held, by the consentient judgment of all the Churches
of Christ in the primitive and succeeding ages, needful to be continued: such
things I say are (though not so properly as the former, yet) usually and
interpretative said to be of Divine Right. Of which sort I take the observation
of the Lords day, the ordering of the Keys, the distinction of Presbyters and
Deacons, and some other things (not all perhaps of equal consequence) to be.
Unto Ius divinum in that former acception is required a Divine Precept: in this
later, it suffices thereunto that a thing be of Apostolical institution or
practice. Which ambiguity is the more to be heeded, for that the observation
thereof is of great use for the avoiding of sundry mistakes that through the
ignorance or neglect thereof daily happen to the engaging of men in endless
disputes, and entangling their consciences in unnecessary scruples.

V. Now, that the Government of the Churches of Christ by Bishops is of divine
right in that first and stricter sense, is an Opinion at least of great
probability, and such as may more easily and upon better grounds be defended
then confuted: especially if in expounding those Texts that are alleged for it
we give such deference to the authority of the Ancient Fathers and their
expositions thereof, as wise and sober men have always thought it fit we
should do. Yet because it is both inexpedient to maintain a dispute where it
needs not, and needless to contend for more, where less will serve the turn: I
find that our Divines that have travailed most in this Argument, where they
purposely treat of it, do rather choose to stand to the tenure of Episcopacy ex
Apostolica designatione, then to hold a contest upon the title of jus divinum,
no necessity requiring the same to be done. They therefore that so speak of
this Government as established by Divine right, are not all of them necessarily
so to be understood, as if they meant it in that first and stricter sense.
Sufficient it is for the justification of the Church of England in the
constitution and government thereof, that it is (as certainly it is) of Divine
right in the latter and larger signification: that is to say, of Apostolical
institution and approbation; exercised by the Apostles themselves, and by other
persons in their times, appointed and enabled thereunto by them, according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the Commission they had
received from him.

VI. Which besides that it is clear from evident Texts of Scripture, and from
the testimony of as ancient and authentic Records as the world has any to
show for the attesting of any other part of Ecclesiastical story; it is also in
truth a part of the established Doctrine of the Church of England: evidently
deduced out of sundry passages in the book of Consecration, (which book is
Approved in the Articles of our Religion Art. 36. Confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and Subscribed unto by all persons that have heretofore taken
Orders in the Church, or Degrees in the University;) and has been constantly
and uniformly Maintained by our best Writers, and by all the sober, orderly and
Orthodoxe sons of this Church. The point has been so abundantly proved by
sundry Learned men, and cleared from the exceptions of Novellists; that more
need not be said for the satisfaction of any intelligent man that will but
first take the pains to read the books, and then suffer himself to be master of
his own reason.

VII. Only I could wish, that they who plead so eagerly for the jus divinum of
the Lords day, and yet reject (not without some scorn) the jus divinum of
Episcopacy, would ask their own hearts (dealing impartially therein) whether it
be any apparent difference in the nature of the things themselves, or in the
strength of those reasons that have been brought for either, that leads them
to have such different judgments thereof; or rather some prejudicate conceit of
their own; which having formerly fancied to themselves even as they stood
affected to parties, the same affections still abiding, they cannot easily lay
aside. Which partiality (for I am loath to call it perverseness) of spirit, is
by so much the more inexcusable in this particular; by how much Episcopal
government seems to be grounded upon Scripture-Texts of greater pregnancy and
clearness, and attested by a fuller consent of Antiquity to have been Uniformly
and Universally observed throughout the whole Christian world, then the Lords
day has hitherto been shown to be.

VIII. But should it be granted that all the defenders of Episcopacy did indeed
hold it to be jure divino in the strictest and most proper sense; yet could not
the Objectors thence reasonably conclude, that it should be eo nomine
inconsistent with the Regal power, or so much as derogatory in the least degree
to that Supreme power Ecclesiastical, which by the Laws of our Land is
established, and by the doctrine of our Church acknowledged to be inherent in
the Crown. As themselves may easily see, if they will but consider.

IX. First, that Regal and Episcopal power are two powers of quite different
kinds: and such as considered purely in those things that are proper and
essential to either, have no mutual relation unto, or dependence upon, the one
the other; neither has either of them any thing to do with the other. The one
of them being purely spiritual and internal, the other external and temporal:
albeit in regard of the Persons that are to exercise them, or some accidental
circumstances appertaining to the exercise thereof, it may happen the one to be
somewayes helpful or prejudicial to the other; yet is there no necessity at all
that the very powers themselves in respect of their own natures should be (at
that distance) either of them so destructive of other, but that they might
consist well enough together. Yea although either of them or both should claim
(as indeed they both may do) to be of divine right independently upon the
other. Let any man come up to the point, and show if he can, how and wherein
the Episcopal power is any thing at all diminished by affirming the Regal to be
of divine right; or how and wherein the Regal power is at all Prejudiced, by
affirming the Episcopal to be of divine right. The opposition between those two
Terms, To be from Heaven and To be of Men, which was objected, comes not home
enough: unless we should affirm them both of one and the same power in the same
respect. Which since we do not; that opposition hinders not, but that the
same power may be said to be of both in diverse respects, viz. to be from
Heaven, or of God, in respect of the substance of the thing in the general; and
yet to be of Men in respect of the determination of sundry particularities
requisite unto the lawful and laudable exercise thereof.

X. Secondly, that the derivation of any power from God does not necessarily
infer the non-subjection of the persons in whom that power resideth to all
other men. For doubtless the power that Fathers have over their children,
husbands over their wives, masters over their servants, is from Heaven, of God
and not of Men. Yet are Parents, Husbands, Masters in the exercises of their
several respective powers subject to the power, jurisdiction and Laws of their
lawful Sovereigns. And I suppose it would be a very hard matter for any man to
find out a clear and satisfactory reason of difference between the
Ecclesiastical power and the Oeconomical; why the one, because it claims to
be of Divine Right should be therefore thought to be injurious to Regal power,
and the other (though claiming in the same manner) not to be injurious.

XI. Thirdly, the Ministerial power, in that which is common to Bishops with
their fellow-Presbyters, viz. the Preaching of the Word and administration of
the Sacraments, etc. is confessed to be from Heaven and of God; and yet no
prejudice at all conceived to be done thereby to the Regal Power: because the
Ministers who exercise that power are the Kings subjects, and are also in the
executing of those very acts that are proper to their Ministerial functions to
be limited and ordered by the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws. A man might therefore
justly wonder, (but that it is no new thing to find in the bag of such
Merchants, as we have now to deal with, pondus and pondus,) how it should come
to pass that the Episcopal Power, in that which is peculiar to Bishops above
other their brethren in the Ministry, viz. the Ordaining of Priests and
Deacons and the managing of the Keys, cannot be said to be of God, but it must
be forthwith condemned to be highly derogatory to the Regal Power:
notwithstanding the Bishops acknowledge themselves as freely as any others
whosoever, to be the Kings subjects, and submit themselves, with as much
willingness (I dare say, and some Presbyterians know I speak but the truth) as
the meanest of their fellow-Ministers do, to be limited in exercising the
proper Acts of their Episcopal Functions by such Laws as have been by Regal
Power established in this Realm. The King does no more challenge to himself as
belonging to him by virtue of his Supremacy Ecclesiastical, the power of
Ordaining Ministers, Excommunicating scandalous offenders, or doing any other
act of Episcopal Office in his own person; then he does the power of Preaching,
administering the Sacraments, or doing any other act of Ministerial office in
his own person: but leaves the performance of all such acts of either sort
unto such persons, as the said several respective powers do of divine right
belong unto; viz. of the one sort to the Bishops, and of the other to all
Priests. Yet does the King by virtue of that Supremacy, challenge a power as
belonging unto him in the right of his Crown, to make Laws as well concerning
Preaching, administering the Sacraments, and other acts belonging to the
function of a Priest, as concerning Ordination of Ministers, proceedings in
matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance in the Spiritual Courts, and other acts
belonging to the function of a Bishop. To which Laws, as well the Priests as
the Bishops, are subject, and ought to submit to be limited and regulated
thereby in the exercise of those their several respective Powers; their claim
to a Ius divinum, and that their said several powers are of God,
notwithstanding. I demand then: As to the Regal Power, is not the case of the
Bishops and of the Ministers every way alike? Do they not both pretend their
Powers to be of God? And are they not yet for all that both bound in the
exercise of those powers to obey the King and his Laws? Is there not clearly
the same reason of both? How then comes it to pass, that these are pronounced
innocent, and those guilty? Can any think God will wink at such foul
partiality? or account them pure with the bag of deceitful weights?

XII. Fourthly, that there can be no fear of any danger to arise to the
prejudice of the Regal power from the opinion that Bishops are jure divino,
unless that opinion should be stretched to one of these two constructions: viz.
as if it were intended either 1. that all the Power which Bishops have legally
exercised in Christian Kingdoms did belong to them as of divine right; or 2.
that Bishops living under Christian Kings, might at least exercise so much of
their power as is of divine right after their own pleasure, without, or even
against the Kings leave, or without respect to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm. Neither of which is any part of our meaning. All power, to the exercise
whereof our Bishops have pretended, comes under one of the two heads: of
Order, or of Jurisdiction. The Power of Order consists partly in preaching
the word and other offices of public Worship; common to them with their
fellow-Ministers; partly in Ordaining Priests and Deacons admitting them to
their Particular Cures, and other things of like nature, peculiar to them
alone. The power of Jurisdiction is either Internal in retaining and remitting
sins in foro conscientiae, common to them also (for the substance of the
authority, though with some difference of degree,) with other Ministers: or
External for the outward government of the Church in some parts thereof
peculiar to them alone. For that external power is either Directive in
prescribing rules and orders to those under their jurisdictions, and making
Canons and Constitutions to be observed by the Church; wherein the inferior
Clergy by their Representatives in Convocation have their votes as well as the
Bishops; and both dependently upon the King (for they cannot either meet
without his Writ, or treat without his Commission, or establish without his
Royal Assent:) or Judiciary and Coercive, in giving sentence in foro exteriori
in matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance, Excommunicating, Fining, Imprisoning
offenders, and the like. Of these powers some branches, not only in the
exercise thereof, but even in the very substance of the Power it self, (as
namely that of external jurisdiction coercive,) are by the Laws declared, and
by the Clergy acknowledged to be wholly and entirely derived from the King, as
the sole fountain of all authority of external Jurisdiction whether Spiritual
or Temporal within the Realm; and consequently not of divine right. Other-some,
although the substance of the power it self be immediately from God and not
from the King, as those of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving etc. Yet are they so
subject to be inhibited, limited, or otherwise regulated in the outward
exercise of that power by the Laws and Customs of the Land, as that the whole
execution thereof still depends upon the Regal Authority. And how can the
gross of that Power be prejudicial to the King or his Supremacy, whereof all
the parts are confessed either to be derived from him, or not to be executed
without him?

XIII. Fifthly, that if Episcopacy must be therefore concluded to be repugnant
to Monarchy, because it claims to be of divine Right: then must Monarchs
either suffer within their dominions no form of Church Government at all (and
then will Church, and with it Religion, soon fall to the ground;) or else they
must devise some new model of Government, such as never was yet used or
challenged in any part of the Christian world; since no form of Government ever
yet used, or challenged, but has claimed to a Ius divinum as well as
Episcopacy: yea, I may say truly, every one of them with far more noise, though
with far less reason then Episcopacy has done. And therefore of what party
soever the objectors are, ( Papists, Presbyterians, or Independents) they show
themselves extremely Partial against the honest Regular Protestant; in
condemning him as an enemy to Regal Power for holding that in his way, which
(if it be justly chargeable with such a crime,) themselves holding the very
same in their several ways, are every whit as deeply guilty of, as he.

XIIII. Lastly, that this their partiality is by so much the more inexcusable,
by how much the true English Protestant for his government not only has a
better title to a Ius divinum then any of the other three have for theirs; but
also pleads the same with more caution and modesty, then any of them do.
Which of the four Pretenders has the best title, is no part of the business we
are now about. The trial of that will rest upon the strength of the arguments
that are brought to maintain it: wherein the Presbyterians perhaps will not
find any very great advantage beyond the rest of those that contest for it. But
let the right be where it will be; we will for the present suppose them all to
have equal title (and thus far indeed they are equal, that every one takes his
own to be best:) and it shall suffice to show, that the Ius Divinum is pleaded
by the Episcopal party with more calmeness and moderation, and with less
derogation from Regal Dignity, then by any other of the three.

XV. For First, the rest when they spoke of Ius Divinum in reference to their
several waves of Church Government, take it in the highest elevation, in the
first and strictest sense. The Papist groundeth the Popes Ecumenical Supremacy
upon Christ's command, to Peter to execute it, and to all the Flock of Christ (
Princes also as well as others) to submit to him as their universal Pastor The
Presbyterian cries up his Model of Government and Discipline, (though minted
in the last by-gon Century,) as the very scepter of Christ's Kingdom, whereunto
all Kings are bound to submit theirs; making it as unalterable and inevitably
necessary to the being of a Church, as the Word and Sacraments are. The
Independent Separatist also, upon that grand principle of Puritanisme common to
him with the Presbyterian (the very root of almost all the Sects in the world)
viz That nothing is to be ordered in Church Matters, other, or otherwise then
Christ has appointed in his Word; holds that any company of people gathered
together by mutual consent in a Church Way is Iure Divino free and absolute
within it self, to govern it self by such rules as it shall judge agreeable to
Gods Word, without dependence upon any but Christ Jesus alone, or subjection to
any Prince, Prelate, or other humane person or Consistory whatsoever. All these
you see do not only claim to a Ius Divinum, and that of a very high nature;
but in setting down their opinions weave in some expresses tending to the
diminution of the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of Princes. Whereas the Episcopal
Party, neither meddle with the power of Princes, nor are ordinarily very
forward to press the Ius Divinum, but rather purposely decline the mentioning
of it, as a term subject to misconstruction (as has been said) or else so
interpret it, as not of necessity to import any more then an Apostolical
institution. Yet the Apostles authority in that institution, being warranted by
the example, and (as they doubt not) the direction of their Master Jesus
Christ, they worthily esteem to be so reverend and obligatory; as that they
would not for a world have any hand in, or willingly and deliberately
contribute the least assistance toward (much less bind themselves by solemn
League and Covenant to endeavor) the extirpation of that Government; but
rather on the contrary hold themselves in their consciences obliged, to the
uttermost of their powers to endeavor the preservation and continuance thereof
in these Churches, and do heartily wish the restitution and establishment of
the same, wheresoever it is not, or wheresoever it has been heretofore (under
any whatsoever pretense) unhappily laid aside, or abolished.

XVI. Secondly, the rest (not by remote inferences, but) by immediate and
natural deduction out of their own acknowledged principles, do some way or
other deny the Kings Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical: either claiming a
power of Jurisdiction over him, or pleading a privilege of Exemption from
under him. The Papists do it both ways; in their several doctrines of the
Popes Supremacy, and of the Exemption of the Clergy. The Puritances of both
sorts, who think they have sufficiently confuted every thing they have a mind
to mislike, if they have once pronounced it Popish and Antichristian, do yet
herein (as in very many other things, and some of them of the most dangerous
consequence) symbolize with the Papists, and after a sort divide that branch of
Antichristianisme wholly between them: The Presbyterians claiming to their
Consistories as full and absolute spiritual Jurisdiction over Princes, (with
power even to excommunicate them, if they shall see cause for it,) as the
Papists challenge to belong to the Pope: And the Independents exempting their
Congregations from all spiritual subjection to them, in as ample manner, as the
Papists do their Clergy. Whereas the English Protestant Bishops and Regular
Clergy, as becomes good Christians and good Subjects, do neither pretend to
any Jurisdiction over the Kings of England, nor withdraw their subjection from
them: but acknowledge them to have Sovereign Power over them, as well as over
their other subjects; and that in all matters Ecclesiastical as well as
Temporal. By all which it is clear, that the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy, as it
is maintained by those they call ( stylo novo) the Prelatical party in England,
is not an opinion of so dangerous a nature, nor so derogatory to the Regal
Powers, as the Adversaries thereof would make the world believe it is: but that
rather, of all the forms of Church Government that ever yet were endeavored to
be brought into the Churches of Christ, it is the most innocent in that behalf.

THE III. SECTION
In Answer to the later Objection.
1. HAving thus cleared the Opinion held concerning Episcopacy in the Church of
England from the crime unjustly charged upon it by the Adversaries, (but
whereof in truth themselves are deeply guilty) in their former Objection: our
next business will be the easier, to justify it in the Practice also from the
like charge laid against it in the later Objection, by showing that the
Jurisdiction exercised by the Bishops within this Realm, (and namely in that
particular which the Objectors urge with most vehemence, of acting so many
things in their own names,) is no way derogatory to the Kings Majesty's Power
or Honor. Wherein it were enough for the satisfaction of every understanding
man, without descending to any farther particularities, to show the
impertinency of the Objectors from these two general Considerations.

II. First that the Bishops have exercised no Jurisdiction in foro externo
within this Realm, but such as has been granted unto them by the successive
Kings of England; neither have challenged any such Jurisdiction to belong unto
them by any inherent right or title in their persons or Callings, but only by
emanation and derivation from the Royal Authority. The very words of the
Statute primo. Edw. 6. in the objection mentioned run thus, Seeing that all
authority of jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deducted from
the Kings Majesty as Supreme head -- and so justly acknowledged by the Clergy
of the said Realms, and that all Courts Ecclesiastical be kept by no other
power or authority either foreign or within the Realms, but by the authority
of his most Excellent Majesty etc. Now the regular exercise of a Derived power
is so far from destroying, or any way diminishing that Original power from
whence it is derived, as that it rather confirms and establishes the same.
Yea, the further such derived power is extended and enlarged in the exercise
thereof, so as it be regular, (that is, so long as it contains it self within
the bounds of its grant, and exceeds not the limits prefixed thereunto by
that Original power that granted it) the more it serves to set forth the
honor and greatness of that Original power; since the virtue of the efficient
Cause is best known by the greatness of the effect: for propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. As the warmth of the room
does not lessen the heat of the fire upon the hearth, but is rather a sign of
the greatness of that heat: nor does the abundance of sap in the branches cause
any abatement in the root, but is rather an evident demonstration of the
greater plenty there.

III. Secondly, that it is one of the greatest follies in the world, to
endeavor in good earnest to maintain any thing by argument when we have the
evidence of Sense or Experience to the contrary. For what is it cum ratione
insanire, if this be not? To deny fire to be hot, or water to be moist, or snow
to be white; when our senses enform us they are such? Or to prove by argument
that life may be perpetuated by the help of art and good diet, or that infants
are capable of faith or instruction by ordinary means; when Experience shows
the contrary. Now the Experience of above fourscore years, ever since the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, does make it most evident, that the
exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction by the Protestant Bishops here, was so far
from diminishing the power, or eclipsing the glory of the Crown, that the Kings
and Queens of England never enjoyed their Royal power in a fuller measure, or
flourished with greater luster, honor and prosperity, then when the Bishops
(by their favor) enjoyed the full liberty of their Courts, jurisdictions,
honors and privileges according to ancient grants of former Kings and the
Laws and Customs of England. On the other side; in what condition of power
and honor (otherwise then in the hearts of his oppressed Subjects) our most
pious and gracious Sovereign that now is has stood, and at this present
stands, through the prevalency of the Smectymnuan Faction; ever since they
had the opportunity and forehead from lopping off (as was at first pretended)
some luxuriant superfluities (as they at least imagined them to be) in the
branches of Episcopal Jurisdiction (as High Commission, Oath ex officio, etc.)
to proceed to take away Episcopacy it self Root and Branch: it were a happy
thing for us, if the lamentable Experience of these late Times would suffer us
to be ignorant. So as we now look upon that short Aphorism so usual with his
Majesty's Royal Father [NO BISHOP, NO KING] not as a sentence only full of
present truth when it was uttered; but rather as a sad prophecy of future
events, since come to pass. The miseries of these wasting divisions both in the
Church and Commonwealth we cannot with any reason hope to see an end of, until
it shall please Almighty God in his infinite mercy to a sinful nation, to
restore them both ( King and Bishops) to their Ancient, Just and Rightful
power: and in order thereunto graciously to hear the weak prayers of a small
oppressed Party, (yet coming from loyal hearts, and going not out of feigned
lips) beyond the loud crying Perjuries, Sacriledges, and Oppressions of those
that now exercise an Arbitrary Sovereignty over their fellow Subjects without
either Justice or Mercy, together with the abominable hypocrisy and disloyalty
that has so long reigned in them and their adherents.

IV. Those two general Considerations, although they might (as I said) suffice
to take away the force of the Objection, without troubling our selves, or the
Reader with any farther answer thereunto: yet that the Objectors may not have
the least occasion given them to quarrel the proceedings, as if we did
purposely decline a just trial, we shall come up a little closer, and examine
more particularly every material point, in the order as they lie in the
Objection aforesaid. And the Points are three.

1. That the manner used by the Bishops, in sending out their Summons, etc. in
their own names, is contrary to the form and order of other Courts.

2. That such forms of Process seem to have at first proceeded from the Usurped
power of the Bishops of Rome, who labored by all possible means to bring down
the Regal Power, and set up their own.

3. That upon these very grounds the custom was altered by Act of Parliament,
and a Statute made 1. Ewd. VI. (howsoever since repealed and discontinued,)
that all Processes Ecclesiastical should be made in the Kings name, and not in
the Bishops.

V. As to the first point, true it is that the manner used by the Bishops in
the Ecclesiastical Courts, (viz. in issuing out Summons, Citations, Processes,
giving Judgments etc. in their own names, and not in the Kings,) is different
from the manner used in the Kings Bench, Exchequer, Chancery, and sundry other
Courts. But that difference neither does of necessity import an independency of
the Ecclesiastical Courts upon the King, nor did in all probability arise at
the beginning from the opinion of any such independency; nor ought in reason to
be construed as a disacknowledgement of the Kings authority and Supremacy
Ecclesiastical. For

VI. First there is between such Courts as are the Kings own immediate Courts,
and such Courts as are not, a great difference in this point. Of the former
sort are especially the Kings Bench and Chancery: as also the Court of Common
Pleas, Exchequer, Justices of Jail-delivery etc. In the Kings Bench the Kings
themselves in former times have often personally sat; whence it came to have
the name of the Kings Bench; neither was it tied to any particular place, but
followed the Kings Person. At this day also all Writs returnable there run in
this style, Coram nobis, and not (as in some other Courts) coram Iustitiariis
nostris or the like: and all judicial Records there are styled, and the Pleas
there holden entered, Coram Rege, and not coram Iustitiariis Domini Regis.
Appeals also are made from inferior Judges in other Courts to the King in
Chancery; because in the construction of the Laws the Kings Personal Power and
Presence is supposed to be there: and therefore Sub-poena's granted out of that
Court, and all matters of Record passed there run in the same style Coram Rege
etc. Forasmuch as in the Judges in these two Courts there is a more immediate
representation of the Kings Personal power and presence, then in the Judges of
those other Courts of Common Pleas, Exchequer, etc. Which yet by reason of his
immediate virtual power and presence are the Kings immediate Courts too. In
regard of which his immediate virtual power, although the style of the Writs
and Records there be not Coram nobis, Coram Rege, as in the former, but only
Coram Iustitiariis, Coram Baronibus nostris, etc. yet inasmuch as the Judges in
those Courts are the Kings immediate sworn Ministers to execute justice, and to
do equal right to all the Kings people in his name, therefore all Processes,
Pleas, Acts and Judgments are made and done in those Courts, as well as in the
two former, in the Kings name. But in such Courts as do not suppose any such
immediate Representation or presence of the Kings either personal or virtual
Power, as that thereby they may be holden and taken to be the Kings own
immediate Courts, the case is far otherwise. For neither are the Judges in
those Courts sworn the Kings Judges, to administer Justice and do right to the
Kings subjects in his name and stead: nor do they take upon them the authority,
to cite any person, or to give any sentence, or to do any act of Jurisdiction
in the Kings name; having never been by him authorized so to do. Of this sort
are amongst others (best known to them that are skilled in the Laws of this
Realm) all Courts-Baron held by the Lord of a Manner, Customary Courts of
Copyholders, etc and such Courts as are held by the Kings grant, by Charter to
some Corporation, as to a City, Borough, or University; or else by long usage
and prescription of time. In all which Courts, and if there be any other of
like nature, Summons are issued out, and Judgments given, and all other Acts
and Proceedings made and done in the name of such persons as have chief
authority in the said Courts, and not in the name of the King: So as the styles
run thus, A. B. Major civitatis Ebor. N. M. Cancellarius Vniversitatis Oxon.
and the like; and not Carolus Dei gratia, etc.

VII. Upon this ground it is that our Lawyers tell us out of Bracton, that in
case of Bastardy to be certified by the Bishop, no inferior Court, as London,
York, Norwich, or any other Incorporation can write to the Bishop to require
him to certify: but any of the Kings Courts at Westminister (as Common Pleas,
Kings Bench etc.) may write to him to certify in that case. The reason is,
Because Nullus alius praeter Regem potest Episcopo demandare inquisitionem
faciendam. Which makes it plain that the Kings immediate powe (either
personal, or virtual) is by the Law supposed to be present in Courts of the one
sort, not of the other: the one sort being his own immediate Courts, and the
other not.

VIII. Now that the Ecclesiastical Courts wherein the Bishops exercise their
Jurisdiction, are of the latter sort, I doubt not but our Law Books will afford
plenty of arguments to prove it, beyond all possibility of contradiction or
cavil. Which being little versed in those studies I leave for them to find out
who have leisure to search the books, and do better understand the nature,
constitution, differences and bounds of the several Courts within this Realm.
One argument there is, very obvious to every understanding, (which because I
shall have fit occasion a little after to declare, I will not now any longer
insist upon,) taken from the nature of the Jurisdiction of these Courts so far
distant from the Jurisdiction appertaining to those other Courts, that these
are notoriously separated and in Common and vulgar speech distinguished from
all other by the peculiar name and appellation of the Spiritual Courts. But
another Argument, which those books have suggested, I am the more willing here
to produce, for that it not only sufficiently proves the matter now in hand,
but is also very needful to be better known abroad in the world then it is, for
the removing of a very unjust censure, which merely for want of the knowledge
of the true cause, has been laid upon the Bishops in one particular, to their
great wrong and prejudice. It has been much talked on, not only by the Common
sort of people, but by some persons also of better rank and understanding, and
imputed to the Bishops as an act of very high insolency, that in their
Processes, Patents, Commissions, Licenses, and other Instruments whereunto
their Episcopal Seal is affixed, so often as they have occasion to mention
themselves, the Style runs ever more in the Plural number [Nos G.
Cantuar-Archiepiscopus, Coram nobis, Salvo nobis -- etc.] just as it does in
his Majesty's Letters Patents and Commissions: thereby showing themselves (say
they) as if they were his Fellows and Equals. All this great noise and clamor
against the pride of the Bishops upon this score, proceeds (as I said) merely
from the ignorance of the true original cause and ground of that innocent and
ancient usage; and therefore cannot signify much to any reasonable and
considering man, when that ground is discovered: which is this, viz. that every
Bishop is in construction of our Laws a Corporation. For although the Bishop of
himself and in his private and personal capacity be but a single person as
other men are, and accordingly in his letters concerning his own particular
affairs, and in all other his actings upon his own occasions and as a private
person writes of himself in the singular number, as other private men do; yet
for as much as in his public and politic capacity, and as a Bishop in the
Church of England, he stands in the eye of the Law as a Corporation; the King
not only allows him acting in that capacity, to write of himself in the
plural number, but in all writs directed to him as Bishop (as in Presentations,
and the like) bespeaketh him in the plural number [Vestrae Diocesis, vobis
praesentamus etc.] The Bishop then being a Corporation, and that by the Kings
authority, as all other Corporations (whether Simple or Aggregate, whether by
Charter or Prescription) are: it is meet he should hold his Courts, and proceed
therein in the same manner and form (where there is no apparent reason to the
contrary) as other Corporations do. And therefore as it would be a high
presumption for the Chancellor and Scholars of one of the Universities, being
a Corporation, to whom the King by his Charter has granted a Court, or for the
Major and Aldermen of a City for the same reason, to issue Writs or do other
acts in their Courts in the Kings name, not having any authority from the King
or his grant, or from the Laws and Customs of England so to do: so doubtless it
would for the same reason be esteemed a presumption no less intolerable for the
Bishops to use the Kings name in their processes and judicial acts, not having
any sufficient legal warrant or authority for so doing.

IX. Which if it were duly considered, would induce any reasonable man to
believe and confess that this manner of proceeding in their own names used by
the Bishops in their Courts, is so far from trenching upon the Regal power and
authority, which is the crime charged upon it by the Objectors, that the
contrary usage (unless it were enjoined by some Law of the Land, as it was in
the Reign of King Edward the Sixth) might far more justly be charged
therewithal. For the true reason of using the Kings name in any Court, is not
thereby to acknowledge the emanation of the power or jurisdiction of that Court
from, or the subordination of that power unto, the Kings power or authority, as
the Objectors seem to suppose; but rather to show the same Court to be one of
the Kings own immediate Courts, wherein the King himself is supposed (in the
construction of the Law) either by his personal or virtual power to be present.
And the not using of the Kings name in other Courts, does not infer, as if the
Judges of the said Courts did not act by the Kings authority, (for who can
imagine that they who hold a Court by virtue of the Kings grant only, should
pretend to act by any other then his authority?) but only that they are no
immediate representatives of the Kings person in such their jurisdiction, nor
have consequently any allowance from him to use his name in the exercise or
execution thereof.

X. Secondly, there is another observable difference in this point, between the
Kings Common-law-Courts, such as are most of those aforementioned, and those
Courts that proceed according to the way of the Civil Law. If the King appoint
a Constable, or Earle-Marshal, or Admiral of England: for as much as all trials
in the Marshals Court (commonly called the Court of Honor) and in the
Admiralty are according to the Civil Law; all Processes therefore, Sentences,
and Acts in those Courts go in the names of the Constable, Earle-Marshal, or
Admiral, and not in the Kings name. Which manner of proceeding constantly used
in those Courts, since no man hitherto has been found to interpret, as any
diminution at all or dis-acknowledgement of the Kings Sovereignty over the said
Courts: it were not possible the same manner of proceeding in the
Ecclesiastical Courts should be so confidently charged with so heinous a crime,
did not the intervention of some wicked lust or other prevail with men of
corrupt minds to become partial judges of evil thoughts. Especially considering
that

XI. Thirdly, there is yet a more special and peculiar reason to be given in
the behalf of the Bishops for not using the Kings name in their Processes, etc.
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, then can be given for the Judges of any other the
abovementioned Courts (either of the Common or Civil Laws) in the said
respect; arising (as has been already in part touched) from the different
nature of their several respective Jurisdictions. Which is, that the summons
and other proceedings and acts in the Ecclesiastical Courts are for the most
part in order to the Ecclesiastical censures and sentences of Excommunication,
etc. The passing of which sentences and other of like kind, being a part of the
power of the Keys which our Lord Jesus Christ thought fit to leave in the
hands of his Apostles and their Successors, and not in the hands of Laymen;
the Kings of England never challenged to belong unto themselves: but left the
exercise of that Power entirely to the Bishops, as the lawful Successors of the
Apostles, and inheritours of their Power. The regulating and ordering of that
power in sundry circumstances concerning the outward exercise thereof in foro
externo, the godly Kings of England have thought to belong unto them as in the
right of their Crown; and have accordingly made Laws concerning the same, even
as they have done also concerning other matters appertaining to Religion and
the worship of God. But the substance of that power, and the function thereof,
as they saw it to be altogether improper to their office and calling: so they
never pretended or laid claim thereunto. But on the contrary when by occasion
of the title of Supreme Head, etc. assumed by King Henry the Eighth, they were
charged by the Papists for challenging to themselves such power and authority
spiritual; they constantly and openly disavowed it to the whole world,
renouncing all claim to any such power or authority: As is manifest; not only
from the allowed writings of many godly Bishops, eminent for their learning in
their several respective times, in vindication of the Church of England from
that calumny of the Papists; as Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson, Bishop
Andrews, Bishop Carleton, and others: but also by the Injunctions of Queen
Elizabeth, and the admonition prefixed thereunto; by the 37th. Art. of the
Church of England required to be subscribed by all that take Orders in the
Church, or Degrees in the Universities; and by constant declared judgment and
practice of the two late Kings of blessed memory, King James and King Charles
the Is It. They who thus expressly disclaimed the meddling with Spiritual Censures
and the power of the keys, cannot be rationally supposed to have thought their
own presence (either personal or virtual) any way requisite in the Courts where
such Censures were to be pronounced, and that power to be administered and
exercised: and therefore doubtless could not deem it fit or proper, that in the
juridical proceedings of such Courts their names should be used.

XII. The second point in the charge objected is, that this custom used by the
Bishops in acting all things in the Ecclesiastical Courts in their own names
grew at first from the exorbitant power of the Popes, who labored what they
could to advance their own greatness by exempting the Clergy from all
subjection to Temporal Princes, and setting up an Ecclesiastical power of
Jurisdiction independent upon the Secular: and that the Parliament had that
sense of it in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, as the words of the Statute
made I. Edward VI. for the altering of the said Custom, do plainly intimate.

XIII. In which part of the Charge there is at the most but thus much of Truth.
1. That the Bishops of Rome did not omit with all sedulity to pursue the grand
design of that See, which was to bring all Christian Princes into subjection to
it self. 2. That all the laboring for the Exemption of the Clergy from the
Secular Powers, was in order to that design. 3. That the Bishops manner of
using their own names in all acts of their Jurisdiction, (looked upon alone and
by it self without any consideration of the true reasons thereof) does carry,
by so much the more, show of serving the Papal Interest, then if they should do
all in the King's Name, by how much the acknowledging the Kings
Supremacy-Ecclesiastical is less apparent therein, then in the other. 4. That
the want of such an express acknowledgement of the King's Supremacy, together
with the jealousies the State had in those times over any thing that might seem
to further or favor the usurped Power of the Pope in the least degree; might
very probably in this particular (as well as it did in some other things)
occasion such men as bear the greatest sway in managing the public affairs in
the beginning of that godly (but young) King's Reign, out of a just detestation
of the Papacy to endeavor overhastily the abolishing of whatsoever was with
any color suggested unto them to savor of Popery, without such due
examination of the grounds of those Suggestions as was requisite in a matter of
so great importance.

XIIII. This is all we can (perhaps more then we need) yield unto in this point
of the Charge. But then there are some other things which we cannot easily
assent unto: as viz.

1. That this custom had undoubtedly its original and growth from the Popes
usurped power. Which as we think it impossible for them to prove; so it seems
to us the less probable, because by comparing of this course used in the
Ecclesiastical Courts with the practice of sundry other Courts, some of like,
some of different nature thereunto, we have already showed the true reasons and
grounds of the difference between some Courts and othersome in this particular.

2. That it is a rag or relic of Antichristian tyranny. Which we believe to
be altogether untrue. Not only for the reasons before specified, and for that
the same is done in sundry other Courts, holden within this Realm without any
note of Antichristianisme or Popery fastened thereupon: but also because it
has been constantly continued in this Kingdom (the short Reign of King Edward
the Sixth only excepted) with the allowance of all the Protestants Kings and
Queens of this Realm ever since the Reformation. Who, although they be ever and
anon taxed by the Puritane-faction (unjustly and insolently enough) for want of
a Through-Reformation, and leaving so much Popish trash unpurged in the point
of worship and Ceremonies: yet have not usually been blamed by that party for
being wanting to themselves in vindicating to the uttermost their Regal
authority and Supremacy Ecclesiastical from the usurped power of the Bishops of
Rome in any thing wherein they conceived it to be many wise or degree
concerned. As also because this manner of proceeding in the Courts
Ecclesiastical has been constantly and without scruple of Conscience or
suspicion of Popery used and practiced by all our godly and Orthodoxe Bishops;
even those, who have been the most zealous maintainers of our Religion against
the Papists, and such as have particularly written against the Antichristian
tyranny of the Pope, or in defense of the Kings Supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical; as Jewel, Bilson, Abbots, Buckridge, Carleton, and many others.

XV. But against all this that has been said, how agreeable soever it may seem
to truth and reason, may be opposed the judgment of the whole Realm in
Parliament (the Bishops themselves also then sitting and voting as well as
other the Lords and Commons) in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth, who thought fit by their Act to alter the aforesaid form, and that upon
the two aforesaid grounds, viz. that it was contrary to the form and order of
the Common Law-Courts, and according to the form and manner used in the time of
the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome. Which being the last and weightiest
point in the Charge, is the more considerable, in that besides its own
strength, it gives also farther strength and confirmation to the other two.

XVI. But for answer unto this argument drawn from the judgment of the
Parliament, as it is declared in the Statute of ^ Edw. 6. I would demand of the
Objectors, where they place the chief strength of the Argument: whether in the
authority of the persons (viz. the great Assembly of State convened in
Parliament so judging; or in validity of those reasons, which led them so to
judge. If in this later, their judgment can weigh no more, then the reasons do
whereon it is built; the frailty whereof we have already examined and
discovered. If in the Authority of the Judges; we lay in the balance against
it the judgment of the Kingdom in all the Parliaments after the decease of
King Edward for above fourscore years together: the first whereof repeated that
Statute; and none of those that followed (for ought appears to us) ever went
about to revive it.

XVII. If it shall be said first, That the enacting of that Statute by King
Edward was done in order to the farther abolishing of Popery, and the
perfecting of the Reformation begun by his Father: I answer, that as it was a
very pious care, and of singular example in so young a Prince, to intend and
endeavor the reformation of Religion and the Church within his Realms (for
which even at this day we have cause to acknowledge the good providence of
Almighty God in raising him up to become so blessed an instrument of his glory
and our good:) so on the other side we cannot doubt but that the business of
Reformation under him was carried on with such mixture of private ends and
other human frailties and affections, as are usually incident into the
enterprising of great affairs, especially such as cannot be effected without
the assistance of many Instruments. All of which in likelihood being not of one
judgment and temper, but having their several inclinations, passions and
interests with great difference; the product of their endeavors (whatsoever
sincerity there were in the intentions of the first mover) must needs be such,
as the constitution of the most prevalent instruments employed in the work
would permit it to be. The very name of Reformation of Religion and manners,
and of abuses crept into the Church or Commonwealth, carries with it a great
deal of outward glory and luster, filling the hearts of men with expectations
of much happiness to ensue, and in that hope is evermore entertained with
general applause, especially of the vulgar sort: because men look upon it as it
were in the Idea, (that is to say, as it is fancied and devised in the mind and
imagination) and abstractedly from those impediments and inconveniences, which
when they come ad practicandum and to put their thoughts in execution, they
shall be sure to meet withal more or less, to render the performance short of
the promise and expectation.

XVIII. Now because Reformation is so much talked of in these evil days of
ours, wherein thousands of well-meaning people have been seduced into dangerous
bypath by that specious Name: it will not be amiss, (though we may seem
perhaps to digress a little for it) to prompt the Reader to some
considerations, that may incline him rather to suspect a thing to be ill done,
then to be confident that it is well done, if he have no other reason of that
confidence but this, that it is pretended to be done by way of Reformation.

XIX. It is considerable first, that Reformation is the usual vizard, wherewith
men of insatiable avarice or ambition disguise their base unworthy intentions,
that the ugliness thereof may not appear to vulgar eyes. Seldom has any
Sacrilegious or Seditious attempt appeared abroad in the world, and been
countenanced either by the Great ones or the Many; which has not been ushered
in by this piece of Hypocrisy. Not to look further (backward or forward) for
instances in both kinds, then to the Reign of that King wherein the Statute so
much insisted upon was made; It cannot be denied, but that during the Reign of
that religious and godly young King (without his knowledge as we verily hope
and believe, or at most through the malicious suggestions and cunning
insinuations of some that were about him) such Sacriledges were acted, and that
under the name and pretense of Reformation, as have cast a very foul blemish
upon our very Religion, especially in the eyes of our Adversaries, who have
ever showed themselves forward enough to impute the faults of the persons to
the Profession. And under the same pretense of Reformation were also masked all
the bloodshed, mischiefs and outrages committed by Kett and his seditious
rabble in the same Kings Reign: insomuch as a great Oak whereat they appointed
their usual meetings, and whereon (by the just judgment of God) himself the
ringleader of that rebellion was afterward hanged, was by them called the Oak
of Reformation. By what was done in those times, (ill enough indeed, yet
modestly in comparison of what has been done in ours) we may have a near guess
what their meaning is, that are so eagerly set upon a Thorow-Reformation (as
they call it) in the Church, in the Commonwealth, in the Universities: even to
get into their own hands and disposal all the Haces and Offices of power or
profit in them all. I dare not say, (for truly of some I believe the contrary,
and hope the same of many more) that all those that join in vote or act with
those plansible pretenders of Reformation, or wish well unto them in the
simplicity of their hearts, are guilty of their abominable hypocrisy. But sure
all experience shows, that in great Councels there are evermore some one or a
few (...), active and cunning men that are able by the reputation of their
wisdom and abilities of speech to carry all businesses in the vogue even as
themselves have beforehand closely contrived them: leading on the rest, as a
bell-weather does the whole flock, or as a crafty foreman of a Jury does the
whole dozen, which way soever they please; who follow tamely after ( qua itur,
non qua eundum) in an implicit belief, that that must needs be the right way,
which they see such skilful guides to have taken before them.

XX. But say there were no such reserved secret sinister ends either in the
chief Agents or their Ministers, but that a just Reformation were as really and
sincerely intended by them all, as it is by some of them speciously pretended:
yet is it considerable Secondly, how very difficult a thing it is, in the
business of Reformation to stay at the right point, and not to overdo, by
reason of that (...), whereby we are very apt in declining one of the extremes
to fall into the other, either in point of opinion or practice. In detestation
of the heresy of Nestorius, who distinguished the persons in Christ, because
he knew there were two natures; Eutyches went so far as to confound the
natures, because he knew there was but one person. And because the Papists by
the multitude and pompousness of their Ceremonies had taken away much of the
inward vigor of Gods public worship, by drawing it too much outward; the
Puritanes in opposition to them, and to reform that error, by stripping it of
all Ceremonies have left it so bare, that (besides the unseemliness) it is well
nigh starved for want of convenient clothing. It is in the distempers of the
body politic in this respect not much otherwise then it is in those of the
body natural. In an Ague, when the cold sit has had his course, the body does
not thence return to a kindly natural warmth, but falls speedily into a
burning preternatural heat, nothing less (if not rather more) afflictive then
the former. And how osten have Physicians, (not the unlearned Empericks only,
but even those best renowned for their skill and judgment,) by tampering with
a crazy body to master the predominancy of some noxious humor therein, cast
their patients ere they were aware under the tyranny of another and contrary
humor as perilous as the former: or for fear of leaving too much bad blood in
the veins, have letten out too much of the vital spirits withal? Only the
difference is, that in bodily diseases this course may be sometimes profitably
experimented, and with good success; not only out of necessity, when there is
no other way of cure left, (as they use to say, Desperate diseases must have
desperate remedies:) but also out of choice, and in a rational way; as
Hippocrates advises in the case of some cold diseases to cast the patient into
a burning fever, which he calls (...). And I remember to have read somewhere
to that purpose such an Aphorism as this, Vtile est innasci sebrem in spasmo.
But for the remedying of Moral or Politic distempers, it is neither
warrantable nor safe to try such experiments: Not warrantable; because we have
no such rule given us in the Word of God whereby to operate: nor safe; because
herein the Mean only is commendable, all Extremes (whether in defect or
excess) vicious. Now what defects or excesses there might be in the Reformation
of Religion and the Church within these Realms during the Raigns of K. Henry
the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; it does not become me,
neither is it needful, to examine. But sure it is, they that had the managery
of those affairs in their several respective times were (...), made of the same
day with other men, subject to infirmities and passions, and to be biased with
partial affections, and those affections capable to be enflamed with zeal,
cooled with delays, enraged by opposition, and allayed by seasonable
applications. And therefore although we cannot say for certain with what
affections those Reformers in the beginning of King Edward's Reign were steered
in the whole business: yet it is very possible, and in this particular of the
Statutes, (from the weakness of the reasons therein expressed) not improbable,
that the jealousies they had of the Papal power so lately ejected might make
them more abundantly cautelous and sollicitous to secure themselves
thereagainst, then need required. Verily the temper of those times and men, and
the Reformation made about those times in other countries considered; we have
far greater cause to bless God that in their then* Reformation in very many
things they did not a great deal worse, then to blame them that in some few
things they did not a little better, then they have done.

XXI. It is further considerable Thirdly, that where a Reformation is truly
intended, and the thing it self intended by that Reformation to be established
is also within a tolerable compass of Mediocrity; there may yet be such error
in the choice of the means to be used for the accomplishing of those
intentions, as may vitiate the whole work, and render it blameworthy. For
although it be a truth so expressly affirmed by the Apostle, and so agreeable to
the dictates of right reason [That we may not do any evil thing for any good
end] as that I should scarce have believed it possible that any man that
pretended to be Christian or but reasonable should hold the contrary, had I not
been advertised by very credible persons that some men of eminent place and
power did so, by distinguishing (but beside the book, and where the Law
distinguishes not) between a public and a private good end: yet the eagerness
of most men in the pursuance of such ends as they are fully bent upon, and
their pride of spirit disdaining to be crossed in their purposes, and impatient
of meeting with any opposition; puts them many times upon the use of such
means as seem for the present best conducing to the ends they have proposed to
themselves, without any sufficient care to examine whether such means be lawful
or not. For either they run on headlong and are resolved not to stick at any
niceties of conscience, but being engaged in a design to go through with it per
fas and nefas; measuring honesty by utility: or else they gather up any thin
fig leaves where they can meet with them to hide the deformity of their actions
if it were possible even from their own eyes; and are willing their affections
should bribe and cheat their judgments with any weak reasons to pronounce that
lawful to be done which they have a mind to do, the secret checks and
murmurings of their consciences to the contrary notwithstanding. Hence it is,
that whereas men ought to conform all their wills and actions to the exact rule
of Gods Word, they do so often in stead thereof crooken the rule to make it
comply with their actions and desires: raising such doctrines and conclusions
from the sacred Texts of Scripture by forced inferences, as will best serve to
give countenance to whatsoever they fancy to be, or please to call
Reformation; and to whatsoever means they should use for the effecting of such
Reformation, though it were by popular tumults, civil war, despising
Governors, breaking Oaths, open Rebellion, or any other act how unjust soever
and full of disloyalty. Which made Learned Zanchy, observing in his time how
Anabaptists and all sorts of Sectaries, that attempted to bring in any new and
unheard of alteration in Religion into the Churches of Christ, by any means
though never so seditious and unlawful, did yet justify all their enterprises
by this, that they were done in order to a more perfect Reformation, to cry
out, Ego non intelligo istam Reformatorum mundi ^^elogiam. Whether this
observation be so sitly applyable to those times of King Edwards Reformation,
as the two former considerations were, I know not: I am sure it sits but too
well to these evil times of ours, wherein the pretense of a Thorow-Reformation
serves as a foil to set off the blackest crimes that ever the Christian world
was guilty of.

XXII. Lastly, say there should be nothing amiss in any of the premises, but
that the intentions were sincere, the proceedings moderate, and the means
lawful: yet since no wit of man is at the present able to foresee all the
inconveniences that may ensue upon any great and sudden change of such Laws
and Customs as have been long and generally observed, till time and experience
discover them; it may very well (and not seldom does) come to pass, that the
Reformation intended for the remedying of some one abuse, or the preventing of
some present apparent inconvenience, may open a gap to let in some other abuses
or inconveniences, which (though yet undiscerned) may in time prove to be more
and greater, then those that were sought to be remedyed. Physicians tell us
that all sudden changes in the body are dangerous: and it is no otherwise in
the Church and State. Which is the ground of that Maxim, well approved of all
wise men, if rightly understood, Malum been positum non movendum: and of that
other, so famous in the Ancient Councels, (...), Let the old Customs be
observed. And therefore Aristotle gravely censureth that Law made by Hippodamus
the Milesian Lawgiver, That whosoever should devise any new Law for the common
good should be rewarded by the State, as a Law indeed foolish and pernicious,
how specious and plausible soever it seemed at the first appearance: because
(says he) it would but encourage busy and active spirits to be always
innovating some thing or other in the State, which might finally tend to the
subversion of all ancient Laws and Customs, and consequently of the whole
Government it self. Now that the Reformation in King Edwards days, as to this
particular in that Statute concerned, was subject at least to this frailty, we
may very probably gather ( a posteriori) from this; that after it was once
repealed, they that had to do in the Reformation ever since, thought it sit
rather to let it lie under that repeal, then to revive it.

XXIII. There can be no doubt, but that to an objection made from the force of
a Statute, it is a sufficient answer (if it be true) to say that the said
Statute has been repealed and so continues. Yet the adversaries of Episcopacy
are so pertinaciously bent to hold their Conclusion in despite of all
Premises, that they seem to be nothing satisfied there withal, but dividing
the answer, turn the former part of it ( viz. that of the Repeal) to their own
advantage. For say they, that Repeal being made by Queen Mary, who was a
professed Papist, and a Persecuter of the Protestant Religion, was certainly an
Act of hers done in favor of Popery; and so is a strong confirmation, that the
form of proceeding formerly used by the Bishops in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
prohibited by the Statute of King Edward, but restored by that her Repeal, was
a popish practice, and more besitting Papists then Protestants to use.

XXIV. To return a full answer hereunto; first it shall be willingly granted,
that Queen Mary, being a zealous Papist, did cause that Statute made in the
first of her Brothers Reign to be repealed out of pure zeal to the Romish
Religion, and in favor of the Pope and of his Jurisdiction. Both be use she
conceived (which was true) that her late Brother being a Protestant had by that
Statute prohibited the Bishops to do sundry things in their own names, of
purpose thereby to lessen the Popes authority within his Realms: as also
because their using of the Kings name in their Processes and Acts carried with
it (as we formerly granted) a more express and evident acknowledgment of the
Kings Supremacy Ecclesiastical, then the contrary custom does.

XXV But then secondly, this being granted, it will by no means follow either
first, that the repeal of that Statute is not to be valued by any Protestant;
or that secondly the custom of the Bishops prohibited by the Statute and
restored by the Act of Repeal was Popish; or thirdly, that our former answer
was unsufficient: not the first, because we are not to look upon the Statute
and upon the Act of Repeal, as they were made, the one by a Protestant the
other by a Papist (for that were to judge (...), and with respect of persons;)
but to consider whether the reasons whereupon the Statute was grounded were in
veritate rei such, as that it ought not to have been repealed either by Papist
or Protestant. Which reasons how they have been valued, appears upon the
post-fact in this; that a Papist Princess by the principles of her Religion
could do no less then repeal that Statute, and a Protestant Princess without
prejudice to the principles of her Religion might continue that Repeal.

XXVI. Not the second: because that very Statute of I. Edward the Sixth, by
which it is ordained that all Summons, Citations and other Processes
Ecclesiastical be made in the name and with the style of the King, does it self
sufficiently absolve the contrary custom formerly used by the Bishops acting
in their own names, from being either Popish or otherwise derogatory to the
Kings Supremacy. Inasmuch as by Proviso's in the said Statute the Bishops are
still permitted in some cases to use their own names without any mention at all
to be made of the King: as namely the Archbishop of Canterbury to grant
Faculties and Dispensations; and every other Bishop to make Collations,
Presentations, Institutions and Inductions of Benefices, Letters of Orders and
Dimissories etc. under their own names and seals, as by the words of the said
Statute does plainly appear. Which sure would not have been permitted in any
case, had the thing it self been by them conceived to have been simply and de
toto genere either Popish or prejudicial to the Regal Power.

XXVII. Not the Third: because they disjoynt our former answer, that they might
make their advantage of the one piece of it severed from the other. For the
strength of the answer (it being copulative) was not to lie in either part
alone, but in both together taken jointly; and indeed more principally in the
later part which they slightly put off, then in the former whereat they take
advantage. We do not say that the objecting of that Statute is of little moment
against us, because it was repealed by Queen Mary (though that repeal alone is
sufficient to make it void and invalid as to all effects in Law:) but because
being then repealed it was never after revived in the Raigns either of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, or his Majesty that now is: which shows that the Act
of Repeal (as to the point now in dispute) was by them approved of, and
intended to continue in force. And it will thence follow further and most
clearly, that in the judgment of all these wise and religious Princes, there
was a great difference between the Papal and the Episcopal Jurisdiction, as
they had been either of them exercised within these Realms: and that the Papal
was prejudicial to the Regal Power and Supremacy, but the Episcopal was not.

XXVIII. Neither does that suffice which is put in by way of Reply hereunto, to
allege that the continuance of the old custom (after the repeal made)
happened either through inadvertency of the State, or by reason of the great
power some or other of the Bishops ever had with those Princes. For it cannot
be doubted but that the State, having before them a Precedent of so late and
fresh memory as the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. would at some time or other within
the space of fourscore years (especially there being no want in those days of
enough greedy Great-ones and factious Disciplinarians to remind them of it)
have taken a time to frame and pass a Bill for the reviving of that Statute: if
they had deemed the custom, therein forbidden, Popish or derogatory either to
the Kings honor or power, or had not rather found sufficient reason to
persuade them that the said Statute was inconvenient, or at leastwise useless.
And as for the Bishops, they that understand the condition of those first times
well know that (under God and his good providence) they stood in a manner by
the immediate and sole favor of Queen Elizabeth. The Papists on the one side
hated them above all other sorts of men, because of their Religion, and their
abilities above all other men to defend it. On the other side the Puritanes who
envied their power, and some great ones about the Court, who having tasted the
sweet of Sacrilege in the times of the two last Kings, thirsted after the
remainder of their Revenues, complied either with other, for their several
respective ends, against the Bishops. Which being so, it had been the
foolishest thing in the world for the Bishops, to have used that power or
interest they had with the Queen (upon whose favor or displeasure their whole
livelihood depended) for the procuring of her consent to any Act to be done in
favor of them, that malice it self could with any colorable construction
interpret either to savor of Popery, or to trench upon the Royal Supremacy:
That Queen having both by her sufferings before, and actions after she came to
the Crown, sufficiently witnessed to the world her averseness from Popery: and
being withal a Princess of a great Spirit, and particularly jealous in the
point of Prerogative.

XXIX. Whence I think we may (with good reason) conclude, that the ancient
custom of the Bishops in making Summons, etc. in their own names, after it was
by the Act of Repeal 1. Mar. restored, was continued by Queen Elizabeth and her
successors ever since without interruption, or reviving of the Statute of King
Edward: neither out of any inadvertency in the State, nor through any importune
or indirect laboring of the Bishops, as by the Objectors is weakly presumed;
but advisedly and upon important considerations, viz. that the devising of such
a new way, as is set forth and appointed in the said Statute, was not only a
needless thing, (and Laws should not be either made, or altered, but where it
is needful so to do,) but subject also to manifest both inconvenience, and
Scandal.

XXX. That it was altogether needless to change the old Custom may appear by
this, that all the imaginable necessity or utility of such a change could be
only this: To secure the King by using his Name in their Processes etc. (as a
real acknowledgement that their Jurisdiction is derived from him and no other.)
that the Bishops had no intention in the exercise of their Episcopal power to
usurp upon his Ecclesiastical Supremacy. Which Supremacy of the King, and
Superiority of his Jurisdiction and Authority over that which the Bishops
exercised, being already by so many other ways and means sufficiently secured;
it could argue nothing but an impertinent jealousy, to endeavor to strengthen
that security by an addition of so poor and inconsiderable regard.

XXXI. The Kings of England are secured against all danger that may accrue to
their Regal power from Episcopal Jurisdiction as it has been anciently and of
later times exercised in this Realm: First by the extent of their Power over
the persons, and livelihoods of the Bishops, and over the whole State
Ecclesiastical, as in the ancient right of the Crown, which how great it was,
may appear by these three particulars.

XXXII. First, the Collation and Donation of Bishoprics together with the
nomination of the persons to be made Bishops, in case they did by their Writ of
Conge d'eslier permit the formality of Election to others, See Stat. 25. H. 8.
20; 1. Edw. 6. 2.
did always belong to the Kings of this Realm, both before and since the
Conquest, as in right of their Crown. Our learned Lawyers assure us, Cok. 1.
Instit. 2. Sect. 648.
that all the Bishoprics of this Realm are of the Kings foundation: that they
were originally donative, and not elective: and that the full right of
Investiture was in the King, who signified his pleasure therein per traditionem
baculi and annuli, by the delivery of a ring and a Crosier-staff to the person
by him elected and nominated for that office. The Popes indeed often assayed to
make them elective, either by the Dean and Canons of the Cathedral, or by the
Monks of some principal Abbey adjoining: but the Kings still withstood it, and
maintained their right as far as they could or durst. Insomuch as King Henry
the First being earnestly solicited by the Pope to grant the election of
Bishops to the Clergy, constanter allegavit (says the story) and verbis
minacibus, he stoutly and with threats refused so to do, saying he would not
for the loss of his Kingdom lose the right of those Investitures. It is true
that King John, a Prince neither fortunate nor courageous, being overpowred by
the Popes, did by Charter in the Seventeenth year of his Reign grant that the
Bishoprics of England should be eligible. But this notwithstanding in the
Reign of King Edward the Third, it was in open Parliament declared and enacted,
that to the King and his heirs did belong the collation of Archbishopricks,
etc. and all other dignities that are of his Advowson; and that the elections
granted by the Kings his progenitors were under a certain form and condition,
viz. that they should ask leave of the King to elect, and that after the
election made they should obtain the Kings consent thereunto; and not otherwise.

XXXIII. Secondly, the King has power, if he shall see cause, to suspend any
Bishop from the execution of his Office for so long time as he shall think
good: yea, and to deprive him utterly of the dignity and office of a Bishop, if
he deserve it. Which power was de facto exercised both by Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth in the beginning of their several Raigns upon such Bishops as would
not conform to their Religion.

XXXIV. Thirdly, the Kings of England have a great power over the Bishops in
respect of their Temporalties, which they hold immediately of the King per
Baroniam; and which every Bishop Elect is to sue out of the Kings hands
(wherein they remained after the decease of the former Bishop during the
Vacancy,) and thence to take his only restitution into the same, making Oath
and fealty to the King for the same upon his Consecration. Yea, and after such
restitution of Temporalties and Consecration, the King has power to seize the
same again into his own hands, if he see just cause so to do. Which the Kings
of England in former times did so frequently practice upon any light
displeasure conceived against the Bishops; that it was presented as a grievance
by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the other Prelates by way of request to
King Edw. 3. in Parliament, Stat. for the Clergy 14. ^. 3. cap. 3.
and thereupon a Statute was made the same Parliament, that thenceforth no
Bishops Temporalties should be seized by the King without good cause. I find
cited by Sir Edward Coke out of the Parliament Rolls 18. H. 3. a Record,
wherein the King straightly charge the Bishops not to intermeddle in any
thing to the prejudice of his Crown; threatening them with seizure of their
Temporalties if they should so do. The words are, Mandatum est omnibus
Episcopis quae conventuri sunt apud Gloucestr' (the King having before summoned
them by writ to a Parliament to be holden at Gloucester) firmiter inhibendo,
quod sicut Baronias suas quas de Rege tenent diligunt, nullo modo praesumant
concilium tenere de aliquibus quae ad Coronam pertinent, vel quae personam
Regis vel Statum suum, vel Statum concilii sui contingunt; scituri pro certo
quod si fecerint, Rex inde capiet se ad Baronias suas, etc. By which Record,
together with other the premises, it may appear, that the Kings by their
Ancient right of Prerogative had sundry ways power over the Bishops whereby to
keep them in obedience, and to secure their Supremacy from all peril of being
prejudiced by the exercise of Episcopal Jurisdiction.

XXXV. Yet in order to the utter abolishing of the Papal usurpations and of all
pretended foreign power whatsoever in matters Ecclesiastical within these
Realms, diverse Statutes have been made in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth
and since for the further declaring and confirming of the Kings Supremacy
Ecclesiastical. Wherein the acknowledgement of that Supremacy is either so
expressly contained, or so abundantly provided for; as that there can be no fear
it should suffer for lack of further acknowledgement to be made by the Bishops
in the style of their Courts. Amongst other, First, by Statute made 25. H. 8.
19. upon the submission and petition of the Clergy it was enacted, that no
Canons or Constitutions should be made by the Clergy in their Convocation
without the Kings license first had in that behalf, and his royal assent
after: and likewise that no Canon etc. should be put in execution within the
Realm that should be contrariant or repugnant to the Kings Prerogative Royal,
or the Customs, Laws, or Statutes of the Realm. Then Secondly, by the Statute
of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. all such Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities and Pre-eminences, as had been exercised or used, or might be
lawfully exercised or used by any Ecclesiastical power or authority was
(declared to be) for ever united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. And Thirdly, it was also in the same Statute provided, that the Oath of
Supremacy (wherein there is contained as full an acknowledgement of the Kings
Ecclesiastical Suprenacy as the wit of man can devise) should be taken by every
Archbishop and Bishop etc. which has been ever since duly and accordingly
performed.

XXXVI. Lastly from receiving any prejudice by the Bishops and their
Jurisdiction, the Regal power is yet farther secured, by the subordination of
the Ecclesiastical Laws and Courts to the Common Law of England, and to the
Kings own immediate Courts. For although the Ecclesiastical Laws be allowed by
the Laws of this Realm, and the proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts be by
the way of the Civil and not of the Common Law: yet are those Laws and
proceedings allowed with this limitation and condition, that nothing be done
against the Common Law whereof the Kings prerogative is a principal part) nor
against the Statutes and Customs of the Realm. And therefore the Law allows
Appeals to be made from the Ecclesiastical Courts to the King in Chancery: and
in sundry cases, where a cause depends before a Spiritual Judge, the Kings
prohibition lies to remove it into one of his Temporal Courts.

XXXVII. Having so many several ties upon the Bishops to secure themselves and
their Regal authority from all danger that might arise from the abuse of the
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction exercised by the Bishops in their Courts
(by the ancient prerogative of their Crown, by the provisions of so many
Statutes and Oaths, by the remedy of the Common Law:) the Kings of England had
no cause to be so needlessly cautelous as to be afraid of a mere formality, the
Style of a Court. Especially considering the importance of the two Reasons
expressed in the Statute of King Edward, as the only grounds of altering that
Style, not to be such as would countervaile the Inconvenience and Scandal that
might ensue thereupon.

XXXVIII. For whereas it was then thought convenient, to change the Style used
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, because it was contrary to the form used in the
Common-Law-Courts within this Realm, (which is one of the Reasons in the said
Statute expressed:) it might very well upon further consideration be afterward
thought more convenient for the like reason to retain the accustomed Style,
because otherwise the form of the Ecclesiastical Courts would be contrary to
the form of other Civil-Law-Courts within the Realm (as the Admiralty, and
Earle-Marshals Court,) and of other Courts of the Kings grant made unto
Corporations; with either of which, the Ecclesiastical Courts had a nearer
affinity, then with the Kings Courts of Record, or other his own immediate
Courts of Common Law. Nor does there yet appear any valuable reason of
difference, why Inconformity to the Common Law-Courts should be thought a
sufficient ground for the altering of the forms used in the Ecclesiastical
Courts; and yet the like forms used in the Admiralty, in the Earle-Marshals
Court, in Courts Baron, in Corporation-Courts etc. should (notwithstanding the
same inconformity) continue as they had been formerly accustomed without
alteration.

XXXIX. If any shall allege as some reason of such difference, the other
Reason given in the said Statute; viz. that the form and manner used by the
Bishops was such as was used in the time of the usurped power of the Bishop of
Rome: besides that therein is no difference at all, (for the like forms in
those other aforesaid Courts were also in use in the same time;) there is
further given thereby great occasion of Scandal to those of the Church of Rome.
And that two ways: First, as it is made a Reason at all; and Secondly, as it
is applied to the particular now in hand. First, whereas the Papists unjustly
charge the Protestant Churches with Schism for departing from their Communion:
it could not but be a great Scandal to them, to confirm them in that their
uncharitable opinion of us, if we should utterly condemn any thing as unlawful,
or but even forbid the use of it as inexpedient, upon this only grouud or
consideration, that the same had been used in the times of Popery, or that it
had been abused by the Papists. And truly the Puritanes have by this very means
given a wonderful Scandal and advantage to our Adversaries, which they ought to
acknowledge and repent of: when transported with an indiscreet zeal they have
cried down sundry harmeless Ceremonies and customs as superstitious and
Antichristian, only for this that Papists use them. Whereas godly and regular
Protestants think it agreeable to Christian liberty, charity and prudence, that
in appointing Ceremonies, retaining ancient Customs, and the use of all other
indifferent things such course be held, as that their moderation might be known
to all men; and that it might appear to their very Adversaries, that wherein
they did receed from them or any thing practiced by them, they were not
thereunto carried by a Spirit of contradiction, but either cast upon it by some
necessity of the times, or induced for just reasons of expediency so to do.

XL. But then Secondly, as that Reason relates to the present business in
particular, the Scandal thereby given is yet greater. For we are to know, that
when King Henry the Eighth abolished the Papal Power, resuming in his own hand
the ancient rights of the Crown, which the Bishops of Rome had unjustly
usurped: he took upon himself also that title which he then found used by the
Bishops of Rome, but which none of his Progenitors the Kings of this Realm had
ever used, of being the Supreme head of the Church within his Dominions. This
title continued during the Reign of his son King Edward the Sixth, by whom the
Statute aforesaid was made, and is mentioned in that very Statute. Now albeit
by that title or appellation was not intended any other thing, then that
Supremacy Ecclesiastical which the Kings of this Land have, and of right ought
to have, in the governance of their Realms over all persons and in all causes
Ecclesiastical as well as other, and which is in the Oath of Supremacy
ackowledged to belong unto them: yet the Papists took Scandal at the novelty
thereof, and glad of such an occasion made their advantage of it, to bring a
reproach upon our Religion; as if the Protestants of England were of opinion,
that all Spiritual Power did belong unto the King, and that the Bishops and
Ministers of England had their whole power of Preaching, administering the
Sacraments, Ordaining, Excommunicating, etc. solely and originally from the
King, as the members of the body live by the influence which the Head has into
them. Upon their clamours, that title of Supreme head and governor was taken
into farther consideration in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. And
although that style in the true meaning thereof was innocent and defensible
enough: yet for the avoiding of Scandal and Cavil, it was judged more expedient
that the word Head should thenceforth be laid aside, and the style run only
Supreme Governor; as we see it is in the Oath of Supremacy and otherwhere ever
since, without mentioning the word Head; according to the intimations given in
the Queens Injunctions and elsewhere in that behalf. And it seems to me very
probable, that for the same reason especially (besides those other reasons
already given) it was thought fitter by Her then, and by her successors
hitherto; that the Bishops in all their Ecclesiastical Courts and proceedings
should act in their own names as formerly they had done, then that the Statute
of King Edward should be revived, for doing it in the Kings name. For the
sending out processes etc. in order to Excommunication and other
Church Censures in the Kings name, would have served marvellously to give
color, (and consequently strength, in the apprehension at least of weaker
judgments) to that calumny wherewith the Papists usually asperse our Religion,
as if the Kings of England took themselves to be proper and competent Judges of
Censures merely spiritual in their own persons, and the Prelates accordingly
did acknowledge them so to be.

Thus have I shown to the satisfaction (I hope) of the ingenuous and
unprejudiced Reader, that Episcopacy is no such dangerous creature either in
the Opinion or Practice, as some would make the world believe it is: but that
the Kings Crown may stand fast enough upon his head, and flourish in its full
verdure, without plucking away or displacing the least flower in it,
notwithstanding Episcopacy should be allowed to be of Divine Right in the
highest sense, and the Bishops still permitted to make their Processes in their
own names and not in the Kings. By this time I doubt not, all that are not
wilfully blind (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) do see and
understand by sad experience, that it had been far better both with King and
Kingdom then now it is, or (without Gods extraordinary mercy) is like to be in
haste: if the enemies of Episcopacy had meant no worse to the King and his
Crown, then the Bishops and those that favored them did.

A POSTSCRIPT to the Reader.
WHereas in my Answer to the former of the two Objections in the foregoing
Treatise, I have not any where made any clear discovery what my own particular
judgment is concerning the Jus divinum of EPISCOPACY in the stricter sense,
either in the Affirmative or Negative: and for want of so doing, may perhaps be
censured by some to have walked but haltingly, or at least wise with more
caution and mincing, then became me to do in a business of that nature; I do
hereby declare,

1. That, to avoid the starting of more Questions then needs must, I then
thought it fitter (and am of the same opinion still) to decline that Question,
then to determine it either way: such determination being clearly of no moment
at all to my purpose, and for the solving of that Objection.

2. That nevertheless, (leaving other men to the liberty of their own
judgments) my opinion is, that EPISCOPAL GOVERNMENT is not to be derived
merely from Apostolical Practice or Institution: but that it is originally
founded in the Person and Office of the Messiah, our blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST.
Who being sent by his Heavenly Father to be the great Apostle, [HEB. III. 1.]
Bishop and Pastor [1 PET. II. 25.] of his Church, and anointed to that Office
immediately after his Baptism by JOHN with power and the Holy Ghost [ACT. X.
37-8.] descending then upon him in a bodily shape [LUK. III. 22.] did
afterward before his Ascension into Heaven, send and empower his holy
Apostles, (giving them the Holy Ghost likewise as his Father had given him) in
like manner as his Father had before sent him [JOH. XX. 21.] to execute the
same Apostolical, Episcopal and Pastoral Office for the ordering and governing
of his Church until his coming again: and so the same Office to continue in
them and their Successors, unto the end of the world. [MAT. XXVIII. 18 -- 20.]
This I take to be so clear, from these and other like Texts of Scripture; that
if they shall be diligently compared together, both between themselves, and
with the following practice of all the Churches of Christ, as well in the
Apostles times as in the Purest and Primitive times nearest thereunto; there
will be left little cause, why any man should doubt thereof.

3. That in my Answer to the later Objection I made no use at all (nor indeed
could do) of the Opinion of the Reverend Judges in that point, nor of his
Majesty's Proclamation grounded thereupon. For although the Proclamation had
been extant Ten years before this task was imposed upon me; yet I had never
seen, nor so much as heard of the same in all the time before, nor yet in all
the time since; till about ten days ago I was advertised thereof, when these
Papers were then going to the Press. Which, since they give so much strength to
the main Cause, and so fully avoid the Objection; I have followed the advice of
some friends, and caused them to be printed here withal.

FINIS.

