A JUSTIFICATION OF THE Present War AGAINST THE United Netherlands. WHEREIN The
Declaration of His Majesty is Vindicated, and the WAR proved to be Just,
Honorable, and Necessary; The Dominion of the Sea Explained, and His Majesty's
Rights thereunto Asserted; The Obligations of the Dutch to England, and Their
Continual Ingratitude: Illustrated with Sculptures. In Answer to a Dutch
Treatise Entitled, Considerations upon the Present State of the United
Netherlands.

By an English Man.

Cicero ad Atticum, Lib. X. Ep. 7. Pompeij omne Consilium Themistocleum est:
Existimat enim, qui Mare teneat, eum necesse rerum potiri.

Lucius Florus. Pudebat nobilem populam ablato mari, raptis insulis, dare
tributa quae jubere consueverat.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Hills and John Starkey, and are to be Sold at the
Bell in St. Paul's Chuch-yard and the Mitre within Temple Bar, 1672.

THE AUTHOR UNTO THE READER.
SInce the Author of the Considerations is pleased to conceal his Name, and
suffer his Book to pass as the work of a private person; it seems requisite,
that I do declare this ensuing Treatise to proceed from an Hand not less
private, if not more; and this I am the more obliged to own, lest by any
mistake of mine through Haste, Ignorance, or Misinformation, some prejudice
might be created against the just and unquestionable Rights of his Majesty. The
Interests of Princes are not proper subjects for ordinary pens: yet in this
juncture of our Affairs, in these times of universal danger, I hope my attempt
shall not be liable to mis-construction, since it has no other sourse and
original, than the service of my King and Native Country: and I do profess that
I have not, to my best knowledge, made use of any officious untruths, nor in
any Allegation, or Asseveration, imposed upon the credulous Reader; nor have I
asserted the less probable opinions at any time, out of compliance with the
present exigencies of State, in opposition to those which are strengthened with
greater Authority and Reason. I have thoroughly convinced my self in the first
place, and therefore hope the Discourse may prove more satisfactory unto all
others. The infant Republic of the United Netherlands, after that it had got
some considerable strength by the assistance of England, began to be sensible
of the Advantages they drew from Navigation, and how necessary it was for them
not only to open the Commerce unto both Indies, but to secure themselves of the
Fishing in the British Seas* the death of Queen Elizabeth (who would otherwise
have been jealous of their growing power, and tender of her own Rights)
together with the peaceable disposition of King James, seemed to make way for
their ambitious designs, Domin. Baudius de induciis belli Belgici, l. 3.
and the Cabal of Holland (whereof Grotius was one) did publish an Anonymous
Treatise, called Mare liberum, wherein the freedom of the Sea to navigate, or
fish in, was maintained as a due right of mankind, according to the Law of
Nature, and Nations: which foundation they esteemed more suitable to their
ends, then if they should depend upon a revocable privilege, or tacit
permission. The Book was the less resented at that time, because it was in
appearance levelled against the Spanish Indies, and the prohibition of Commerce
there; and then all Europe was willing to see the pride and power of Spain
abated by any means. Howsoever King James was angry at the pretended Liberty of
Fishing, and his Ambassador Carleton complained thereof to the States; Grotius
Apologet. c. 19.
but they never avowed the principles, but owned the Rights of King James,
though in deed slighted them, and usurped upon the Fishing, in such manner as I
have showed in this Treatise. That single Book has occasioned a multitude of
Discourses upon that Subject; Mr. Seldom defended the English dominion over the
British Seas: Others that of Venice, and Genoa: The Dutch Advocates undermining
by their Writings all the Regalities of Princes, as their Masters have done by
their Actions. After that the troubles of Scotland and England had disabled
King Charles the First from attending unto the Dominion of the Sea, according
as He most generously purposed, the Dutch thought that the English, being
weakened with the Civil Wars, and distracted with Intestine Factions, by reason
of the alteration of the Government, could not resist their ambition, should
they usurp the Universal Dominion of the Seas; and to secure themselves
therein, they sent Van Tromp to destroy the English Navy, without declaring any
War; but neither did that attempt, nor the War ensuing thereupon, prosper as
they hoped they would. But ever since that fierce War, they have determined
upon the ruining the English Navigation, and not only to exclude the English
from the East India Trade, Terris, fretis, portubus [per Indiam Orient.]
Hispaniarum atque Lusitaniae regem (atque ut auguramur etiam Anglos) exuere. M.
Schoockins de imper. ma^it. c. 21. Funestiores adhuc succedent anni, nisi in
parts ante omnia solicitato Deo Opt. max. laboraverimus Anglos mari expellere,
illiusque Imperium asserere. Frustra sumus, si per quaecunque pacta cum
talibus, speremus sartam tectam fore mercaturam nostram: quam diu hi graves
nostri vicini in mari dominabuntur, compedita erit mercatura. Si enim una
Oresunda ratione mercaturae Orientalis necessario transeunda, antehac habita
fuit Crux Mercatorum, quanta crux non futura dominans Anglia, dico, tot
commodis portubus, and tam valida hoc tempore class instructa? id ibid.
but to expel them from* and deprive them of the Dominion of the British Seas.
It is a received Aphorism amongst the Hollanders, that the flourishing
condition of England is a diminution of their glory; Also, that Trade and the
Repute of strength are inseparably linked together; and hereupon they have so
many ways contributed to the embroiling of our Kingdoms, and omitted nothing
that might represent us as ridiculous and contemptible unto Foreign Princes.
After they had usurped the Fishery, they began to assume a freedom to act all
manner of Hostilities upon our Allies (if at enmity with them) not only upon
our Seas, but in our Ports; and hereof there are many Instances besides the
destruction of the Spanish Fleet in 1639. After this, their pride increasing
with their power, they refused to strike Sail to our Ships of War: now they
will allow it to be but a Ceremony and Civility, and dispute the paying
thereof, unless we come up to such terms as are insupportable. Thus by degrees
they have reduced this Nation to the present weakness and contempt; nor can any
concessions, any indulgence satisfy their Arrogance and Covetousness: They who
covet all, will not acquiesce in any grants that are not answerable to their
desires, how unjust or vast soever they be: Igitur ne minimus quidem apex de
solennibus formulis detrahi debet, nec quicquam de jure remittendum, ne
judicium vestrum metus esse videatur, and uno concesso semesque inclinatis ad
assentiendum and indulgendum mentibus graviora long, and injustiora
postulentur. Ubi Majestatis jus agitur media via neutiquam est eligenda.
Princeps Auriacus apud D. Ba^dium de induciis. lib. 2.
And their friendship is sooner purchased by a brisk opposition, than
complaisance. If we look upon the number and quality of the injuries which we
have received from the Dutch, the Turks of Algiers and Tunis are less
offensive, and less perfidious. If we consider the courses by which the Dutch
attacque us, the Algerines are the more supportable to an English spirit, since
they act by force, and open piracy, what the Hollanders do by finess and
deceit: And since it is our unhappiness to have so ill neighbors, that we
must either fall by a lingering and inglorious death, or hazard by War a more
precipitate end; I think hi^ Majesty has made that choice which is most
conformable to the genius and temperament of his Subjects; and instigated by
his Honor, Justice, and Necessity, put into the hands of the English, an
opportunity at least of perishing bravely. But as we ought not in a righteous
cause to distrust the mercy of God, so upon so auspicious a beginning as the
Lord of Hosts has favored us with, under the conduct of our Undaunted
Admiral; we may hope for a prosperous success over our treacherous and
ungrateful Enemies. It becomes the Nation now to express their generous
resolution and courage, whereby the first advantages may be timely and
vigorously pursued. Non ignarus, instandum famae, ac prout prima cessissent,
fore universa. C. Tacitus in vita Agricolae*
It is true, War is expensive; yet it is not to be esteemed so, when the effects
of peace will be more fatal and cost us more: It is expensive, yet in the
beginnings of War even prodigality is wisdom; and he that lays out most lays
out least. Small supplies may foment and continue a War, but great ones put a
speedy end thereunto. Let us then show our selves unanimous, and resolute; Let
us add to our usual boldness all that fury which despair infuseth: Our
circumstances are such as admit of no after-game: either we must be the
Distressed Kingdom of England, or they once more the Distressed States of
Holland; and 'twill be more insupportable for us to fall into a condition we
never yet understood, than for them who return only to their primitive estate.
The Dutch presume not so much upon their own strength, as upon our divisions,
animosities, and poverty. Let us undeceive them in these surmises; let us
convince them, that the English have yet much to give, as well as All to lose;
and that they can abandon all private emulations and jealousies where the
Public is so highly endangered; and either totally extinguish them, or lay
them aside till they have a more fitting time to resume them. If we can form
our minds to such sentiments as these, we may have in a short space, what Peace
we desire; if we act by other Principles, we can have no Peace, but what
pleases the insolent and enraged Hollander.

Errata.
Page 10. lin. 31: for Soveraigners read Sovereigns, p. 21. l. 25. blot out
being now in, p. 62. l. 36. for vend r. read.

The second Cut is to be inserted page 40.

Impartial and Seasonable REFLECTIONS Upon a late Book, Entitled,
Considerations upon the Present State of the United Netherlands.
WHen I perused the Treatise, Entitled, Considerations upon the present State
of the United Netherlands, I could not but recall to mind that Raillery of
Charles the Fifth; who, when He adjusted the usefulness of several European
Languages, said, That the Dutch was fittest to be used unto an Horse. Certainly
the expressions they use against His Sacred Majesty, the present King of Great
Britain, are so rude and barbarous; the suggestions so palpably false, that in
a controversy betwixt private persons, such a procedure were intolerable in
any part of the Civil World: How much more then ought we to resent it, where
the Dignity and Honor of our Prince (upon whose Reputation abroad, and at home,
not only the National Renown, and General Commerce, but the Welfare and Being
of each Particular Man is suspended) is concerned? I do not endeavor to serve
the present juncture by this high insinuation of what importance it is, that
the Majesty of our Sovereign be upheld: I do not act any thing of the Courtier
herein; it is a document of the best Politicians, and the experience of all
Ages, Neque vero incassum haec nominis existimatio quaeritur: H^c enim dubios
firmat, benevolentiam amicorum auget, milites obsecundantes reddit, commeatuum
vias explanat, pecunias minori labor acquirit; demum plaeraque omnia in
existimatione consistunt; quae cum perdita est, fortia ac validissima remedia,
nedum debilia and invalida, vix prosunt, and inviso semel princip^, seu been
seu male facta premunt. Scipio Ammirat. dissertat. Polit. lib. 13. Discurs. 1.
does confirm it for a Truth: It is no vain or empty design, for a Prince to
preserve that credit and renown which appertains unto His Quality; it is hereby,
that He shall ensure Himself of those that waver in their Friendship or
Allegiance; it is hereby, that He shall retain His Armies in Discipline and
Courage; it is hereby, that He shall continue in His other Subjects, their due
Reverence and Respect. In fine, The Reputation of a Prince is All in all: And
that being once lost, the most powerful and prudent Remedies become ineffectual
to the support of his Crown, and tranquillity of His Dominions. Neither do I
upbraid the Dutch with the violation of those Edicts, whereby Christianity
regulates Men so in their deporments, As not to speak evil of Dignities; not to
Blaspheme the Gods, or Magistrates; being reviled, not so much as to revile
again; Whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any praise, if there be any glory, to
think thereof: No, no, I should injure Christendom to reckon the United
Netherlands a part thereof; such are their practices, that it is a crime in them
to profess that Religion, and a great mistake in those that entitle them
thereunto: I know not, whether I do not speak too mildly concerning those
deluded persons, since it is a wilful error in them that imagine so; the Dutch
themselves have avowed it, and those that managed their Trade in Iapan, when
the Christians there (at the instigation of the Dutch) were all by horrible
tortures put to death, and every Hous-keeper enjoined to declare in writing,
Varenius Descript. Japoniae, l. 2. De Religione, Japon. c. 11. p. 200. Edit.
Amstelodam. 1649.

Haec Rejeri Gisberti Narratio est, cui, quoniam ea tantum describit, quae ipso
praesente gesta sunt, fidem derogare haud jure possumus. Varen. ibid. p. 201.


That he neither was a Christian, nor retained any Christians in his family,
Melchior a Santvoort, and Vincentius Romeyn, subscribed themselves, that They
were Hollanders: Most impiously for lucre's sake declining that Profession of
Christianity, to which Christ and his Apostles oblige them. If they were
ashamed or afraid to acknowledge Christ then, I know what our Savior will do
to them hereafter; and if we be ashamed to own them now, or positive in denying
them to be Christians now, we are justified by an infallible Authority. I would
willingly palliate the matter, by casting the scandal upon a few particular
persons, who might be surprised with the imminent danger at that time: But
their reputation is not to be salved so; for the Conditions, upon which the
Trade continues to be managed there, with the knowledge and approbation of the
States General, and of the Provincials of Holland, are these;

They are at their first arrival, Omnes libros, siquo^ secum adduxerunt,
tradere tenentur. -- Insuper exercitiis Christianae Religionis omnino abstinere
debent praesentibus Iap^^is, adeo quidem ut ne manus complicate ante cibum vel
post assumptum audeant: Si in hoc peccaverint, capitale est, imo navi
mulctarentur. Varenius ubi supra, l. 1. c. 26. p 193. and lib. 2. de Relig.
Japon. c. 11. p 208.
faithfully to deliver up all the Books which they bring along with them to
Japan, (not a Bible, or Prayer Book, is reserved) which are not to be restored
till their departure again. They are to refrain from all manner of outward
Profession of Christianity in Word or Deed amongst the Japanners; in so much,
that it is Death and Confiscation of their Ships and Goods, if they do so much
as verbally give God thanks for the Meat they eat, or by any motion of their
Hands or Eyes testify any inclination thereunto. Upon these terms the Emperor
permitted them to trade thither; the Conditions were sent into Holland to be
approved of there, it being added in the close of the Letter, Quamdiu apud
Hollandos aliquid, quod Christianismum redoleat, peragetur, nihil impetrabunt,
quicquid etiam petierint. Id. ibid. p. 210.
That if they did make any of the least show, that they were Christians, they
should not obtain any favor at the hands of the Emperor. And the Dutch have so
exactly submitted to these Conditions, and do so absolutely in word and deeds
dissemble their Christianity, that not only the common people, but the Rulers
and Magistrates of Iapan do really believe that they are as perfect Heathens as
themselves. Dissimulandam enim eis esse Religionem, and pro Ethnicis quoque
haberi a Magistrat^ Japonensi. Id. ibid. p. 208.
What would those Ancient Christians do to these Irreligious Hollanders? What
Sentiments would they entertain against these practices, who proceeded so
severely against such of their number heretofore, as did (amidst a fierce
persecution) deliver up the Sacred Scriptures into the hands of the Paynims?
The P^^^^gueses refused to ^^^de there upon those terms. Which are the best
Christians, those Papists, or these Protestants? Is i^ not manifest that the
Dutch are hereby obliged to deny themselves absolutely to be Christians, in
case any Japanner does put suc^ a Question unto them?
With what Zeal would they exterminate these Traditores, these Gnostics out of
the Church, and Sacred Society of Christians? I cannot parallel th^se Actions
with any exorbitancies of the Primitive Heretics, how detestable soever they
were. But it is most manifest, that by their rigor against those Traditores,
etc. they would have ejected the Hollanders out of the number of Christians,
and anathematised them above any upon record, since the Dutch act that for
gain, which no terrors could excuse under a Dioclesian, or Maximianus.
Whatsoever may be alleged in behalf of Vincentius Romeyn and his Associates,
In regno Iap^nensium, ubi Christiana religio interdicta est, ^^^gae qui ibi
habitant, ex ^an^* to ^^ci^tatis Indiae Orientalis ab omni externo cultu
abstinere tenentur. Tract. Theologo-polit. c. 4. p. 6. 2. edit. 1670. Hamburg.
(if any thing can be said) extends not to the subsequent Traders: and even
before the persecution in Iapan, the Hollanders demeaned themselves no
otherwise then afterward, for amongst the motives which induced the Emperor
of Iapan to allow them to trade, it is expressly said, That He permitted them
this liberty, Cum Hollandi multis jam annis, quibus in Japonia commercia
exercuerunt, nunquam de propaganda Christian^ religione quicquam attentaverint,
nec de (...) soliciti fuerint -- id. ibid. page 209.
because that during all the precedent years in which they traded thither, He
never observed that they intended the propagation of their Religion, or seemed
at all concerned for it. One would think that any professing Christianity would
not demean themselves thus unworthily: but these men proclaim and publish to
the world their impiety, without remorse, or shame. The Director of their
Factory there, Francis Caron, printed this in his Description of Iapan, and
Varenius upon strict enquiry found it to be really true. Their Books were
printed at Amsterdam. And let who can, style them Christians, Reformed
Churches, or Protestants, I am sure none can communicate with such Publicans
and Heathens; and had an Hollander been Bishop of Carthage, then Donatisme had
been no Schism. An Hollander! This is the Name of a People that esteem nothing
sacred, but their own profit, and live under no obligations of Honor,
Morality, or Religion, but Interest. I must ravage over Africa (so famed for
Monstrous productions) and in the most inhumane parts thereof seek a parallel
for these European Monsters: They are not to be ranked amongst the tolerable
Paynims: Old Rome would have taught them that there are certain Laws of War, as
well as Peace, and those such as cannot be silenced by the noise of Canons: And
I will from Athens borrow an Expostulation against them. Non esse sibi
conquerendum, quod hostilia ab host passi fuerint: esse etenim quaedam belli
jura, quae ut facere, ita pati sit fas: sata exuri, dirui secta, praedas
hominum pecorum que agi, misera magis quam indigna patienti esse: id se queri,
quod Philippus, qui Romano^ alienigenas and barbaros voce^, adeo omnia, simul
divina humanaque polluerit, ut priore populatione cum infernis diis, secunda
cum superis bellum nefarium gesserit. Livius lib. 31.
"We do not complain that being Enemies, they act as Enemies: there are some
conditions and laws of war, which may be equitably practiced on both sides; to
harrasse the fields, plunder Towns, kill, slay, and take Captives, how
miserable soever these things be to those that suffer them, yet are they not
unjust actions: We do complain that these Netherlanders, who, even in the
Treatise which I now animadvert upon, do so highly pretend to Piety and
Protestancy, should violate all divine and humane Rules of Civility, that they
rail instead of fighting, that they attacque us with contumelious language, and
aggravate their unjust enmity with an insolence that is not to be endured. I am
as much perplexed to find out the Rules of their Politics herein, as I am
elsewhere to seek for those of their Religion, seeing that this deportment must
needs exasperate all mankind against them, and common humanity obliges every
one to endeavor their extirpation: Provocations of this kind, Injuries of this
nature, admit of no composition, and render the most bloody wars to be most
just. The indignities done to our King do extend unto all Princes, and become
Examples of what they universally must expect in time to suffer from the
continuance of their High and Mighties: but these affronts particularly and
most sensibly touch the subjects of the King of Great Britain, and turn their
just anger into implacable fury. As the Dutch are to the English, such were the
Veientes to the Romans, Sed Veiens hostis assiduas magis, qua^^ gravis,
contumel^s saepius, quam periculo animos agitabat. Livius lib. 2. c. 48. Livius
lib. 5.
they were a vexatious rather than terrible enemy, and irritated them more by
their contumelies, than their armies: But it is observable, that there never
was a fiercer or more cruel war, and the Romans did never testify so high
resentments, as for those indignities: and from such like considerations arose
that cautelous advice of Scipio Ammiratus and Macchiavell (no Dutchmen) that
Men ought to be cautious how they irritate an enemy by contumelious language
and other indignities; Scipio Ammi^at. dissert. polit. l. 18. disc. 10.
Macchiavell. disc. in Livium l. 2. c. 26.
since the impressions thereof are more violent and durable in the minds of
Men, then what are occasioned by common, and even grievous injuries.

I smiled when I read the High commendations which they bestow upon their
Country and Government. Oh! the rare situation of it! It Is a Canaan; but
seated in a Bogge, and overflows with water, instead of Honey. It Is a Canaan,
in which there are many Jews, but scarce one Israelite without guile. No
Espials yet have informed me of those prodigious Grapes, such as the
Israelitish discoverers met with in Canaan; and these cheating Hollanders
obtrude upon us Turnips for Pomegranates. Yet do they assure us their Land is a
true Canaan: but it is more true, which they add, That it is a Land of Promise;
for all Europe and the East Indies do complain there is nothing of performances
there. They magnify their excellent Government; which is an Anarchy: they
subsist not by any wise reiglement, but combination of interest, and sense of
common danger. The Provincial States of Holland and West-Friesland demonstrate
this in their Declaration printed at Leyden in 1654.
They have been an hundred times in danger of a total rupture; each Province is
sovereign and independent of the rest, and can send Embassies, contract
Leagues, and otherwise negotiate with foreign Princes, without the privity of
the others: never was there Sheaf of Arrows so ill made up into a bundle. Their
Liberty (whereof they boast) consists in paying more Taxes then any Prince in
the world exacts: and in being subjected to the most Arbitrary proceedings as
to Life, exile, and imprisonment, that ever I read of: and if I am deceived,
Grotius in his Apologetic (who suffered thereby, with many others) deluded me
into that sentiment. But though these Canaanites do live under an ill
Government, in a bad Country, upon Pickled Herrings, Groot, Butter, and
Cheese; yet they enjoy for their souls, that immortal part, as much as from God
they can desire, namely the food of his word, which nourishes them to life
eternal. -- And this is the Celestial diet of all the Jews, Socinians,
Anabaptists, Papists, etc. that a bound there. The States General have nothing
to do with Religion: the several Provinces, and Towns can only intermeddle
therewith; and that they so do, that the Ecclesiastics can neither preach
otherwise than what the Magistrates please, nor exercise any Church Discipline
as they ought. Upon these Terms the Ministers are Pastors, and feed them with
heavenly food* being servants rather of the Burgomasters and of Mammon, than
God. Were our Nonconformists there employed they would find it unlaw^ul to
(...) the (...) Minist^rii ^vangelici, and they would be banished should they
discourse there about the duty of Magistrates, See the Apology of Olden
barnavelt printed in English in 161^.
and power of Ministers, as they do in England. These Zealous Protestants have
declared that 'twas indifferent to them what Religion any Province or City were
of, so they would but Unite with them. The League at Vtrecht (which is the
foundation of their Union) does run thus, Grotius Apologet. c* 2.
and Grotius shall justify all I say. They say, They have always highly
interessed themselves in the friendship of His Majesty: And to preserve his
friendship, they made all those ignominious Pictures, Medals, and Monuments;
they refused him the Honor of the Flagge, and informed His Majesty, That the
Dominion of the Sea is an Usurpation, and that upon God Almighty; to whom alone
this State attributes it. They say, Their great interest consists in the peace
and tranquillity of Christendom. Oh! happy interest of a Christian State. -- I
believe their interest now consists in the peace of Christendom; because that
war menaceth them, which they would have turned upon England; and I believe
they did not swerve from their interest, when they formerly sowed divisions
betwixt the Swedes and Danes, and other German Princes; and of late endeavored
to embroil all Europe in wars, thereby to counterpoise France. I might reflect
upon their confining their interest to the peace of Christendom; whereas they
place it otherwise in the East Indies, embroiling those parts as much as they
can in wars, and destroying our Merchants upon all occasions: But it is very
observable, that the real interest of these most amicable Dutch, consists in
Europe, in doing all those things which may justly incense Princes to make war
upon them, and yet in cajolling them into a tame and dishonorable acquiescence.

Such passages as these, I confess did add to my divertisement upon the
reading* but a different passion seized when I met with those insolent
expressions with which they affront our Sovereign, who not only by reason of
his personal excellencies, but by the right of his English Crown, is ranked
amongst the Reges superillustres. Corsettus.
Had His Majesty been of a lesser quality, yet since his Ancestors have by
their favor, protection, and vast expense of Men and Money, raised the Dutch
into a Republic, ordinary Gratitude might have engaged them to civiler
Language. To give the Lie to any Man, is reputed a just cause of quarrel; and
if we allow Princes but equal concerns for their Honor, this alone
authenticates the War. They charge Him with Injustice, Dissimulation, and
Piracy: They call His Courtiers a company of Stupid Fellows, and say, His
Majesty can as little adhere to Reason, as with reasonable offers He will be
satisfied. They say, That the War has no other Prospect, then the Limits of an
unlimited Ambition, endless Covetousness, and a Spirit of Revenge not to be
glutted. That His Mind is misled and obnubilated with a desire of War, the most
accursed and unruly of all desires. That His Declaration contains plain
untruths, malicious interpretations, and gross impertinencies. That no
Precedents of Violated Faith, out of any Chronicles can be produced, which in
this case can parallel the example of the said King.

These, and many other such like Passages, occur frequently in this Treatise: I
should not have presumed to repeat them, but that I am confident they will be
efficacious to animate All the Subjects of His Majesty to vindicate the Honor
of their injured Prince, especially when they shall understand how undeservedly
He is aspersed by these ignoble, ungrateful, arrogant and perfidious
Netherlanders. Behold, how unfortunate His Majesty is to contend with a mean
and ungenerous Adversary! How Civil and Prince-like was the King of Great
Britain in His Declaration! What was there that could exasperate, besides the
Truth of his Allegations? Let any Man impartially consider the Motives
whereupon His Majesty proceeds; let him forget himself a little while that he
is a Subject, thereby to judge the better of the Actions of His Sovereign, and
I am assured he will concur with me in opinion, That the present War with the
Dutch, is Honorable, Just, and Necessary: And consequently, if His Majesty's
loving Subjects do value, either their Allegiance to their King, (which is not
to be doubted) or the Honor and Prosperity of the Nation, and of each
particular Member thereof (all being involved in this contest, and depending
upon the issue of it) they will unanimously assist His Majesty in the present
juncture, as far as their Prayers, Lives, and Fortunes can advantage Him.

I acknowledge my self to have been of the number of those, who by reason of
their ignorance of private Negotiations, and the Real transactions of State;
together with that Epidemical jealousy of Court-designs, did believe that this
War was needless, and unseasonable: That it was projected by some Courtiers,
and others, who sought to advantage themselves by the Public Calamities, or by
Pensions from the Crown of France; that the Dutch were so humble and
submissive, that it was our obstinacy to refuse all satisfaction, not any
perverseness and pride in them so as to deny us any: I was jealous of the
grows of Popery, and thought it to be the interest of this Kingdom, not to
weaken or destroy a Republic pretending to Protestancy, and for the erection
whereof so many of our Progenitors had hazarded and lost their lives. I brought
with me all those surmises and misapprehensions which any Netherlander or
English Malcontent could wish infused into me: But when I came to a better
intelligence concerning affairs; when I had seriously inquired into the
Transactions betwixt the Dutch and Us, how condescending His Majesty had been,
and with what insolence the Netherlanders had deported themselves; when I found
the reality of His Majesty's pretensions, and that the Declaration was so
penned, that the contents were capable of much higher aggravations, but no way
to be extenuated or invalidated: Then did I begin detest the petulant humor of
this age, whereby every one is prone to examine the actions, and censure the
prudence of his Governors, without understanding the prospect those elevated
spirits have concerning such affairs, or the grounds and circumstances by which
they regulate their Councils; and most commonly We not being able to determine
of matters, were every punctilio and intrigue represented unto us. I thought
the times happy, when men employed themselves in other Discourses, and
practiced obedience, Ludovic. Molina. de justit. tract. 2. Disp. 112. Francis.
a Victoria, Relect. 6. de jure Belli number. 25. A^^^sius de Cas. Conscient. l 5.
c 33. sect. 17. Vir justus, si forte sub rege homine etiam sacrilego militet,
recte potest illo jubent^ bellare, si, quod sibi jubetur, vel non esse contra
Dei praeceptum certum est, vel utrum sit certum non est: (...) ut fortasse reum
faciat regem iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo
serv^^nd^ S. A^gustin. contra Eaustum.
rather then disputes: When they believed that prudent and solid doctrine of
the Casuistical Divines: That it was only for the Counsell^rs of Kings to
debate and examine the utility and prejudices, the justice and injustice of
Wars; the other subjects not being to expect an ample account of all the
Motives and Inducements by which their King is swayed, nor to be so infatuated,
as to think they can debate or decide such matters, without any better
cognizance then what arises from a vulgar Brain, a narrow prospect of things,
and popular Reports and Suggestions: But to presume so well of their Superiors,
as to imagine they understand what is right or wrong, honorable and
dishonorable, advantageous and inutile; and that they have so much of common
sense as to understand, that the welfare of the people is the grand interest of
the Prince, and that the King is the greatest sufferer in the ruinating of his
Kingdoms.

To the end that others may be undeceived, as well as my self, and fortified
against all mis-apprehensions, which either their own ignorance, or the
clandestine Artifices of these ungrateful and most malicious Netherlanders may
subject them unto, I shall represent unto the World, the most important
passages, whereby they endeavor to elude or refute the most just and sincere
Declaration of His Majesty, and evince unto the most suspicious or prejudicate
Persons, that it is incumbent upon the Subjects of His Majesty, and there is an
unavoidable necessity of reducing these insolent and treacherous Dutchmen into
such a posture, as they may not only pay their due submissions (with
reparations of honor) unto our King; but be obliged to continue them for the
future. They are a Nation, with whom no League can take effect any longer then
their advantage leads them thereunto, or want of strength and opportunity does
restrain them: It is impossible for any Civilian to fetter them by a Treaty: If
they cannot evade it by equivocations, mental reservations, common elusions,
and such artifices as become not Soveraigners; These Hollanders will impudently
deny all such matters as enterfere with their designs, and supply the injustice
of their actions by violence and fraud. They have no Honor to loose, no
Conscience to stain, no certain Principles to recede from. The Tartars and
Moors prove the sincerer Confederates, and Humanity it self is concerned, that
there should not be any longer upon Earth so fatal an instance, that there are
not in Men naturally such seeds of Morality, such inclinations to civil
Society, such Laws of Nature and of Nations, as those Authors teach us who
never thoroughly understood an Hollander. I might give evident proofs of this so
heinous a charge several ways, but I shall confine my discourse to what these
Dutch considerations lead me unto; and it is from thence, that I will manifest
to the most ordinary capacities, and the most prepossessed judgments, that
these Adversaries are not injured by this Character; and to make the case more
plain, I will write their words.

Considerations upon the present state of the Affairs of the United
Netherlands. Published by a Lover of his Country, for the encouragement of his
Countrymen in these troublesome times.
WHosoever looks upon the first beginning of the State of the United
Netherlands with a curious eye, and serious consideration of the Histories, and
discreetly observes by what means the Fabric of the said State, out of the
lowness of its original is raised to this present height, must needs be induced
to confess, That Divine Providence (which not always appears visible to the
eyes of the World) has so clearly been manifested in the framing and exalting
of this State, that with just Reasons it must be acknowledged, that God
Almighty was the external and visible erector of this Famous Republic.

An Age is now expired ( when before the Country, through an unhappy Disorder
of Government of those times, was fallen into a lamentable confusion) since
William E. of Marck, L. of Lume, Admiral of the P. of Orange's Navy, by a
strict command from the Queen of England ( who not only denied him liberty to
stay in Her Country, but also refused to supply his Seamen with necessaries)
constrained to leave England, arrived beyond his intentions, forced by cross
Winds, but indeed the Winds of Gods directions, before the Brill, of which He
easily possessed himself, not with a design to keep, but only to ransack the
same, and so to leave it again: But being informed by others of the convenience
and importance of the place, brought the same into a posture of defense,
keeping it for his Principals and Superior Commanders. And in this manner was
the first Foundation of this precious structure laid, or rather, in regard of
the External Instruments; cast up by chance, but, in verity, by the direction
of the Supreme Builder, whose omnipotent hands oftentimes make use of Mortals,
as the blind instruments of his wonderful destinies.

It is not my design here to make a Relation of the progress of our Affairs,
and by what means our Ancestors have through troubles and adversities struggled
and ascended to the height of that felicity, which by Gods goodness we enjoy
at present: But my intentions only aim by this short discourse to move my
worthy Country men to fix their assured confidence, that the same God which
has exalted us from lowness to a State, whose high and flourishing condition
now for a long continuance of time has stirred up as much Envy, as formerly
its Misfortunes moved Compassion, shall graciously protect and preserve the
Works of his Almighty hands, if, imitating our Predecessors, we in this
juncture of time do join two principles together, which ever ought to be
inseparable, viz. An entire resignation of our selves to the Divine Providence,
and, An unalterable mind, and vigorous courage in these troublesome times, to
act as much for our preservation, as our Forefathers have done for their first
Deliverance: Desiring my Contrymen, that in comparing our present Anxieties,
with the Perplexities of our Ancestors, and the necessities under which we our
selves have labored, they will look back in the Histories for the Primitive
times of our Predecessors, and for that time within compass of their own
remembrance, whereof still we preserve the memory.

We shall find in the Histories, that the Affairs of our Predecessors, in their
first progress and growing Infancy, were reduced to that inconvenience, that
the consideration thereof moved the Supreme Person at that time, who with an
indissoluble Bond had linked his own prosperity to the fate and destiny of
these Countries, to urge this hopeless Advise, viz. To cause by cutting of the
Banks* and pulling up the Sluices, these Lands to be swallowed down in an
irrecoverable condition, and, with Gods Mercy, with that small remainder of
their ruinated Fortunes, to seek other Countries beyond Seas, there either to
live more happily, or to find a period of their lives with less misery.

I shall not blame the Considerer for reflecting upon the Mercies of God,
extended toward his Country men. I commend the least sense of Religion in
him, but I have most suspicious thoughts concerning Piety in an Hollander: And
I believe every Englishman will approve this jealousy to be just, seeing, All
this specious preamble is made use of to no other end, then to evade all
acknowledgments to Queen Elizabeth, and the English Monarchy. It is not the
pleasure of the Almighty, that subordinate means and instruments should be
deprived of their proper Elogies. He by his Providence appointed means; He by
his Sovereign will, does prosper or frustrate them; yet so that the divine
interposition does not usually derogate from the efficacy of second causes, or
exclude us from confessing their concurrence. Whosoever shall reflect upon the
Ambitious designs joined with the extraordinary power of Spain in those days:
The intentions of that Monarchy to reduce the Belgic Provinces under a more
absolute obedience than the Brabantine Constitutions consisted with; the
obstinate humor of the Dutch in adhearing to their Privileges, how irrational
soever; Also the apprehensions which France, Germany and England, had
concerning the excessive growth of the Spanish and Austrian power, such a
Considerer will not admire so very much, that the rebellion of the United
Netherlands did continue so long, and succeed so well; nor discover such an
extraordinary series of providence in the erection of their Republique: And
the most partial men must grant, that it is a most fallacious way of reasoning,
to argue from the happiness of the event unto the justice of the cause, or
peculiar favor of the divine Author: There is not any thing in this Dutch
suggestion which might not have been more rationally alleged by a Goth, or
Mohammedan, since the juncture where in those Monarchies advanced themselves,
was attended with less favorable circumstances than I can observe in the
revolutions of the Netherlands: But I am confident no Goth, or Sarracen would
have so entitled to God the original of their successes, as to exclude the
intermediatt assistances which they received from others at any time. Such
ingratitude is singular in the Netherlanders; and all this impudent harangue
has no other tendency, then to elude the obligations which that unworthy
people have to Q. Elizabeth and the Royal Progenitors of His Majesty. Here is
no mention made of any protection or aid given them by the English Queen; but
one Action related, which as it seemingly carries with it somewhat of
unkindness, so it is insinuated merely to this end, that they may alienate the
people from a Reverence and regard for our Nation. It is not to be denied that
Q. Elizabeth did contribute much to the first support of these Dutch, giving
them reception here in England, when the fury of the D. of Alva enforced them
as exiles to seek an habitation in foreign Countries: this most gracious Queen
compassionated their miseries, and gave multitudes of them leave to fix at
Norwich, A. E. M^^eran. Histor. Belg. l. 3. Carabden. Hist. Elizab. ad ann.
1568.
Colchester, Sandwich, Maydstone, and Southampton A. D. 1568. Here the exiles
had the advantage of a quiet life, and the opportunity of pursuing their
designs in order to the regaining of their Country. Nor was it a small favor
to the Prince of Orange and his Partisans, that when they were ready to sink
under their losses in Friezeland and elsewhere, this Queen seized upon two
hundred thousand Pistols of Gold, which were transporting from Spain to the D.
of Alva; the detaining whereof as it was a great disappointment to the Duke
(who stood in great need of it for the reinforcing of his designs) so it begat
great animosities betwixt the Queen and Him, the Merchants Ships on each side
were seized upon, Letters of Reprisall granted, and the English estranged from
the Spanish Netherlands, by the translation of our Staple from Antwerp to
Hambourgh. It is manifest that our Queen did by that action, and by the
hostilities and contrivances of a new Trade, which ensued thereupon, contribute
effectually to the fomenting of the Netherlandish discontents, the D. of Alva
was diverted from prosecuting the Gheusians with his former violence, his
subjects were exasperated by the damage of the English Trade, the English were
(by the removal of our Staple) dis-engaged from all dependence on the Spaniards
there by way of Commerce, and inclined to abett and assist the distressed
followers of the Prince of Orange. And if the Dutch will not acknowledge these
actions for a great assistance and courtesy to them, the Spanish Ambassador
De-speci, in his Remonstrance said, they proceeded from some that bare no good
will to the Spaniard, Cambden. Hist. Elizab. ad ann. 1569.
and favored the Rebels of the Netherlands. After this, the distressed
Netherlanders betook themselves to practice piracy at Sea upon the Spaniards,
under the command of the Prince of Orange, but were immediately under the
conduct of William Earl Vander Marck and others, and the Queen (notwihstanding
that She was resetled in a good correspondence and league with the Spaniards)
did permit them by connivence, the free use of her Ports every where throughout
England, A. ^. Meteraen. lib. 3. ad ann. 1571. E. G^imston. History of the
Netherland, lib. 9. A. D. 1571. Franc. Ha^^^s Annal. ducum Braban^. ^om. 3. ad
ann. 1572.
so as that they provided themselves here with Victuals and Munition upon all
occasions, and here they usually vended their prizes, which they took upon the
Vly, Texel, and the Ems. By which means these exiles sustained themselves well
(the Prince of Orange receiving the Tenths or Fifths of their Prizes,) gave
much trouble to the Duke of Alva, continued those discontents in their
partisans, which otherwise would, in all probability, have been extinguished,
by reason of the power and terror of the Spaniards, and the weak and declined
condition of the exiled Prince of Orange. I would willingly understand from any
ingenuous persons, whether these actions did not highly contribute to the
erection of this Republic; and might not as well have been thankfully
acknowledged, as the subsequent decree of Queen Elizabeth is most ingratefully
mentioned. Viz. That William Earl of Marck, Lord of Lume, Admiral of the Prince
of Orange's Navy, was by a strict command from the Queen of England, denied
liberty to stay in her Country, and also refused to supply his Seamen with
necessaries; whereupon ensued the taking of Brill, as is specified --. The
insinuation of this Edict is maliciously urged here, thereby to extenuate the
favors of the English Nation: The Queen was engaged by Articles, not to
entertain openly any Rebels unto the Crown of Spain; She could not harbor them
any longer without a rupture with that potent Monarch; and She was unwilling to
involve Her self in so great a War, for so weak Confederates. Whereupon She by
a strict Proclamation did forbid them the use of Her Ports, and that Her
subjects should sell them any Provisions, after a certain time, which was
March. Whereupon they were necessitated to depart, and seek some other
receptacle, and Providence cast them upon Brill. But had not the Queen harbored
them, A. ^. M^teran. l. 3. ad An. 157^. Fr. H^^^^. ad An. 1572.
How had they ever imbodied themselves, or increased to the strength of Forty
Sail of Ships, most of them Fly-boats, wherewith they possessed themselves of
Brill, and took two rich Ships by the way? No sooner was Brill taken, but
Flushing in Zealand, and some other Towns revolted to the Prince of Orange; yet
were his forces so small (though joined with those of Vander Marck) as not to
be able to subsist against the Spaniards; but that the Queen permitted
multitudes of English to repair thither; The first that went, was Sir Thomas
Morgan, Cambdens History of Queen Elizabeth, ad An. 1572. A. E. Meteren. lib.
4. ad An. 1572.
who carried over Three hundred Men to Flushing, the report of whose coming, is
said to have stayed the D. of Alva, when he was in a readiness to recover that
Town. Afterward, through the procurement of Morgan, arrived there Nine
Companies of English, under Sir Humphrey Gilbert. With these aids, and other
Auxiliaries from France, though the Prince of Orange achieved great things,
and reduced many Towns in Holland and Zealand unto his party, yet such was
their distress, A. E. Met^ra^. ad An. 1575. E. Grimston: lib. 10. ad An. 1575.
that An. Dom. 1575. they entered into a debate of putting themselves under the
Protection of some Foreign Prince; least through want of Money, and of
Soldiers, and also the fickle inclinations of a discontented populace, they
should suddenly fall under the power of the Enemy.

And in the name of the States of Holland and Zeland, and Prince of Orange, was
an Embassy sent into England, to offer unto the Queen, not only what was
agreeable to equity, reason, Fr. H^raeus ad an. 1^75. Cambden hist. of Queen
Elizabeth ad an. 1575.
and religion, but to the exigency of their condition, and what self
preservation and extreme necessity prompted them unto. The Commission of the
Ambassadors was, either to make a League with the Queen, or to submit
themselves under her Protection; or (if necessity required it) to acknowledge
her for their Princess and Sovereign Lady, issued from the Earls of Holland and
Zeland, by the Lady Philip, Daughter to William the third of that Name, Earl of
Henault and Holland, etc. The Queen thanked them for their good will toward
her, but fearing the enmity of Spain, the envy of France, and the charge of the
War; as also not being satisfied, how she might with her honor, and a safe
conscience, receive those offered Provinces into her protection, much less
possession, she declined the Overture, yet promised to intercede for them with
Spain, and in the mean space gave them leave to raise what Soldiers they could
in England, A. E. Meteran. lib. 5. ad an. 1575. E. Grimston. lib. 10. ad an.
1575.
either from out of the English, Scots, or exiled Netherlanders, and to furnish
themselves with what provisions and Ammunitien they wanted, and to transport
them. Notwithstanding this transcendent favor of the Queen's, the ungrateful
Zelanders the next year affronted her Majesty, and seized upon sundry of her
Merchants Ships upon various pretenses, whereupon she was so incensed, A. E.
Meteran. lib. 5. ad an. 1576. Cambden. Hist. of Q. Eliz. ad an. 1576.
that there had been an absolute difference betwixt them* had not the Prince of
Orange prudently composed all. After this, when Don John became Governor of
the Netherlan^^, and withal aspired to marry the Queen of Scots, A. E.
Meteran. lib. 7. ad an. 1577.
and render himself King of England, the Queen enters into a more strict League
and confederacy with them, to aid them with men and money; and 'twas at her
charge principally, Id ibid. lib. 8. ad an. 1578. Cambden ad an. 1578.
that Prince Casimire came to their aid with a German Army: And out of England
there went over the Seas to them, the Lord North's eldest Son, John North; the
Lord Norris's second Son, John Norris; Henry Cavendish and Thomas Morgan
Colonels, with very many Volunteers; and, after that the Germans mutinously
deserted the States, Cambden ad an. 1579.
the Queen furnished them readily with a great sum of money, the ancient Jewels
and rich Plate of the House of Burgundy being (...)ed unto her for it. After
this, for several years the (...)erlands cast themselves under Archduke
Matthia (...) Duke of Anjou, but with so ill success, Auraico principe Belgarum
Gubernatore jam interfecto, multis urbbus ab host captis, and Fran^i^o
auxilio, instinct^ h^stium, negato, rebusque fe^e desperatis. A E. M^^^r^n.
lib. 13. ad an. 1585.
that they found themselves not able to continue long, Antwerp and sundry other
places being taken, and William Prince of Orange murdered, the French King not
being able or willing to receive the Sovereignty of those Provinces, so that
they determined by a solemn Embassy to tender her Majesty the entire Dominion
and Principality of the Netherlands: They had treated with her before by I.
Ortelius about protection, Vide deduct. Ordin. Holland. West-Frisiaeq: etc. p.
228. edit. Leydnes. A. d. 1554.
but the Queen refused to espouse their quarrel, except she might have
cautionary Towns, that her expenses might be repaid at the end of the War. But
now that the desperate condition of their Affairs made any terms to be
prudential, Non sine metu in posterum, quem tunc praesens necessitas averterat.
Glotius Annal. l. 5.
they resolved to subject themselves unto her, or contract any League for
protection which she would enjoin them. Upon the sixth of July 1585. their
Deputies came to London, which were these. For Brabant (although, by reason of
the Siege of Antwerp, not fully authorized) was sent Iacques de Grise chief
Bailiff of Bruges; A E. Meteran. lib. 13. ad an. 1585. E. Grimston l. 12. ad
an. 1585.
for Guelderland was Rutgert van Harsolt, Burgomaster of Harderwick; for
Flanders (although likewise not fully authorized) Noel Caron, Seignior of
Schoonwall, Burgomaster of Franc, for Holland and Friseland, was John Vander
Does, Lord of Noortwick; and Ioos Van Menin Counselor of the Town of Dort, and
John van Oldenbarnevelt Counselor of the Town of Rotterdam; Doctor Francis
Maelson, Counselor of the Town of En^khuysen, for Zeland, was Jacob Valck, a
Civil Lawyer, and one of the Council of State: for Vtrecht, was Paul Buys
Doctor; for Friseland, was Ielgher van Seytzma, Counselor of State; Hessel
Aysma President, and Laest Ioughema: They were kindly received by the Queen,
and nobly feasted at her cost, upon the ninth of July they were brought to
their Audience at Greenwich; the Audience was most solemn and public, the
Queen being seated on her royal Throne, and all the Privy Council attending on
each hand of her Majesty. The Deputies being introduced, fell upon their knees
before the Throne of the Queen, and Ioos Van Menin, with great reverence and
submission, made an Oration to her in the name of the Distressed States of the
United Netherlands, unto this purpose.

That the States of the United Netherlands Provinces humbly thanked her Majesty
for the honorable and many Favors, The Dutch at their return, did coin
Medails of Copper, in memory of this Audience, and the Protection which Queen
Elizabeth afforded unto them. I received two of these from Elias Ashmole Esquire
Windsor Herald.
which it had pleased her to show unto them amidst their extreme necessities,
having not long since received the testimonies of her Princely clemency, when
after the cruel Murder of the Prince of Orange, it pleased her Majesty, by her
Ambassador Mr. Davidson, to signify unto them, the great care she had for
their defense and preservation; and after that again by the Grise, by whom she
let them understand, how much she was discontended to see them frustrated of
their expectations. reposed upon the hope they had in the Treaty with France:
adding, that, nevertheless, her Majesty's care for the support of the
Netherlands, was rather augmented than diminished, by reason of the
difficulties which multiplied upon them: For the which, not only the Provinces
in general, but every particular person therein, should rest bound unto her
Majesty for ever, and labor to repay so transcendant obligations by all
pos^^ble fidelity and obedience. And therefore the Estates aforesaid, observing
that since the death of the Prince of Orange, they had lost many of their Forts
and good Towns, and that* for the defense of the said United Netherlands, they
had great need of a Sovereign Prince, who might protect and defend them from
the insolences and oppressions of the Spaniards, and their Adherents, who
sought daily more and more all the means they could, with their Forces and
other sinister Practices, to spoil and utterly root up the foundation of the
aforesaid Netherlands, and thereby to bring the ^oor af^^icted people of the
same into perpetual bondage, and worse than Indian slavery, under the
insupportable yoke of the most exeerable Inquisition. Finding likewise, that
the Inhabitants of the said Netherlands were persuaded, and had assured
confidence, that her Majesty out of her Princely inclination, would not endure
to see them utterly overthrown, as their Enemies expected by molesting them
with long, unjust, and bloody Wars, the which the Estates (according to their
duties, and in respect of their places, in the behalf of their Fellows and
Brethren) were forced to withstand, and, as much as in them lay, oppose
themselves against the manifest slavery, which they thought to impose upon the
poor Common People, and by their best endeavors ^o maintain their ancient
Freedoms, Laws, and Privileges, with the exercise of the true Christian
Religion ( whereof her Majesty truly and by good right did bear the Title of
Defendress) against the which the Enemy and all his Adherents had f^rmed so
many Leagues, attempted so many fearful and deceitful Enterprises and Treasons,
and yet cease not daily to invent, practice, and devise the destruction of her
Majesty's Royal Person, together with her Estate and Kingdoms; which the
Almighty God under the protection of his everlasting goodness, hitherto has
preserved from all dangers for the good and upholding of the Church of Christ
here upon earth. For these reasons, and many other good considerations, the
Estates aforesaid, with one full and free consent, had altogether determined,
and fully resolved to fly unto her Majesty, in regard it is an usual thing for
all oppressed and distressed people and Nations, in their great distress and
necessity to seek just aid and assistance against their Enemies, from Kings and
Princes their Neighbors, and especially from those that were endued with
courage, fear of God, uprightness of heart, and other Princely Ornaments: and
to that end, the Estates aforesaid had enjoined and commanded them to beseech
her Majesty to accept of the Sovereignty and Supreme Dominion over the said
United Provinces, upon certain and reasonable Conditions, especially tending to
the upholding, maintaining, and furtherance of Gods true Religion, and the
ancient Freedoms and Privileges to them due and belonging, together with the
government and managing of the Wars, Policy, and Justice of the said United
Provinces of the Netherlands. And although the said Netherlands had endured
diverse losses, and that many of their Towns and Forts had been won from them by
the Enemy, during these Wars: nevertheless in Brabant, Guelderland, Flanders,
Macklin, and Overissel, there were yet many good Towns and places that held out
against the Enemy, and the Provinces of Holland, Zeland, Utrecht, and Frizland,
were by Gods-grace and wonderful providence still kept and preserved in their
whole and entire possessions, wherein they W Sherwin sculpt
had many great and strong Towns and Places-fair Rivers, Deeps and havens,
whereof her Majesty and her successors, might have good Commodities, Services,
and Profit, whereof it were needless to make any longer discourse; but one in
special, That by Uniting the Countries of Holland, Zeland, Utrecht, and
Frizland, the Towns of Ostend and Seluse, unto her Majesty's Kingdoms and
Dominions, she might have the full and absolute Dominion over the great Ocean,
and procure unto the subjects of her Majesty perpetual and most assured safe^y
together with their prosperity.

They did therefore most humbly beseech her Royal Majesty to vouchsafe, out of
her Royal favor and Princely bounty, to yield to the foresaid points of their
Request, and so to accept for her, and her lawful Heirs, or Successors in the
Crown of England, Defenders of the true Christian Religion, the Sovereign
Rights, Principality, and Dominion of the said Netherlands; and in regard
thereof to reecive the Inhabitants thereof, as her Majesty's most humble and
obedient Subjects and Vassals, into her perpetual Safeguard and Protection: a
People as true, faithful, and loving to their Princes and Governors (without
vai^ boasting be it spoken) as any other in Christendom. And so doing, she
should preserve and protect many fair Churches, which it had pleased Almighty
God in these latter days, to gather together in several of the said Provinces,
being now in many places, being now in great fear, peril, and danger: and to
deliver the Netherlands and the Inhabitants thereof from miserable thraldom,
who ( not long before the wicked and hostile Invasions of the Spaniards) were
so rich and flourishing in all sorts of wealth, by reason of the great
Commodities of the Sea, Havens, Rivers, Traffic, manual Trades and
Occupations, whereunto they are much given, and naturally inclined. She should
likewise preserve them from utter destruction and perpetual slavery both of
Body and Soul, and so effect a right Princely and most Royal work pleasing to
God, profitable for all Christendom, worthy of eternal praise and glory, and
sitting well with the Magnanimity ^^d other Royal Virtues of her Majesty, as
also most advantageous to the security and welfare of her particular Subjects.

This being said, They presented their Articles unto her Majesty with the
greatest humility imaginable; beseeching God, who is the King of Kings, to
defend, protect, and preserve her from all her Enemies, to the increase of her
Honor and Greatness, and perpetually to keep her in his holy protection and
safeguard.

The Queen heard them graciously, and received their Overtures with very
obliging acknowledgments; the Deputies, kissing her Royal hands, retired with
much satisfaction, and her Majesty was no less pleased with the honor of that
day's Audience: For albeit that the King of France had the first tender of
their Sovereignty, yet neither was it made with such submission and deference
as to her Majesty, neither was the tender so absolute then as now; The Deputies
to France were sent indeed with a general pretense and declaration of
surrendering up the Dominion of the Netherlands to that Crown, but they had
separate instructions from their several Principals (the which they never
imparted one to the other, but kept secret) with different procurations. The
Deputies of Brabant, De^^a^a^ O^d^^. H^lland. and We^^ (...)der. ^dit. A. D.
1651. post 1. cap. ^. (...)
Flanders, Zeland, and M^chlin, were enjoined to finish the Negotiation upon
any terms they could get, so as that Religion and general privileges were
confirmed unto them: Whereas Holland and Vtrecht had so limited their Deputies,
that they were to insist upon better terms, and rather not to come up to the
general Instructions of the States, I^^ ca. 5. sect. 22.28. Cum (...) lustris,
illa legatio ex singulis Provinciis, (...) 1^85. institueretur, ut Regi
Galliarum sum^ um Belgii offerretu^ Imporium, Provinciae Br^^antiae, Geltriae,
Flandriae, Zeland^ae, Me^hliniae, suis delegatis, mandato suarum provinciarum,
atque particulari instructione injunxerant, ut multo liberaliorem quam a
foede^at (...) constitutum e^at (...), Regi offerrent: (...) vice versa
Hollandia and (...) Deputatis hoc mandaverant, ut (...) liberales ess^nt (...)
conditioni^ (...) foederatis visum (...) -- Geldri, Zelandi^^ except^ religione
and (...); omnia Regi Galliae (...), quo fac^^^s pax expediri posset, (...)
proceres (...) obligallent, jure (...) se non usuros esse.
than to exceed them. I do not read of any such difference in the Procurations
sent over hither, neither do I find any reason to believe there were any such:
the Queen for several weighty reasons, declined to take upon Her the
Sovereignty or perpetual protection of the Netherlands; yet did She consent to
enter into a League with them, to aid them with 5000 Foot and 1000 Horse, and
to pay them during the War; which the Estates were to repay, when a peace
should be concluded. In the mean time Flyssing, and the Castle of Ramm^kins in
Waleheren, A. E. M^terin. lib. 13. ad an. 1585. E Granston l. 12. ad an. 1555.
and the Isle of Brill, with the City and two Forts, were to be delivered into
the Queens hands, to be kept by her Garrisons for caution. The Governor
General, and two Englishmen, whom the Queen should name, should be admitted
into the Council of Estates, etc. The confederacy was finished upon the tenth
of August; and accordingly Sir John Norris was sent over with some Soldiers.
The Earl of Leicester followed as General of her Majesty's Forces: The
Netherlanders received him with more honor, and conferred on him more power
than the Queen approved of. They made him General of all their Forces,
State-Holder and Governor of all their Provinces, invested him with all that
power which Charles V. used to commission his Governors with. The Queen
reproved the Earl of Leicester for accepting of such power, and the States for
giving it to him. But the Earl soon found himself deceived by these
Netherlanders, for, notwithstanding that they had chosen him to be their
Governor in so solemn a manner, and sworn, themselves, and the Soldiers,
obedience to him, yet they pretend to rule him, model sometimes, sometimes
oppose his Orders and Constitutions. Insomuch that the Earl found that he
should have but a Titular Government, being subject to the Commands and
Authority of those pitiful States and ordinary Burgomasters; whereupon he
relinquished the Government, proclaiming (even in Medails) the Ingratitude of
those Fellows. Let them make what complaints they please against his deportment
there; it is certain, that All the Clergy adhered unto him, Nunquid non
Hollando^^^, Zelandor unique (...) and prudentia, Deo (...); vi (...) Ordin.
(...). part 2. (...), 6. 9^2.
and regretted his departure: The Soldiers did mutiny in his behalf; Vtrecht
and Frizland (besides other Provinces and Towns) did solicit for his return:
and I find that all the clamor against that Earl did arise from the Province
of Holland, and some Zelanders only; as they themselves boast in a Remonstrance
against the other Provinces. To invalidate that Power, which they had so
publicly given him, Holland, a Province always branded for Faction and
Ingratitude, having advantaged themselves much by the credit of the assistance,
more by the Auxiliaries of the English, began to think it unfitting, that
(according to the Articles) the English should be privy to the secret
transactions of the Council of State, and by the advice of Oldenbarnvelt, they
found out an Evasion, not daring openly to violate the Treaty, nor to infuse
jealousy into the Queen, by holding Clandestine Cabals; and 'twas this: that
only ordinary matters, and such as the English might know, should be dispatched
in the Council of State; but that another Assembly should be formed,
Disquisitione; politic. Hag^e com^^* edit. 3. A. D. 1655. Cas. 21.
termed the Convention of the States General, unto which they should draw all
matters of importance, and which required secrecy, under the pretense that the
Council of State had so much business already, as not to be able to dispatch
the other. Thus early did they abuse the favors of Queen Elizabeth, and by
this illusion did they lay the foundation of their H^^h and Migh^ies. It is
evident, that during the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth, they were never
faithful to the League; they treated with France, and aided that King, without
the Queens knowledge, which was a breach of the League. And whereas by the
express words of the Articles, The Queen was to conduct them to, and settle
them in a firm Peace; and this being done by her mean^, the money was to be
repaid: She never could prevail with them to come to a Treaty, much less any
accord, but they had the impudence to solicit her to continue her aids to a
War which they never purposed to end, it proving so beneficial to them. When
the Queen urged, that by the Treaty, she was to be Arbitress of War and Peace:
they evaded it by saying, those expressions were but Complemental, Conceptum
quidem sie erat, sed verba ^^neri data. Grotius hist. Belgic. l. 5.
and argued their respects to her, not their dependence on her judgment. I find
them upon their knees again, and beseeching her m^st humbly, that she would not
conclude a Peace with Spain, A. D. 1598. And this Grotius says was done, Qui
Angliam ierant Legati, flexo genu in morem ei ^s regiae, c^m priorum gratias
lib^^r^liter egissent -- Grotius hist. l. 7.
because it is the custom of the English Court to petition the King in that
suppliant posture: but certainly this usage extends not to the Ambassadors of
their High and Mighties. But, in the same year, when they thought that Queen
Elizabeth might stand in some need of their friendship, Auda^iam usurpantes
ant^hac formidatam, se^m^nem ita instituerent. Grotius hist. l. 7.
whether they bended their knees unto her Majesty, I cannot find, but I read
that they dealt with Her, not as formerly, but with more arrogant language. Id
primores Angli ita interpretabantur: nihil iniquius quam fraudare reginam
credito, modo per cavillationes, modo per falsas preces, quas pala^^ urbium
opalentia, and ad largiriones usque sufficiens ararium refellere^t. Grotius
hist. l. 7.
The English Court did then look upon the Hollanders as notorious Cheats, who
pretended poverty, and had Collections here, when the splendor and growing
opulency of their Towns (besides the vast Bribes which their Treasury could
spare occasionally) were demonstrations of their Riches: that they declined to
repay the Queen her moneys, not because they could not do it, but that they
might tie her unto their fortune and assistance, by the hopes of a
re-imbursement of those vast Sums which She had expended for them: Her constant
Charge being above one hundred and twenty thousand pounds each year: Cambden ad
an. 1598.
and it is not to be doubted, but that She would have reduced them by force to
a better observance of Articles, and punished them for their fraudulent
dealings with Her, but that She prudently foresaw that France to depress Her,
and Spain, to ruin Her and disable France, were ready to assist and protect
them.

In fine, the Histories I have read do seem to demonstrate this, that the Dutch
were a most ungrateful people toward Queen Elizabeth, that they never rendered
her any Service* but when it was to their proper advantage: all their
pretensions to Religion contained little of reallity, and their acknowledgments
were but verbal, and consisted principally in extraordinary submission and
deference, which prevailed much upon the spirit of Her, who was a Woman, and
had much of Haugtiness. When she first undertook publicly to aid them, the
chief inducement thereunto was not the Necessity of her Affairs, not the
concern for the Protestant Religion (for She advised them to be very cautious,
how they changed their Religion) but a Feminine Hum^ur carried away by their
flatteries and humble applications, Monen* ne Romanae religionis poss^ssionem
temere moverent. Grotius hist. l. 3.
and delighting to see greater submissions paid to Her, than to the King of
France, by the King of Spain's Subjects. No sooner had She concluded upon an
open amity with them, but the Zelanders triumphing with joy (and to honor Her)
did stamp money with the Arms of Zeland, A. E. Meteran. l. ^3* ad an. 1385
Cambden, ad an. 1585. Franc Harae^^ annal. ad an. 1585*
viz. a Lion arising out of the waves, and this inscription, Luctor and emergo,
that is, I struggle and get above water, and on the other side, with the Arms
of the Cities of Zeland, and this, Authore Dec, savente Regina, that is, God
being the Author, and the Queen Favourer: and I find it to have been an usual
form of speech amongst the Dutch in that Age, which they applied to all
discourses where it might be suitable, By the Mercy of God, and the Goodness of
Queen Elizabeth: Cambden ad* an 1385.
and by such Wheedles did they inveigle the Queen to take (as the King of
Sweden then said) the Diadem from her head, and set it upon the doubtful chance
of War. And it is an action not to be paralleled out of the Annals of impudent
and Ungrateful persons, that the Dutch having been so effectually obliged by
that Queen, and having by such a continued series of protestations averred,
that they did owe their welfare and being to the Mercy of God and Favor of
Queen Elizabeth, they should now take no notice, that the English contributed
any thing to their support: So detestable baseness does make me judge, that If
it were not their Interest, Their Religion is such, that They would proceed to
ascribe nothing unto God himself: and all they write to that purpose, is no
more than a Complement from their High and Mighties to the Almighty.

We shall on it to relate how often the Republic ( after that by the hand of
God she was raised from that desperate condition) has trembled and quaked both
for fear of Foraign Enemies, and Intestine combustions.

Histories will declare unto us, that not only the State of the united
Provinces, but all the Netherlands, which together ( but not with a strict
obligation) were tied, were sufficiently plunged into the extremest
inconveniences by the perfidiousness of the Duke of Anjou, brother to the King
of France: And that afterward the United Provinces were brought into a
deplorable disorder, and beyond all posture of defense, by the craft and
ambitious designs of the Earl of Leicester, sent hither by Queen Elizabeth for
our protection.

I have already spoken concerning the Earl of Leicester, and their ingratitude
toward him: the French do form the like charge against them in behalf of the
Duke of Anjou, that they violated their agreements with him, gave him only an
empty Title, but reserving and drawing all the power into their own hands: the
sense of which indignity (considering that He was a Brother of France, and had
brought them powerful succors in their distress) made him take the courses
specified. And it is observable, that in all th^se and other emergencies, where
the Dutch are branded for their Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, and unworthy
Dealings, the particular Province of Holland is always the sole Author, or
principal occasion. Whereof they themselves boastingly give a relation in their
Manifest published at Leyden 1654. It is thence that I derive my Intelligence,
Ideo A^chidux Matthias Belgii imperio admotus, cum quo inscio principe
contraxerant, ut nimia principis autoritas elideretur Declar. ordin. Holland,
part. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9.
that the Infant States, being jealous of the Power and Popularity of William
Prince of Orange, did without ever acquainting him therewith, invite the
Archduke Matthias to be their Governor. And it is there that I read of a great
peril that Holland* etc. was in, and how they were delivered from it, the which
our Considerer might have seasonably inserted here, as well as the rest, viz.
The States of Holland, Zeland, and Vtrecht were determined to make Prince
William Earl of Holland with all the Prerogatives heretofore enjoyed by such
Earls: and though Amsterdam, Gouda, and some other Towns dissented, yet were
they resolved to pursue their intentions: Deus opt. max^^^plon subditos nova
subjectione, in quam praecipites f^rebantur, exemit Dec^ar. or^in Holland. part
2. cap. 1. sect. 20.
but the Prince was assassinated a month before the Installment could be
effected; and God most providentially did thereby free the Subjects o^ Holland
from that subjection into which they were running precipitously. There cannot
be a greater testimony of the degeneracy of this Age, in which such Ingratitude
is publicly avowed and authenticated by a solemn declaration of the States of
Holland and West-Frizlan^, and the most infamous actions in the world (and such
as would create a blush in the countenances of any men but Hollanders) are
recited as the most glorious. O^dines Urbis Groni^ga atque Ommeland^ae, stastim
post mo^te ^ Principis Guliel^^, novissi^^ defuncti, (...) ejus dignitatibus
omnibus privarunt -- In Fris^a linea illa usque ad hod^ernum d^em Seclusa
permane^. ibid. part 2. cap. 6. sect. 14.16.11.
It Is there that I read, how the States of Groninghen and Ommeland, immediately
upon the Murder of Prince William, did deprive his Son, Grave Maurice, of all
his Dignities, Honors, and Emoluments in their Province, and never admitted
any of that Line to be their Governor unto this day. It Is there that I read a
defense of their secluding the Prince of Orange from being State-holder, or
Admiral, or General of the Forces of the United Provinces (a separate Article
which Holland concluded part 2. cap. 6.
with Cromwell) wherein they extenuate and deny any obligations they have to
the whole House of Orange; and therefore they might, without breach of Morality
and Civility, proceed as they did. I confess I was amazed to read such things,
and wondered not that Queen Elizabeth and our English Kings meet with so much
unmoral usage amongst these Hollanders, since Prince William and his Heirs are
thus entreated: and whilst others behold the Dutch as Protestants and
Christians, I cannot but rank them amongst the worst of mankind, not to be
paralleled by any known race of Pagans and Savages.

We will likewise pass by in silence the relating of those passages, of which
many of Us have been living Witnesses, as when the whole Country, (...) a
sudden Invasion on the Veluwe, and the taking of Amerford, was in the like
manner alarmed, as Rome when Hannibal appeared before her Gates.

This Invasion happened Anno Dom. 1629. The Spaniards joining their Forces with
those of the Emperor under Montecuculi, This is largely described by D.
Heinsius, in his Siege of ^ois le Du^.
did make the said irruption, and surprised Amerford, being already Masters of
Wesel. All Holland was affrighted, and their High and Mighties forsook the
Hague to fit at Vtrecht. The recent memory hereof might suggest unto the
Hollanders more of moderation in their deportment, since they are no more
assured of their good Fortune, than the World is of their good Manners. I could
not but compassionate the distress of old Rome, the memory whereof this passage
renewed; and I wished that victorious Monte^u^^^i had prevented our Prince and
the King of France in the reducing of Holland, whose baseness represents them
to have a greater affinity with Carthage than Rome, and the Belgie Faith
imports as much of Treachery as ever did the Punic.

And forasmuch as comes within the re^ch of our own Memories, we have yet fresh
remembrances of the War with the Lord Protector Cromwell, into which by a
certain destiny, and an interest beyond interest, we were drawn, at a time when
the Nation, for want of Ships and Guns, was reduced to a perplexity, the
thought whereof we cannot entertain without grief, and alteration in our hearts.

All that are acquainted with the transactions of that War, do well know that
the Dutch began their preparations for that War long before the English
apprehended it: they ordered 150 Ships to be equipped out, and beat up their
Drums for Volunteers to man them, amusing the English with a Declaration, that
this was done to secure the Commerce; so that no preparations extraordinary
were then set on foot in England: and whilst they were in League with this
Nation, and in the midst of a Treaty for a stricter Alliance, their Admiral
most perfidiously comes into Dover road, with an intent to destroy the English
Navy, and ascertain thereby to his Masters the Dominion of the Sea. I more
willingly mention these things, because they are an instance to some people,
not only of the perfidiousness of the Dutch, but of the equity of his Majesty's
present quarrel: This is expressed in the Declaration of the pretended
Commonweal^h: and they determined to assert the right of the Fi^g, not only as
an Honorable salute, but as a testimony of their undoubted right and domini^n
upon the neighboring Seas.
for that War, was grounded upon the striking of the Flag, and the Dominion of
the Seas: and it is apparent Faction, not any colorable reason which can sway
any man that approved of that War to condemn this. It is also an instance, that
the present quarrel of the Dutch is not with His Majesty, His Royal Highness,
and the Court, but with the Nation. In other cases it is irrational and
imprudent to distinguish betwixt the Political and private Capacity of our
King; but in this they are so inseparable, that the interest of the People,
King, and Court are all one, and equally concerned in the evil success of our
Fleet: and were we (by a detestable fiction) deprived of the King and Court,
the Controversy would still remain betwixt the Dutch and the unhappy survivors
in England. It was not the want of force at that time which occasioned the
misfortunes of the Hollanders, but the Courage and Valor of the English: and
what may we not (under God) promise our selves from the same persons now, who,
besides the sense of their past Victories, have this further incitement, that
they fight under their lawful Prince, (a Prince so just and generous) and the
auspicious Conduct of his Royal Highness.

Through all these difficulties, and innumerable others, we have, by the
mercies of God, waded, and would have wished with all our souls by a long
continued Unity ( the true and innocent Interest of our Peace-coveting
Republic) to have tasted the ^ruits of our sharp labors and dangers; but it
has pleased God to order and dispose it otherwise, These expressions argue
fear in the Authors: and it ought to add to the courage of the English, that
besides the terrors of an evil Conscience, and the apprehensions of divine
vengeance for their present perfi^y, and former Bar^ar^ties to the murdered and
ruinated English; they are also sensible of the puissance of their Enemies, now
in conjunction against them.
who by his just and adorable judgments forces us to acknowledge that we now
(as much as ever) stand in need of his powerful protection, since we find our
selves at this present time, encompassed with a necessity to oppose the
extremest assaults of the greatest Forces of Europe, with a power which indeed
is inconsiderable in comparison of that of our Enemies, by which yet (how weak
soev^r) we da not despair to defend and secure our selves; strengthened with
hopes that God shall please to look upon the Equity of our innocent case, with
the eyes of his justice, and our sins and defects with the eyes of his mercy.

And, in truth, if ever the Sword is drawn in time of necessity, and for
innocent defense of our dear Country; it is at this present, in which it seems
the Grandees of this world, have in the counsel of the power of darkness,
concluded the ruin and destruction of the United Netherlands, assuming to
their associates, all such as value Christian blood, no more than that of Sheep
and Goats, delighting their eyes with the devastation of Countries and Cities,
even as if they beheld Comedies.

Wise people do frequently look back upon things passed, and by comparing those
with the present Transactions, they from thence form unto themselves Documents
and Rules whereby to regulate their deportment: If our Enemies, the Hollanders,
had amongst the difficulties through which they have waded, called to mind the
meaness of their own condition when they sought refuge here, and when Queen
Elizabeth supported them, the Vicinity, Strength, and Generosity of the English
Nation, the candor and sincerity which has been constantly expressed unto them
by the Royal Ancestors of his Majesty, whilst they favored these infamous
Netherlanders. Had they considered the vicissitudes of Fortune, how great and
unexpected they are; the dangers of growing too puissant, though the foundation
of Grandeur be not laid in the wronging and depressing of others; that it is
requisite for them who advance themselves by fraudulent means, and the injuries
of others, to retain some firm Allies, and by the repute of their sincerity, to
some, efface the ignominy, and allay the odium which their perfidiousness to
others would create them. Had they assumed such thoughts as these, they had
never contracted so universal an enmity as they are now in danger to sink
under. Their condition is altogether like that of the Earl of S. Paul, who
having enriched and advantaged himself by a constant practice of Treachery to
the Kings of England and France, and the Duke of Burgundy, none of them being
safe from his machinations, nor being able to rely upon any promises of his,
how solemn and sacred soever, they all together resolved to establish the
common tranquillity by the ruin of that perfidious man. And when the City of
Venice had by several arti^^c^s aggrandized her self, and incroached upon the
Dominions of sundry Princes; the Emperor, French King, Pope, and others did
all join against that Republic (which by so many practices in raising and
fomenting of the Divisions and Wars of Italy, breaking of former, and entering
into new Leagues, as advantage, not right, did excite them) and deprived the
Venetians of all they held in the Terra firma. It is in vain for the Considerer
to justify the present War unto his Countrymen, by urging Necessity and
Innocent defense of themselves: How specious soever those pleas are, they avail
not in this case, because, they by the manifold injuries and contumel^es done
to the K. of England have provoked him to attacque them, and created to
themselves this Necessity of Warring; nor is their Defense innocent, because it
includes a Defense of the most barbarous Criminals against all Laws divine and
humane: And certainly if ever any War was justified by the Laws of Nature and
Nations, if self-preservation, the protection of injured Subjects, vindication
of Rights, revenge of great Injuries and Indignities, be just motives to
commence a quarrel (as each one of them is) never was any Prince more wronged
than his Majesty is, The depositions of their cruelties against his Majesty's
Sub^ects in the East Indies, Guinny, and other places, are to be seen in the
Regis^^^s Offi^e of the High (...) of Almiralty ^^pt at Doctors Commons.
when the glory of his present actings is extenuated or soiled by any charge of
injustice; nor do I find amongst his Associates any such as value Christian
blood no more than that of Sheep and Goats; but I find He has for Enemies
those that so exquisitely tormented and so barbarously put to death the English
at Amboyna, and by a thousand actions no less cruel have testified their little
regard to Christian blood.

The Considerer, that he might evince the Equity of their Cause, pretends to
deduce its original: the sum of his prolix discourse is this. That the King of
France urging his pretensions on a considerable part of the Spanish
Netherlands, in right of his Queen to whom they were devolved: The United
Netherlands moved by a Peace-loving inclination, and apprehension of a terrible
N^^^hbour, d^d endeavor to extinguish the sury of that War, whose flames they
fea^ed would not only consume the adjacent Countries, but also scorch the more
remote places: and to that end they associated Counsels with the Kings of Great
Britain and Sweden, and jointly concluded a Triple Alliance betwixt themselves,
by which they ^ave mutually obliged each other to promote the peace betwixt
France and Spain on the terms and proffers of the Alternative, and by the same
peace to secure the quiet and tranquillity of Christendom: promising each to
other, for further confirmation of the said Triple League, That betwixt them
always should be, and continue a Sincere Unity, and serious correspondence from
their hearts; and in good faith to advance each others profits, utility and
dignity, and whatsoever should oppose it self thereunto with their best
endeavors to re^rove: and if at any time it should happen, that this their
amicable intention should meet with a wrong interpretation, and by chance an
untimely revenge of War by any of the said Parties, or any others on their
behalf, should be offered to any of them Confederated, that in such case they
should faithfully assist one another.

This is the substance of the Triple Alliance: After which he adds, That the
King, the King of England, is sensible in his own Conscience (though with words
he dissembles, and disowns the knowledge thereof) that by reason of the Triple
Alliance, the Dutch are menaced with a War from France, and that, whatsoever
the most Christian King pretends this is the true reason of his designs, and
which he has plainly discovered in all Courts, and is no more than He
threatened them with at first, in case they ratified the Triple League. And
therefore by virtue of this Triple League the King of England owes the Dutch an
unconfined aid; As also limited succors of forty Ships of War, six thousand
Foot, and four hundred Horse, by ver^ue of the Defensive Articles concluded in
16^8. To which his Majesty is eb^iged, If their High and Mighties be attaqued
by any Prince, or State, on what pretext soever. The King of England being
under these obligations, and being or imulated by Ambition, Avarice, and an
insatiable thirst after blood, determined to take the opportunity of this
juncture (wherein the most potent King of France did threaten the Dutch with a
terrible War) to pursue his unchristian designs, and to dis-engage himself the
better from all obligations of Aid to the Dutch, does of himself previously
begin a War, and with a specious Declaration, palliates and dissembles his foul
and malicious designs.

This is the entire substance of what the Considerer tediously does insist
upon, and is the sole foundation whereupon he proceeds to justify the Dutch,
and with all possible aggravations of Language bespatters the King of England,
as if no Chronicles ever produced such a precedent of violated Faith, as his
Majesty does now give an Example of. I do confess that nothing ought to be more
sacred, than the word and faith of Princes: That War is the last of remedies
whereunto they ought to have recourse, and which ought not to be commenced, but
upon just, honorable, and necessary grounds: I do acknowledge the tenor of the
Triple League, and the Defensive Alliance. But I do avow that his Majesty is no
way concerned in the violation of them; Nor is the Allegation of them pertinent
to the present quarrel: and of all the futile pretexts, which I have read of in
History, this is the worst whereon the Dutch do bottom themselves. The Triple
League does no way interest his Majesty in their defense; For it does not
appear that the most Christian King does invade them ^or entering into it: There
is no Authentic Declaration or Testi^ony, that this is the motive which
prevails with Him to undertake this Enterprise: The Secrets of his mind are
known only to himself, and to the searcher of all hearts: It is not for Men to
proceed upon conjectures and surmises (which oft-times prove vain and false) as
if they were certain Truths; nor can any Prince be obliged indeterminately,
(and such is the present unreasonable plea of these Hollanders) where the
condition of the aid to be given, Obstrictio in quibusdam videtur a caeteris
linerare Et locus s^biectus certis pactis and conditionibus, in c^eris manet
liber. Et qui se subjecit in quibusdam, videt^r se se^valle in reliq^^s
liberum. Albe^us Gentilis de jure belii, lib. 1. cap. 11.
is particularly specified, viz. If it should happen that this their Amicable
intention should meet with a wrong interpretation, and by chance an untimely
revenge of War by any of the said Parties, or any others on their behalf should
be offered to any of them confederated, that in such case they should
faithfully assist one another. Can there be any thing more clear, than that the
aid to be given is suspended upon this one circumstance, that the Triple
Alliance should fall under a wrong interpretation, and that thereupon the party
demanding the Aid, should be attacqued by a revengeful War? How does it appear
that the entering into the Triple Alliance is mis-interpreted, since it does not
appear that his Christian Majesty did ever debate it, much less declare himself
therein? How does it appear that He plainly discovered this sentiment by his
Ministers in all Courts, since it does not appear that He gave them private or
public instructions to say so? Must a Prince answer for every expression, or
every particular action of his Ambassador? Can there be no other cause but
this found out why the King of France should attacque the Dutch? Cannot we
imagine, that the French retain a secret and inveterate desire of revenge for
the notorious perfidy of the States General, when they concluded a Peace with
Spain, without mentioning the Crown of France, or having any regard to the
French Interest? Or, is it not possible for the Christian King to make War upon
them without a cause? or merely for enlargement of Empire? Or for other
concealed reasons, or unknown indignities? What pregnant proof, or legal
presumptions do the Dutch allege then, that This is the cause of the present
War? And with what impudence do they upbraid our King, as if the thing were so,
and He knew it in his conscience, to be so, when as the Considerer himself in
the Conclusion of his Treatise, says it is not so? viz. I shall hint at nothing
else in the King of France's Declaration, but that it appears visible therein,
that the War of that high renowned King proceeds from nothing else but a formed
design to enlarge the limits of his Territories as far as his ambition is
extended; yet that we hope that God Almighty shall by the same hand, by which
he has hitherto preserved us, confound the designs of the King -- I doubt not
but hereby it is manifest, that His Majesty is no way concerned by the Triple
League to assist the United Netherlands in this Iuncture: and even so the
Swedes, by their indifference, show how much they approve of the Judgment of
his Majesty: and no man can say otherwise, but such as either regard not what
they speak, or else take the freedom to surmise, and aver, whatsoever is for
their Interest.

I come now to the Defensive Alliance, whereby his Majesty A. D. 1668. did
oblige himself unto that State, to give them an assistance ( if attacqued by
any Prince or State on what pretense soever) of forty ships of War, six
thousand foot; and four hundred Horse, upon promise, three years after the
expiration of the War, to be re-imbursed of the charges of the said succor.
But neither is this Alliance of any more validity at present than the other: It
is the common opinion of the Civil Lawyers, and Reason it self dictates it, Qui
promittit non offendere, is subintelligit exceptionem, Nisi causa superveniat;
nisi culpa accesserit ejus, cui promissio ista fit, and pactio ^oederis; Rebus
sic stantibus. Alber. Gentilis de jure belli, lib. 3. cap. 24. Grotius de jure
belli, lib. 3. cap. 20 sect. 2^. Zouche de jure faeciali, part 2. sect. 9. qu.
An provo^ato, pacto pacis contravenire licet?
that, In all Articles and Treaties for peace, there is this exception to be
supposed in the Contractors; Unless some new cause intervene: Unless it be by
the default of him with whom the League and compact is made: or, Affairs
continuing in the same posture and state, in which they were at the time of the
contract. And that saying of Vlpianus and Pomponius concerning private
compacts, viz. That an agreement is not violated, from which a man recedes upon
a just reason and motive; this by Interpreters is extended to National Leagues
betwixt Princes and States. This being supposed, It remains that we enquire,
Albericus Gentilis ubi supra. Et Zouch. ibid. Pactum pa^is, inquit, Grotius,
admittit, ut si nova causa subsit, vis bellica inferatur, quae si probabiliter
afferri potest, satius est injustitiam sine perfidia, quam cum perfidia
admissam credi. Vide Grotium loco citato.
whether the King of England had any new cause or provocation given him? For,
if such a matter do appear to have happened, though it be slight, nay
disputable, yet is his Majesty absolved from breach of Faith, though not
altogether from the imputation of injustice: But if the provocation be weighty,
and of high importance, nothing can be more legitimate than the present rupture
which his Majesty has made with the Dutch. I would willingly know, if any
Englishman can think that his Majesty could be obliged to this Defensive
Alliance, without any regard to the Peace concluded upon at Breda, that is,
without any supposition, that he was in 1668. in any terms of Amity with these
Netherlanders: If this be unimaginable, then it is apparent, that the
observation of these Articles, on his Majesty's part, depends upon the
observation of the precedent peace, on the part of the Dutch. His Majesty never
contracted this League with them, so as to derogate from that, and to tie
himself up to the Assistance of the Dutch, Si conditio quaedam, qua societas
coitur, socio non praestatur; vel si e^ re f^ui non liceat, cujus grati^
societas ^it inita: rationem habet renunciatio societatis. Et ergo videtur,
quod si in uno non siat sati^ societati, discedi ab omni societate possit.
Alber. Gentil. ubi supra.
against the King of France (or any other invader) notwithstanding that they
should violate their Articles, and multiply injuries, indignities, and acts of
hostility against Him, and his Subjects. No Prince ever fettered himself thus;
no Laws of Nations, no common reason admits of such a Fancy: and therefore the
notorious violation of that peace does plenarily absolve his Majesty from the
bonds of this subsequent Alliance.

The Considerer, no doubt foresaw this defense, but would not take notice of
it, lest he should have been obliged to refrain from the aspersions of
unparalled perfi^iousness and violated Faith, the Name and Noise whereof
might advantage him amongst the Dutch populace, and the more ignorant sort of
men. And, to give a further color to his calumnies, he says, that the Reasons
which his Majesty alleges, are not the Reasons which he proceeds upon: They
are but forged pretensions, whilst the true inducements to this rupture are
Ambition, Avarice, and insatiable revenge, Since the Man so little understands
his Majesty's inclinations and deportment, which have been hitherto such as
yield no ground for a charge of this nature, I will not stand to refute his
insolent and barbarous conjectures, nor believe so ill of the most generous,
mild, and peaceable Prince in the world, as that He diligently sought occasions
for a War, when the injurious Dutch rendered all peace unsafe and dishonorable
unto him.

I shall therefore examine what my Author does urge against the Declaration of
his Majesty, wherein when my Countrymen shall be satisfied, I doubt not but
they will approve of the Justice of his Majesty's Cause, and be inflamed with a
zeal to vindicate the honor of their King, and the necessary rights of the
Kingdom.

Concerning the business of Surinam (my Author does not consider every thing)
all that is said amounts to this; That the place being taken in March 1667. by
Adrian Crynsen of Zeland with the Forces of their State, and so under certain
Covenants reduced to their obedience and subjection, was indeed in the month of
May next following retaken by the English; but that the same in pursuance of
the sixth Article providing, that all Lands, Cities, Fortifications, and
Colonies, taken during the War by any of the parties then in Arms, from the
other, and after the 10/20 of May retaken, should be restored to the first
taker, was delivered up again into the possession of the States: He wonders
that the King of England should offer to style any of the Inhabitants of
Surinam to be His Subjects, since by the rights of War, and the Articles of
Peace, the plenary Dominion and right of Sovereignty is transferred to the
Dutch: and they being now Subjects to that State, ought to complain to their
States General, if the said Capitulations be not observed duly; but that the
King of England is no more interessed in them, than is the King of Spain.

To this I answer, That by the third Article instanced in, though the plenary
right of Sovereignty over Surinam were transferred; yet it is expressly said,
They are to have it altogether after the same manner as they had gotten and did
possess them the 10/10 day of May last past. It remains then, that we enquire,
What manner of Sovereignty the Dutch had in Surinam by their conquest thereof,
by the Capitulations of Abraham Crynsen: and this appears to be no other than
what the Dutch had over Bois le Duc, when Grobbendonck capitulated to surrender
it to the Prince of Orange upon terms, to march away with flying Colors, and
such Inhabitants as pleased might remove their Estates and Goods into the King
of Spain's Dominions within a certain time, etc. A. D. 1629. so were the
Inhabitants of Surinam to have convenient liberty to transport themselves and
their estates into the King of England's Dominions. And as Grobbendonck by his
Capitulation (together with those comprehended therein) did not become the
Subjects of the United Netherlands, no though He or his Followers, had stayed
several months in the surrendered Town, but retained to the King of Spain, so
neither did these of Surinam become by their Capitulation Subjects to the
Dutch: it is true they gained thereby the Sovereignty of the territory, but not
of their persons: and to deny this, is to act by the Punic or Belgic Faith, to
deny that Abraham Crynsen, at that distance, had power to grant Articles;
Grotius de jure belli, l. 3. c. 22. s. 9 Zouche de jure faeciali, part 2. sect.
9. qu. An conditiones deditionis a duce concessae, a suprema potestate
praestandae sint?
and to act as Hannibal did, when he refused to ratify the conditions granted
by Maharbal, because He (though absent) was the Superior, and had not signed
them: which deed is censured by Livy thus, quae punica religione servata fides
ab Annibale est, atque in vincula omnes conjecti. This being premised, I cannot
understand, why the King of England might not call them His Subjects, and send
for them; and as an high injury resent their detaining, since thereby He is
deprived of so many serviceable Planters in his other Colonies thereabouts.

The King proceeds from the grievances of the business at Surinam to a
complaint of pretended affronts, which He alleges to have suffered from the
States, as well in making as showing of Pictures, Medails and Pillars, as in
refusing to strike the Flag: declaring that the first alone, viz. the making
and showing of Pictures and Medails has been a sufficient motive of his
displeasure, and the resentment of all his Subjects, that is, in one word, of
the War. God preserve the World from such Christian Princes, as for a Picture
or Medail, make no scruple to stir up Commotions in Christendom, and to cause
the effusion of so much innocent blood -- I never yet apprehended that
Christianity obliged its Professors to abandon their concerns for a good repute
and honor. They have indeed some such Aphorisms in Holland, where the regards
of Virtue, Piety, Justice, Honor do yield to those of Gain. But in other
places the case differs, and the most honorable considerations prevail above
the infamous, though profitable. S. Augustine and all Casuists do agree, that
those Wars are just, wherein such injuries are avenged upon a Nation or
Kingdom, Lud. Molina de justitia tr. 2. disp. ^02. Albe^. Gentilis de jure
belli* l. 1. c. 18.20.21. Fr. a victoria relect. 6. sect. 4.
which that Kingdom or Nation has either neglected to punish in their own
Subjects, or refused to yield satisfaction for unto the party injured. And if
the Considerer had employed his time in any diligent research into the just
causes of War, he would have found the most knowing, prudent, and learned
Christians to teach, that sometimes private indignities, always the Indignities
put upon Princes are a just cause of War. Thus did David, Lud. Molin^ de
justit. tr. 2. disp. 104. Causa particularis justi belli est injuria aut
contumelia notabilis principi illata. Gretius de jure belli. l. 3. c. 20. sect.
40. Alber. Gentilis de jure belli, lib. 1. cap. 18.
though a man after Gods own heart; who we are ascertained did not ill in
making War upon the Ammonites, because they cut off half the beards of his
Ambassadors. It is most certain, that besides the defense of his people there
are other Titles, and other considerations which put Arms lawfully into the
hands of a Prince; there are other wounds to heal, and other breaches to make
up, than the ruin of his Subjects; the outrages acted against his Honor are
to be revenged, and the spots wiped off, which are imprinted upon the
reputation of his Crown, as one of the Pillars which bear up his Greatness, and
therefore to be carefully preserved from blows, that it fall not into contempt.
The Reputation of a Prince is by some compared to the Credit of Merchants,
which maintains them in honor and luster, though they be in effect poor, and
gives them oftentimes means to fill up the concealed emptiness of their
Coffers, and to repair the weak invisible condition of their fortunes. But when
a Prince is wounded in his Reputation, and his Forces are cried down; when his
prosperities are lessened, and his disgraces increased, when endeavors are
used to obscure the luster of his greatness and puissance, wherewith the eyes
of strangers ought to be dazzled, and to draw a curtain before the exterior
face of his affairs: Etiam stant Reges, and regna nomine, atque existimat^ene,
quare nomenque tueri oportet. Et culpa fuerit relaxare vindictam. Alber.
Gentilis de jure belli, lib. 1. cap. 18.
This is the subject of a just War, and whatsoever private Christians may do in
some cases, Princes do not discharge their duty, nor take requisite care for
their Subjects, if they do not avenge notorious contumelies and indignities;
nay I dare add, that such of them as are negligent in this case, do not only
run into great perils from Foreign Kings, but their Domestics and Subjects,
who will be prone to despise, trample upon, and ruin them whom they see
universally contemned and affronted. The Casuistical Divines and Civilians are
herein agreed, Ex cujus infamia sequitur infamia subditorum: tenetur ex
Justitia non condona^e famae restitutionem: ita quod si remissio facta fuerit,
nihil valeat: quia non potest cedere juri subditorum. Et quando subditi
notantur de crimine infamiae, propter infamiam ^^aelati (vel principi) h^be^r
jus ad famam and Praelati and ad propriam: ergo Praelatus non p^test condonare
restitutionem propriae famae. Dom. Bannes de jure and justitia Qu. 62. Artic. 2.

Omni^ qui infamat proximum tenetur restituere illi famam, and omnia damna,
quae consequuntur ex infamia illius. id ibid. and Le^n. L^ssius de justit. and
jure, lib. 2. c. 2. dub. 29.


and they do not allow a Prince the liberty to pardon Indignities and
Contumelies done to his Person: because his Reputation is not properly his own,
his Subjects share therein, and whatsoever indulgence He grants in such cases,
they are null and invalid. It is further adjudged, that whosoever does act or
speak any thing to the defamation of another, is obliged in conscience to make
the injured party reparation, not only as to the indignity it self, but as to
all the damages which he received by reason of the disparagement done unto him.
And should the English pursue herein what in Justice they may, the greatest
part of the Dutch Trade in Guiny and the East Indies, as also Russia should be
put into their possession: For these insolent Hollanders have advanced
themselves to the present grandeur and height, as well as vastness of Trade by
affronting the English Merchants, defaming and belying most contumeliously the
Person, Conduct, and Strength of their Prince, and by exposing him to scorn and
derision by ridiculous Pictures, and odious Medails. And because that this last
Instance is a part of the present contest, and would indeed alone authenticate
it, I will relate the evil effects of these Medails and Pictures, which they
occasioned unto the English in Muscovy, as the deceased Dr. Collins, who was
Physician to the Czar, has left it upon record. D^. Co^l^us survey of Mus^ovy,
cap. 26.
The Hollanders have another advantage, by rendering the English cheap and
ridiculous by their lying Pictures, and libelling Pamphlets, this makes the
Russian think us a ruined Nation. They represent us by a Lion painted with
three Crowns reversed, and without a tail: and by many Mastive Dogs, whose ears
are crop'd, and tayls cut off. With many such scandalous prints, being more
ingenious in the use of their Pencils than Pens. These stories take much with
the barbarous people, when no body is present to contradict them -- It is no
Justification for the States General to say, that these are for the most part
the actions of particular persons, for which the public is not accountable. It
is enough for the English that the States themselves published some, and that
no solicitations and complaints could make them recall, suppress, and prohibit
the others: this deportment of theirs does amount to an authorizing of them,
and it is a Rule, that A ratihabition in deeds, Si Universitas negligit illud
factum emendare, jam nune illa queat ipsa se. Est scilicet ratihabitio fortio^,
quae r^ sit, qu^m quae verbo: and est delicti quoque ratihabitio. Alber.
Gentil. de jure belli. l. 1. c. 21.

Zouch de jure faeciali part 2. sect. 5. qu. Virum injuria a subditis ^l^atae,
principem vel populum afficiant?


is more powerful, than a ratihabition in words: And the Republic involveth it
self in those crimes, which it refuses to punish. So Agapetus in Justinian
declares. It Is the same thing to offend ones self, and not to prohibit the
offenses of others.

This controversy about Indignities and Contumelies done to Princes, does
recall into my mind the violence wherewith former Kings have resented them.
David without any formalities of denouncing War (that I read of) attacqued the
Ammonites, 2 Samuel 1^.11.
and with horrible torments revenged the indignities done to his Majesty upon
the Inhabitants of Rabbah. And Gustavus Adolphus invaded the German Empire,
^il. Arlanihaeus Arma Succica. p. 13.37. Zouch de jure faeciali. part 2. sect.
10. qu. An bellum aliquando omissa indictione movere (...)
without ever declaring War, to revenge the contumelious usage of his
Ambassadors at Lubec. Had either of those potent Kings received any such
injuries and affronts as his Majesty of Great Britain has had multiplied upon
him, how fierce a vengeance would they have taken upon their barbarous and
insolent Enemies, whose outrageous doings do give unto any rigours the face of
Justice, and absolves from the usual solemnities of War.

I suppose it now manifest that our King might with a great deal of Justice
make War upon the Dutch, mearly in vindication of his own honor, and that
without the usual form of declaring War: But because this last circumstance is
represented so tragically; as if thereby the English Ships, though acting by a
Royal Commission, were Pirates, and as bad as those of Algiers and Tunis: I
shall demonstrate that the solemn Declaration of War, before it begin, is not
always necessary.

It is not any part of the Law of Nature, Natural jure, ubi aut vis illata
arcetur, aut ab eo ipso qui deliquit poena deposcitur, nulla requiritur
denunciatio. Grotius de jure belli, l. 3. c. 3. sect. 6.2.
that a Prince denounce War before he begin hostilities: All that Nature
directs Us unto in this case, is, that we repel force with force, and avenge
our selves, or take reparations for injuries committed against Us. All that can
be alleged for it out of Grotius, is, that it is a fair and laudable course,
Honest and laudabiter interponitur. Grot. ubi supra.
and not always practiced by the Romans themselves: For when the Carthaginians
in two Wars had showed themselves an ungenerous perfidious Enemy, such as the
Dutch are to all the world, they did not denounce the third War against them,
but proceeded by surprise against that vexatious treacherous irreconcilable
people, Appian de bell. Punie.
and used them not as other Nations, because that others were not like unto
them. Xenophon. Cyri. pad. l. 2.
And Xenophon in his Romance of Cyrus, thought it no ill character of his
Hero, Zouch de jure faeciali part 2. sect. 10. qu. Anbellum omissa indictione
mourre li^ea^? Arma Suecica, page 55.
that he should without denunciation make War upon the King of Armenia. So did
Pyrrhus; so did Gustavus Adolphus. As in the Civil Courts of Judicature, a
formal Citation is not always necessary; in like manner a Prince may sometimes
omit the proclaiming of War before he practice hostilities. Atheri^. Gentilis
de jure belli. l. 2, c. 2.
But to evince the entire justice of that Encounter of ours with the Smyrna
Fleet, it may be convenient for us to consider, that those Ships meeting with
our Fleet did refuse to strike their Flags and lore their Topsails unto the
Ships of War of his Majesty, contrary to the 19. Article of Breda: And that
being refused, it was not only lawful for our Ships to destroy or seize them,
and for his Majesty to confiscate them: M. S. Comment. de ^abus Admiral. fol.
28. ^^iden. mare clausum, l. 2. c. 26.
But it was the express Commission of the Ship-Captains (and has been so to
all Men of War for above 400 years) and an inseparable Regality of the King of
England, which authorize, and authenticate that action in full: It is no new
Doctrine in England, to say no Ship can be protected in point of Amity, which
should in any wise presume not to strike sail: Q. Elizabeth gave the same form
of Commissions and Instructions to her Admirals; and if there never happened
any rancounters in her times like unto this, it was because no Prince disputed
the thing with her, and the Dutch were then the Distressed States. This
Regality of having the Flag struck to the Navy Royal, or any part of it, is
paramount to all Treaties, so far is it from being limited and restrained by
the Treaty at Breda; and whatsoever contravenes it is not to be construed so as
the breach of inferior Articles. The Right of the Flag is not demanded by
virtue of the Treaty from the Dutch (though they cannot refuse it without
annulling that treaty) but recognized there as a fundamental of the Crown and
dignity of the K. of England. Such points are not the subject of Treaties, and
no concessions were valid against them. Domin. Baudius de induciis l. 2.
In such cases we say, plus in talibus valere quod in recessu mentis
occultatur, quam quod verborum fermula concipitur. It is therefore evident,
that nothing was acted on our side contrary to the said League, in reference to
the Smyrna Ships: And the ensuing War (notwithstanding the 23. Article) is to
be imputed to the perfidiousness of the States General; not that the private
act and obstinacy of the Smyrna Ships did make it to be so, but the States
General had justified Van Ghent in the like case, and by that solemn and
notorious violation of the Nineteenth Article of Breda, in effect declared War
against Us; Ab altera part indictum esse sufficit. Grotius de jure belli. l.
^. c. 3. sect. 7.
and we needed not to declare any thing on our side; it not being judged
necessary, but a superfluous Ceremony, for both parties to denounce War: And if
the one party, as here the Dutch* do rescind a Treaty, (Leagues are individual
acts, and the violation of one Article does annul the obligation of the whole)
then are we, ipso facto, in a condition of War, nor is it requisite the King
declare himself: They that violate their Faith, Jura violanti jus redditur, si
no^ praestatur. Item neq, his bellum indicetur, qui jam pro hostibus habentur:
ut quid enim opus indictione, per quam denunciatio hostilitatis, si hosts
sumus, and habemur. Quicquid demonstrandae rei additur satis demonstratrae
frusta est. Etiam illud dixere Faeciales, non opus esse renunciare amicitiam,
cum legatis repetentibus res pluries, eae nec essent redditae. nec fu^sset
aliter satisfactum. Alberic. Gentilis de jure belli. l. 2. c. 2.
render themselves incapable of wrong; and it is a vanity to multiply
demonstrations of what the Dutch had already made public: In fine, the Laws of
War inform us, that the War is sufficiently declared, when all applications and
Embassies become fruitless. And Divines tell us, that there are some cases when
a man is absolved from the obligation of fraternal correption and admonition,
viz. when the person offending is notoriously known, In fraterna correptione
inutilis admonitio omittenda est, Theologorum consensu. Genes. Sepulveda in
Apolog. pro libro de justis belli causis.
to be so perverse and obstinate, that all reproofs and warnings would be
fruitless; for, say they, He that ploweth ought to plow in hope, 1 Cor. 9.10.
and where there is no hope of any good success by friendly applications, there
no man is bound in conscience or prudence to pursue them. Though this relate to
private persons, yet the condition is the same in reference to Princes, seeing,
that the chief ground of Embassies, and such like Remonstrances amongst
Christian Potentates, is Fraternal Dilection; and therefore if the inutility
and fruitlesness of a Negotiation, absolve us justly from it there, it will
also do the same here: Wherefore, since his Majesty was convinced by the ill
event of all his amicable applications to the Dutch, and understood so well the
resolutions of the Hague, that they would not strike sail, he might justly omit
all such formalities, and immediately proceed to carve out his own satisfaction
by an advanced War.

Concerning the right of the Flag, it is in the first place to be remarked,
that it is cl^arly intimated in the said Declaration, that that King by the
said Right understands the Sovereignty of the Seas; since speaking of the
Antiquity of the said Right, he ad^s thereunto, that it is an ungrateful
insolence, that We should offer to contend with Him about the said Sovereignty:
Whereby it plainly app^ars, that the Flag and Sovereignty of the Seas ^re words
of different sounds, but according to the Kings meaning of the same
signification; so that We may easily conjecture, that the difference betwixt
the King of England and this State about the said Pretended Right of the Flag
(which is insinuated to that Nation as the most important Grievance wherein the
Peoples Honor is concerned) is not at present a Controversy about Saluting
and Striking of the Flag, and consequently no dispute in relation to the sense
of the Nineteenth Article of the Treaty at Breda, but only a Contest about the
Sovereignty of the Sea, which This State attributes to God Almighty alone; and
the King of England usurpes to Himself, although perhaps per gratiam Dei, by
which the most Absolute Princes govern their Lands and Territories. And the
Ambassador Downing also concerning the aforesaid sense of the Ninteenth
Article, in his Memorial delivered in the Name of the King, demanded of the
States a plain and clear acknowledgment of the aforesaid Pretended Sovereignty
of the Seas.

Every one that can tell of our Countrymen, and the impartial World may see,
that not the refusing to strike the Flag, in pursuance of the said Article
(which was fully performed, as shall hereafter be made evident) but only a
Refusal of the said acknowledgment has been the subject of the King of
England's complaint. And it is likewise easily to be apprehended, that at
present the said Acknowledgment is demanded from the States, not by reason of
the Justice of Right to the pretended affair, but only out of a plotted Design
to war against Us, which design could not be put in Execution but by a demand
of Impossible Satisfaction; for which intent the Ambassador Downing propounded
nothing else to the States than the Acknowledgment aforesaid, lest having made
Propositions of other things, he might receive satisfaction for his King, who
(he knew) would not be satisfied.

Of what importance the said Acknowledgment so demanded is, is not unknown to
any of the Subjects of this State, whose only subsistence is Commerce, and
consequently the Liberty of the Seas. I do believe that not one single
Fisherman in our Country can be found ( be he never so simple) that apprehends
not his chiefest Interest to consist herein, and that to force the said
Acknowledgment out of his throat, and thereupon to cause the Effects of the
said Pretended Sovereignty to follow, is one and the same thing as to tie up
his throat; or at least there is no other Distinction than betwixt a speedy and
a tedious ( yet assured) Death: since after the said Acknowledgment there can
at the best nothing else be expected from the King of England's Grace and
Favor, than an option and choice of a sudden period, or a lingering disease,
which is worse than a precipitated death.

And although the King of England extends not His pretended Dominion further
than the British Seas, yet it is evidently known, that the Limits of the said
Seas are by the King stretched out so far, that not the least part for a
passage out of our Country is left, which is not in respect of his pretended
Sovereignty subjected to the King according to his sense; considering that not
only the Chanel, but also the North Sea, and a great part of the Ocean is by
the King of England accounted the British Sea: so that We should not be able
out of our own Country to set out to Sea, but only by the Grace and Favor of
the King of England, of which we should be assured ^ar less than now we are of
his faith and promise.

We shall not enter at present to confute the aforesaid pretenses to the
Sovereignty of the Sea, not only because the same would probe too prolix, but
also ( and that principally) by reason it cannot be judged necessary to
contradict what all the World holds to be impertinent, except the King of
England, who as little can adhere to reason, as with reasonable offers he will
be satisfied. We shall only say, that it is false, and never can be proved,
that we ever fished in the Sea with license and permission of the King of
England's Father, and that for paying Tribute, as the aforesaid Declaration
expresses.

We confess, that in the year 1636. some of the King of England's Ships of War
seized upon our defensless Herring-busses, and that by mere violence they
forced a sum of money from them, which they called Tonnage-money; but we deny
that from thence any Right or Title can be derived, not only because violence
can create no Right ( no not by continuance) but also because the aforesaid
violent exaction was not continued; Complaints being made in England of the
aforesaid exorbitance, the same afterward was no more demanded.

We shall, with favor of the courteous Reader, passing to the business of the
Flag, so as the same in the Nineteenth Article of the Treaty at Breda is
regulated ( which Article must decide this Controversy) briefly demonstrate
that nothing was committed by the Lord of Ghent in the late Encounter contrary
to the said Article; and moreover, that what has been offered to the King of
England, by this State, over and above the obligations of the said Articles, is
of so convincing a concession, that we need not fear to refer it to the
judgment of the English themselves, as promising to our selves from the said
peoples discretion, that ( in respect this State has given abundant
satisfaction to them in point of Honor) they will scorn and detest to demand
that We should acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Sea ( proceeding only from a
desire of War) to belong to Them.

It is evident, and amongst all discreet persons without Controversy, that
Saluting at Sea, either by firing of Guns, or striking the Flag, or Lowering of
some Sail, must not be interpreted as some sign of subjection, but merely for
an outward testimony of Respect and Civility, which then with a Resolute and
the like Civility is required: and forasmuch as concerns the first saluting,
whereof We only here shall make mention, it is conceived, since those commonly
first salute, that own themselves inferiors in Rank and Worth to those they
meet, although they are not under subjection to them, that Ships of Republics
meeting at Sea with Ships of War belonging to Crowned Heads (to which
Republics yield Superiority in the World) must give the first salute either
with one or other sign of respect; which respect notwithstanding ( as all other
Acts of Civility) must proceed from a free willingness, and an unconstrained
mind, in those that show the same: yet it has often been seen, that the
strongest at Sea has forced the weakest to this submission; and that likewise
the necessity and manner thereof has been expressed in Articles.

Such is likewise concerning the same agreed on betwixt the King of England and
this State in the said Ninteenth Article, in conformity to former Articles, as
well concluded with the present King as the Protector Cromwell, that the Ships
and Vessels of the United Provinces set out to Sea as well for War and defense
against Enemies, as others, which at any time should meet in the British Seas
with any of the Ships of War of the King of Great Britain shall strike their
Flag, and lowr their Top-sail, in the like manner as formerly has been
customary.

To apprehend the true sense of that Article (as it ought to be) let the Reader
be pleased to take notice, that the same proceeded originally from the Articles
betwixt this State and the Protector Cromwell, concluded in the year 1654. and
that at that time the same was not expressed in such terms, as after a long
debate of some words which the Protector Cromwell would have added thereunto,
thereby not only to oblige single Ships, but entire Fleets of the States to the
said Salute, in case of meeting with any of the Ships of War belonging to
England; which words afterward upon the earnest instance of the Ministers of
this State, were left out of the said Article; so that the aforesaid Nineteenth
Article, drawn ont of the tenth Article of the Peace in the year 1662. which
tenth Article on the Kings side was delivered in out of the thirteenth Article
of the year 1654. must not be so understood that an entire Fleet of the States,
by virtue of the said Article, shall be obliged to give the said Salute to one
single Ship of the English: but the said Article must be taken for a
Regulation, according to which single Ships and Vessels of this State in point
of saluting the Ships of England are to govern themselves.

Now to apply the said Article ( according to the true sense) to the late
accident of the Lord of Ghent; it is in the first place to be observed, that
the King of England's Pleasure-Boat ( suppose, in respect of her Equippage, it
must pass for a Ship of War, which we will not dispute) not having met with any
single Ships or Vessels of the States, but coming in amongst a Fleet, then
riding at Anchor ( undoubtedly with a wicked design to seek matter of
Complaint) it with no fundamental reasons can be maintained that the Lord of
Ghent, by virtue of the said Article, was obliged to strike.

Secondly, It is likewise considerable, that the aforesaid Article speaking of
meeting, cannot be applied to a formed design, to cause a Quarrel by requiring
in the uncivillest manner in the world an act of Civility and Respect.

And lastly, It is notorious that the said accident happened in the North Sea,
not far from our own Coast; as likewise it is well known, that the North Sea is
not the British Sea, not only because in all Sea-plats ( yea in the English Map
it self) it is distinguished from all other, but also and especially ( which in
this case is an invincible Argument) by reason the same in the seventh Article
of the Treaty of Breda are distinctly mentioned one from the other, where it is
expressly said, that All Ships and Merchandises, which within twelve days after
the Peace are taken in the British Sea, and the North Sea, shall continue in
propriety to the Seizer; out of which it plainly appears, that, even according
to the King of England's sense, the North Sea differs in reallity from the
British Sea; but (vice versa) that the North Sea is made the British Sea, and
consequently that distinct things are confounded together, where there is a
design to raise commotions and disturbances in the world.

And though their High and Mighties might have kept to the Nineteenth Article
of the said Treaty, according to the true original interpretation, yet they
declared to the King of Great Britain, that upon the foundation and condition
of a firm friendship, and assurance of a real and sincere performance thereof (
upon the fifth Article of the Triple Alliance, in case France should fall upon
this State) they would willingly cause the entire Fleet, when they should at
any time meet with any Ship or Ships of War, carrying his Majesty's Standard,
to strike the Flag, and lowr the Top-sail in testimony of their Respect and
Honor, which they upon all occasions will publicly show to so faithful a
Friend, and so great a Monarch; Provided that from thence no occasion, either
now or hereafter should be taken, or the least inducements given to hinder or
molest the Inhabitants and Subjects of the United Provinces of the Netherlands
in their Free use of the Seas: which Declaration the King of England wrongly
interprets, because that the same is joined with the true performance of the
Triple League, that is, with his Honor and Word; as also with the assurance
that no prejudice should be offered in regard of the Free use of the Seas:
being an infallible argument that The King of England is as little inclined to
leave us an undisturbed use of the Seas, as He is to keep and perform his word.

I have already demonstrated the Justice and Honor of his Majesty's Arms. This
Discourse gives me occasion to manifest the Necessity thereof: All that is
recited here, was alleged by the Dutch Ambassadors to our King; and if it
appear hence, that His Majesty could not continue his Alliance any longer with
the Dutch, unless He would abandon the Sovereignty of the Sea, exchange his
proper Rights into mere Civilities (and those not to be enforced) and put
Himself and his Dominions into the Power of the Dutch: there is none then can
doubt but That the King was unavoidably engaged into this War, by the insolence
and arrogance of the treacherous and usurping Hollanders, and that He did not
seek or feign pretensions to quarrel with them.

The Nineteenth Article of the Treaty at Breda does run thus.

That the Ships and Vessels of the said United Provinces, as well Men of War as
others, meeting any Men of War of the said King of Great Britain's in the
British Seas, shall strike the Flag, and lowre the Top-sail in such manner as
the same has been formerly observed in any times whatsoever.

This Article was transcribed out of a former Treaty made betwixt O. P. and the
States General: and he was the first that ever inserted any such Article into
any Treaty; our Right and Dominion over the British Seas having never been
disputed before, but by an immemorial prescription and possession transmitted
unto us, and supposed as unquestionable by all Princes: these ungrateful Dutch
are the first that controverted it, disowning it in the time of the late Wars
(when our Civil distractions rendered our Prince unable to attend unto the
Maritime Dominion, and to curb their growing pride) yet was the long Parliament
so concerned to preserve the Rights of this Nation, that they made an
Ordinance, April 5. 1643. commanding their Admiral and Commanders at Sea to
enforce all persons to pay the usual and due submissions unto the Men of War
appertaining to this Kingdom. And the pretended Republic here did vigorously,
and by a dreadful War assert the said Sovereignty of the Seas. So that it ought
to be deemed the concurring sentiment of All parties in England, that These
submissions by striking the Flag, and lowering the Top-sail, are not mere
Civilities and unnecessary Punctilioes of Honor, and vainglory, but a
fundamental point, whereon the Being of the King and Kingdom is in great part
suspended: and it has been so studiously insisted on by our Princes, that for
above Four hundred years it has been a Clause in the Instructions of the
Admiral and the Commanders under him, tha^ in case they met any Ships
whatsoever upon the British Seas, M. S. Commentar. de rebus Admiral. f^l. 28.
S^lden ma^e clau^^m. lib. 2. c. 26.
that refused to strike Sail at the Command of the Kings Admiral, or his
Lieutenants, that then they should repute them as Enemies (without expecting a
declared War) and destroy them and their Ships, or otherwise seize and
confiscate their Ships and Goods. And these Instructions have been retained in
use, as well since the Treaty of Breda, as before it. The like Instructions are
given by the Venetians to their Captains in reference to the Adriatic Sea; and
by several other Princes.

It is manifest, and agreed upon by the Considerer, that this Article must
decide the present Controversy, and it is no less evident that this Article
does decide it to their prejudice, and that they are inexcusable as to the
breach thereof. I will not stretch the words of the Article so far, as to
infer, that they ought to strike Flag in acknowledgment of the Sovereignty of
the Sea, since otherwise they do not strike it in such manner as the same has
been formerly observed in any times whatsoever, though the words oblige them
not only to the thing, but circumstantiate the manner of it. Let their
sentiments be free; but yet let us see how they comply with the Article, as to
matter of Fact; They say that O. Cromwell would needs after a long debate have
those words put in, whereas the Article was otherwise penned at first. But this
allegation is impertinent; since we now enquire not into What was at first
debated, nor insist upon the first draught of the Treaty, but what was at last
ratified and confirmed on both sides: For it is thence arises the Obligation.
Secondly, They say, that by the earnest instance of their Ministers, O.
Cromwell was so far prevailed upon, as to relax that Article, and leave out the
said words: and therefore the Article must not be so understood, as if an
entire Fleet of the States by virtue thereof should be obliged to give the said
salute to one single Ship of the English; but the said Article must be taken
for a Regulation, according to which, the single Ships and Vessels of their
State, in point of saluting this Ship of England, are to govern themselves. To
this I reply, that it is not credible, nor believed here by any that were privy
to the transactions of O. Cromwell, that ever he consented to any such
alteration in the said Article: There is no proof of any such thing alleged,
and it is notoriously known to all our Admiralty, that he never did vary his
Instructions and Commissions in the Navy, but enjoined them, as before, to
enforce all Ships to strike, without regarding whether they were entire Fleets,
or single Ships: And I think this to be a demonstration of the falsehood of the
Dutch in this suggestion. Lastly, I find the Articles of peace published at
Amsterdam in 1655. in Latin, where is not any such thing to be seen, as is
here insinuated.

Artic. 13.
Adolphus Brachelius, histor. nostri tempor. Amstelodami 1655.
13. Item quod Naves and Navigia dictarum foederatarum provinciarum, tam bellica
and ad hostium vim propulsandam instructa, quam alia, quae alicui e navibus
bellicis hujus Reipublicae in maribus Britannicis obviam dederint, vexillum
suum e mali vertice detrahent, and supremum velum demittent, eo modo, quo ullis
retro temporibus, sub quocunque anteriori regimine, unquam observatum fuit.

This is sufficient to disprove this impudent forgery of the Considerer; but
had any such thing intervened betwixt the State and O. P. if it do not appear,
that His Majesty did make the like accord, how comes it to pass, that the
expressions of his Majesty must be construed by the sense of Cromwell? If this
Notion of exempting Fleets from saluting any single Man of War, were never
thought upon, nor mentioned, much less debated and decided at the Treaty of
Breda, does not common Equity and Reason oblige the Dutch to acquiesce in the
plain sense of the words, and not to distort or pervert them by far-fetched
interpretations and evasions? In the ^5th Article at Breda, it was agreed that
both parties should truly and firmly observe the League. And Article 36. that
the confederacy should be duly, and bona fide, observed.
It is usual in the last Articles of Treaties, or in the Ratification, for
Princes to express that they do sign, consent, and ratify the Agreement in its
true, proper, and most genuine sense: or, sincerely, and bona fide: and where
it is not so declared, yet it is understood in all Contracts, Principum
contractus omnes sunt bonae fidei -- fides exuberantior requiritur in
contractibus principum, ut ipse ait Baldus. -- Non strictum hic jus, aut juris
rigorem sectabimur: sub quo plerumque erratur perniciose. Non admittemus
disputationes subtiliores, deque apicibus juris: quae aequi and boni ratione
praetermissa, res examinare ad vivum solent. Quales isti esse debent
contrahentes, tales sint: quoniam and tales creduntur. Et itaque fraude^ omnes
absint, and exceptiones omnes subtilis juris cessent, tantumque dicatur quod
principem deceat. Albericus Gentil. (ex communi sententia J.C.) de jure belli,
l. 3. c. 14. and ib. lib. 2. c. 4. Zouch. de jure faeciali, part 2. sect. 4.
Grotius de jure belli, l. 2. c. 16. sect. 20.
but more especially in the Contracts of Sovereign Princes; and Charles V. and
Lewis of France are blamed for making use of those little shifts and elusions
of Treaties, which better become a Pettifogger, than a King. This is the common
Tenet of the Civil Lawyers, and consonant to the Law of Nations. It is true
there lies a ready Evasion; for All this is averred concerning Princes and
their Contracts; but the Dutchmen have nothing that is Royal amongst them,
their High and Mighties are not Princes, and they have different jura
Majestatis, as they have different ends from the generous and sincere part of
mankind. After an impertinent Harangue concerning God, Piety, Protestancy, they
are absolved from giving honor to them unto whom honor is due, Reverence to
whom reverence; or Right to whom right: They can plausibly recede from, and
evert an Article that is prejudicial to their Interest and insatiable Ambition,
and impudently exempt Fleets from amongst the number of Ships. Such men presume
strangely upon their power, or the stupidity of the world, that impose thereon
such Glosses as these. There was no such word mentioned, no such interpretation
proposed at Breda, much less assented unto. The common usage of that Naval term
admits not thereof, and the immemorial practice at Sea to the contrary does
sufficiently refute this sentiment. The Ambassadors had no power delegated
them to part with such a Regality; and perhaps it may be said, that the King
himself has no such Authority as can divest the Crown thereof. Summo consensu
prudentjum traditur, istiusmodi jura, quae Coronae annexa sunt, ita^ut ab ea
divelli ne quidem per ipsum Principem queant, nec lapsu temporum, nec ulla
conventione posse praescribi, aut usucapi, quin quandoque ad pristinum statum
revocari possin^. Nec successores ex tali contractu obligantur. Ianninus apud
D. Baudium de induc. Belgic. l. 3.
However, if any such thing had been done, had such a sense been admitted of,
or intended by the Dutch, Why did not They urge it sooner, and demand that the
Instructions to our Admiral and the Commanders at Sea should be changed from
what they have been during the space of above four hundred years? Their High
and Mighties have very much prejudiced themselves in the opinion of all prudent
men by so long a silence; and in the judgment of all honest persons, by
remonstrating thus now, since thereby they declare that to be the right sense
of the Article, which is indeed Nonsense, and that to be Justice which is, as
notorious an Usurpation as any Chronicles inform us of.

But lest this sense of the Article should not be admitted of, They say further
in defense of themselves, that since in the judgment of the King of Great
Britain, the striking of the Flag, and the acknowledging the Sovereignty of the
Sea are equipollent things, and that by the one His Majesty understands the
other, they cannot consent to the striking of the Flag, lest it should be
construed to a yielding him a Sovereignty and Dominion over the Sea: which is
too much for these High and Mighty Zealots, and such Protestants, that,
abominating all Image Worship, cannot endure any Monarchs, because they are (as
I may say) visible Deities and Mortal representations of that One God, who
providentially rules the Universe; nor can they tolerate their Usurpations upon
the Rights of God Almighty, who is alone Sovereign of the Sea.

If I were not in haste, I would animadvert upon that passage of the
Considerer, whereby he intimates, that All absolute Princes are Usurpers,
Governing their Lands and Territories, per Gratiam Dei, by which the King of
England usurps the Dominion of the Sea: In another place, he intimates as if
all Princes were Tyrants, and all Monarchy Tyranny: In a third, he detracts
from Monarchy, alleging that Monarchs are generally swayed by their wills and
lusts, and that the most efficacious reasonings of Princes and Monarchs are
their Arms: Such insinuations as these ought to exasperate all Princes against
them; and indeed this other controversy about the Dominion of the Sea extends
not only to the King of England, but to the Kings of France, Spain, Portugal,
Sweden, Denmark, etc. to the Republics of Venice, Genoa, etc. All which are no
less notorious Usurpers than his Majesty of Great Britain: and if the King of
England be an Usurper upon the Rights of God, by exercising a Sovereignty over
the British Seas, the Dutch have contributed very much to such Usurpation, by
permitting him to continue it so long: Illud unum inter alia praecipue
perpendendum, foedus Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Frisiae, Ostendae, and Slusae, cum
suae Majestatis regnis unitum proculdubio plenum magni maris dominium, and
perpetuam certamque suae Maiestatis subditis salutem atque prosperitatem esse
allaturum. A. E. Meteran. hist. Belg. ad an. 1585.
When they were the Distressed States, and tendered the Sovereignty of their
Provinces to Queen Elizabeth, their Ambassadors urged this unto Her as one
inducement, that Thereby She might ensure her self of the Dominion of the Great
Ocean: From whence any Englishman may collect, How much it imports Us, that
these Hollanders be rather Distressed, than High and Mighty.

Concerning the Dominion of the Sea, that we may the better understand the
Controversy, and the justice of his Majesty's demands, it is requisite that we
distinguish upon the word Dominion, which is equivocal. Dominion imports one
thing in respect to Jurisdiction and Protection, which the Doctors of the Civil
Law call Sovereignty or Universal Dominion, such is that of a Prince over the
persons and estates of his Subjects: And another thing in reference to
Propriety, which they term particular Dominion, whereby any private person is
invested in his Goods and Estate. Thus the King of England has an Universal
Dominion over the British Seas, whilst yet his Subjects retain their
proprieties in their several Fisheries.

Joan. Palatius de dominio Mari^. lib. 1. c. 11.
The effects of this Dominion Universal, or Sovereignty which accrue to a
Prince, are these,

1. Not only the Regality of the fishing for Pearl, Coral, Amber, etc. but the
direction and disposal of all other Fish, according as they shall seem to
deserve the regards of the public: as in Spain, Portugal, etc. is used.

2. The prescribing of Laws and Rules for Navigation, not only to his own
Subjects, but unto others Strangers, whether they be Princes of equal strength
and dignity with himself, or any way inferior. Thus the Romans did confine the
Carthaginians to equippe out no Fleets; and forbade Antiochus to build any more
than twelve Ships of War. Grotius de jure belli. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 15.
The Athenians prohibited all Median Ships of War to come within their Seas,
and prescribed to the Lacedaemonians with what manner of Vessels they should
sail. All Histories are full of such Presidents, which Princes have enacted
either upon agreements enforced upon the conquered, or Capitulations betwixt
them and others (their equals or inferiors) for mutual conveniences.

Joan. Palatius ubi supra. Julius Pacius de dominio Mari^ Adriatici.
3. The power of imposing Customs, Gabels, and Taxes upon those that navigate in
their Seas, or otherwise Fish therein: which they do upon several rightful
claims: As protecting them from Pirates, and all other Hostilities, or
assisting them with Lights and Sea-marks: For which advantages, common equity
obliges those that reap benefit thereby, to repay it by some acknowledgment,
which ought to be proportioned to the favor received, and the expense which
the Prince is at to continue it unto them.

4. As it is incumbent on a Prince, duly to execute justice in his Kingdoms by
land, so the Sea being His Territory, it is requisite and a necessary effect of
his Dominion, that He cause justice to be administered in case of maritime
delinquencies.

5. That in case any Ships Navigate in those Seas, they shall Salute his
floating Castles, the Ships of War, by loring the Top sail, striking the Flag,
(those are the most usual courses) in like manner as they do His Forts upon
Land. By which sort of Submissions they are put in remembrance, that they come
into a Territory wherein they are to own a Sovereign Power and Jurisdiction,
and receive Protection from it.

These are the proper effects of a real and absolute Sovereignty over the Seas;
which how they are possessed by the Venetians, this following account will show.

The Gulf of Venice is nothing else but a large Bay, or inlet of the Sea, which
entering in betwixt two Lands, and severing them for many miles continuance, in
the end receives a stop, or interruption of further passage, by an opposite
Shore, which joins both the said opposite Shores together. It is called the
Gulf of Venice, from the City of Venice, situated upon certain broken Islands
near unto the bottom thereof. It is also called the Adriatic Sea, from the
ancient City Adria, lying not far distant from the former. From the entrance
thereof unto the bottom it conteins about 600 Italian miles: where it is
broadest, it is 160 miles over; in others but 80, in the most, 100. The
South-West shore is bounded with the Provinces of Puglia and Abruzzo in the
kingdom of Naples; the Marquisate of Ancona and Romagnia in the Pope's State;
and the Marquisate of Trevisana in the Venetian State. The North part of it, or
bottom, has Friuli for its bounds; the North-East is limited by Istria,
Dalmatia, Albania, and Epirus: whereof Istria does not so entirely belong to
the Venetians, but that the Emperor, as Archduke of Gratz, does possess
diverse maritime Towns therein. In Dalmatia, saving Zara, Spalato, and Cattaro,
they have nothing of importance, the rest belonging to Ragusa and the Turks; In
Albania and Epirus, they possess nothing at all, it being entirely the Turk's.
So that he, who shall examine the circuit of this Sea, which must contain above
1200 miles, shall find the shores of the Venetian Signory not to take up 200 of
them, omitting some scattered Towns and dispersed Islands, lying on the Turkish
side of the Adri^tick shore. For the securing hereof from the depredation of
Pirates, and the pretenses of diverse potent Princes, as the Pope, Emperor,
King of Spain, and the great Turk, who have each of them large territories
lying thereupon; also to cause all ships which navigate the same, to go to
Venice, and there to pay Custom and other duties, the Republic maintains
continually in action a great number of Ships, Galleys and Galliots, whereto
also they add more, as there may be occasion; whereof some lie about the
bottom of the Gulf in Istria, others about the Islands of Dalmatia, to clear
those parts of Pirates, who have much infested those Seas: others, and those of
most force, have their stations in the Island of Corfu, and Standia: in the
first of which commonly resides the Captain of the Gulf, whose Office it is to
secure the Navigation of the Gulf, not only from the Corsaires, but to provide
that neither the Galleys nor ships of the Pope, the King of Spain, nor great
Turk, do so much as enter the same, without permission of the Signory, and upon
such conditions as best pleases them; which they are so careful to effect,
that in the Year 1638. the Turkish Fleet entering the Gulf without license, was
assailed by the Venetian General, who sunk diverse of their Vessels, and
compelling the rest to fly unto Valona, he held them there besieged, although
the same City and Port whereon it stands, be under the jurisdiction of the
Grand Signior. And notwithstanding that a great and dangerous War was likely to
ensue thereupon, betwixt the Grand Signor and the Republic, because the
Venetian General, being not content to have chased them into their own ports,
did, moreover then that, sink their Vessels, and landing his men, slew diverse
of their Mariners who had escaped his fury at Sea: yet, after that, a very
honorable Peace was concluded again betwixt them, wherein, amongst other
things, it was agreed, that it should be lawful for the Venetians, as often as
any Turkish Vessels did, without their license, enter the Gulf, to seize upon
them by force, if they would not otherwise obey: And that it should likewise be
lawful for them so to do, within any Haven, or under any Fort of the Grand
Signors, bordering on any part of the Venetian Gulf. -- In the Year 1630* Mary
sister to the King of Spain, Joan* Palatius de domin. ma^is. lib. 2. c. 6.
being espoused to the Emperors Son Ferdinand, King of Hungary, the Spaniards
designed to transport her from Naples in a Fleet of their own. The Venetians
suspected that they had an intention hereby to entrench upon, and privily to
undermine, by this specious president, that Dominion of the Sea which the
Signory had continued inviolate time out of mind; and that they took this
opportunity when Venice was involved with a War abroad, and infested with the
Plague at home, and therefore not in a condition to oppose their progress. The
Spanish Ambassador acquainted the State, that His Masters Fleet was to Convoy
the Queen of Hungary, being his Sister, from Naples to Triesti: The Duke
replied, That her Majesty should not pass, but in the Galleys of the Republic:
The Spaniard repined thereat, pretending that they were infected with the
Plague. The Senate being consulted, came to this resolution, That the Sister of
his Catholic Majesty should not be transported to Triesti any other way, then
by imbarking on the Venetian Galleys, according to the usual manner of the
Gulf; and that, if the Ambassador would acquiesce herein, Her Majesty should
be attended, and used with all that respect and deference which became her
quality. But if she proceeded in any other way, the Republic would by force
assert her proper rights, and attacque the Spanish Navy as if they were
declared enemies, and in hostile manner invaded them. Whereupon the Spaniard
was compelled to desire of them the favor of transport the Queen in their
Galleys, which Antonio Pisani did peform with much state and Ceremony: and the
courtesy was acknowledged by solemn thanks from the Court of the Emperor, and
of Spain.

Ioannes Palatius does furnish me with many more cases wherein the Venetians
have practiced immemorially, and Foreign Princes approved of their Sovereignty
of the Adriatic Sea; and had our Nation been hitherto as prudent in the
perpetual vindication of their Rights, as that Republic, His Majesty had not
been put to this trouble, nor his Subjects endangered, as they are, by this War
with Holland. Howsoever, it is manifest that they did always immemorially
challenge the Dominion of the British Seas, and have never abandoned that
Regality, but so as to preserve their Right unto it by the exercising of
several Acts that result from the entire Dominion of the said Seas.

1. As to that Universal Dominion which is inferred from the Protection of the
Seas. It is evident that our Admirals by their Commissions have ever been
encharged with the Guardianship and Protection of the said Seas; and they were
styled of Old Guardians of the Seas: S^lden. mare clausum, l. 2. c. 14.
the denomination of Admiral is more modern. But with the Name, their Power and
Instructions were not varyed, they being still designed pro salva custodia and
defensione Maris: And there was a particular Tax raised on every Hyde of land
in this Kingdom, called Danegeld, at first exacted by the Danes in lieu of
their protection of the said Seas, Id. ibid. c. 11, and 15.
and continued after their ejectment, by our English Kings before and since the
Conquest unto the Reign of K. Stephen and Henry II, for the Guardianship of the
Seas: and after that the Danegeld was abolished, several Lands were charged
particularly for the defense of the Seas: and Subsidies have been demanded of
the people to the same purpose.

2. As to that Dominion of the Sea which is exemplified by Acts of
Jurisdiction, it is manifest that the English have been immemorially prossessed
thereof. Thus Edward the First made Laws, for the reteining and conserving of
the ancient Superiority of the Sea of England, and for the maintaining of Peace
and Justice amongst all people, Id. ibid. c. 24.
what Nation soever, passing thorough the Sea of England; and to take
cognizance of all attempts to the contrary in the same, and to punish
Offenders, etc. In the like manner did his Royal Predecessors. And the so
famed Laws of Oleron (an Island seated in Aquitaine, at the mouth of the River
Charente) were published in that Isle by King Richard the First, as sole Ruler
and Moderator of Sea-affairs; which hold in force to this day, and are the Laws
of our Admiralty. Seldom. mare clausum, l. 2. c. 15.
And this Dominion is further elucidated from hence; that Our Kings (as appears
by the Parliamentary Records of King Richard the Second) imposed a Tribute, or
Custom, upon every Ship that passed thorough the Northern Admiralty, which
stretched it self from the Thames mouth along the Eastern shore of England
toward the North-East, for the pay and maintenance of the Guard or Protection
of the Sea. Nor was it imposed only upon the Ships of such Merchants and
Fishermen as were English, but upon any Foreigners whatsoever: no otherwise
then a man that is Owner of a Field, should impose a yearly revenue or rent for
the liberty of Through fare, or driving of Ca^tel, or Cart, thorough his Field:
And if any were unwilling to pay the said Tribute, it was lawful to compel
them; there being certain Officers that had authority to exact it, having the
command of six Ships, men of War. The Original record is penned in the Norman
language (as were almost all Records of Parliament in that age) and is thus
Englished.

This is the Ordinance and Grant by the advice of the Merchants of London, Rot.
Pa^i. 2 (...). ^. pa^. 2 Art. 3^. in Senedu^^.
and other Merchants toward the North, by the assent of all the Commons in
Parliament, before the Earl of Northumberland, and the Mayor of London, for the
Guard and tuition of the Sea, and the Coasts of the Admiralty of the North,
with two Ships, two Barges, and two Ballingers, armed and fitted for War, at
these rates following:

First, To take of every Ship and Bark, of what burden soever it be, which
passes thorough the Sea of the said Admiralty, going and returning, for the
Uoyage, upon every Tun VIl. Except Ships laden with Wines, and Ships laden with
Merchandises in Flanders, which are fraighted for and discharged at London; and
Ships laden with Woolls and Skins at London, or elsewhere within the said
Admiralty, which shall be discharged at Calais: which Ships the Guardians of
the said Sea shall not be bound to Convoy without allowance.

Item, To take of every Fisher-boat that fisheth upon the Sea of the said
Admiralty for Herrings, of what burden soever it be, for each wick, of every
Tun VId.

Item, To take of other Ships and Fisher-boats, that fish for other kinds of
Fish upon the Sea, within the said Admiralty, of what burden soever they be,
for three weeks, of every Tun VIl.

Item, To take of all other Ships and Vessels passing by Sea, within the said
Admiralty, laden with Coals from New Castle upon Tyne, of what burden soever
they be, for a Quarter of a year, of every Tun VIl.

Item, To take of all other Ships, Barks, and Uessels, passing by Sea, within
the said Admiralty, laden with Goods of any Merchants whatsoever for Prussia,
or for Norway, or for Scone, or for any other place in those parts beyond the
Sea; for the Uoyage, going and returning, every Last VI^.

The Imposition here laid upon all Fishers that took Herrings, or other Fish,
upon the Sea within the Northern Admiralty, shows the Antiquity of the right
his Majesty has unto that Regality within the British Seas: but the benefits
accruing to the Crown from this specia^ty of the Maritime Dominion, were not
always raised in one and the same manner. In the Ordinance aforesaid the
Fishermen purchase their Liberty of Fishing, by a sum of money to be paid
weekly. At other times I read that the Hollanders, and Zealanders, every year
did repair to Scarborough Castle, ^
and there, by ancient custom, obtained leave to Fish, which the English have
ever granted them, reserving always the Honor and Privilege to themselves.
Amongst the Records of the time of Edward the First, there is an Inscription,
Pro hominibus Hollandiae, etc. For the Men of Holland, and Zealand, and
Friesland, to have leave to Fish near Iernemuth; R^^ Pa^en^. ^3. ^dw. 1. (...).
5.
and that King's Letter for their Protection is extant. And if we do not
continually vend of special Licenses granted to Foreigners in reference to the
Fishery; the reason is, because by the Leagues that were made with the
Neighboring Princes, a License or Freedom of that kind (as also of Ports,
Shores, Passages, and other things) was so often allowed by both Parties, that
as long as the League was in force, the Sea served as if it were a
common-Field, as well for the Forreigner that was in Amity, as for the King of
England himself, who was Lord and Owner. But yet in this kind of Leagues
sometimes the Fishing was restrained to certain limits; and the limits related
both as to place and time: so that, according to agreement, the Forreigner in
Amity might not Fish beyond these limits; the King of England retaining
absolute Dominion over the whole adjoining Sea. Thus by an Agreement betwixt
France and England, the French are excluded from that part of the Sea which
lies toward the West and Southwest, and also from that which lies North-east
of them; but permitted freely to Fish throughout that part of the Sea, Seldom.
ma^e ela (...) 2 c 25 ex Rot Francia, 5 ^en. 4. 29 September.
which is bounded on this side by the Ports of Scarborough and Southampton, and
on the other side by the Coast of Flanders, and the mouth of the River Seine:
and the time is limited, betwixt Autumn, and the Calends of January following.
But in the League of mutual Commerce betwixt Henry the Seventh, and Philip Duke
of Burgundy, etc. Earl of Holland and Zealand, A. D. 1459. Chap. 14. Jo. Isaac
Pontanu^ discust. Histor. l. 1. c. 14.
It was agreed that the Fishermen of each parts of what condition soever they
be shall Sail and pass freely every where, and Fish securely without any
impediment, License, or Safe Conduct. From the which Leagues it is a genuine
inference, that His Majesty has the Dominion of the Seas as to Fishing, and
that the Liberty thereof is not to be obtained but by License, or Compact,
wherein the general emolument arising from the League supplieth the advantage
that would otherwise accrue from particular Licenses. It being thus evinced
that the Sovereignty of the English Seas, as to the Fishing, does appertain
unto His Majesty. I proceed to Scotland, where I find the same power invested
in the Crown thereof; so that the Right of His Majesty unto the Fishing there
is as unquestionable as His Succession to the Kingdom. I have not read in the
Scotch Laws, that ever there were Licenses given to any for Fishing; but every
Fisher, as well Forreigner as Native, was to pay an Assize-Herring unto the
King, and this Assize-Herring is an unalterable Regality of that King.

Iacobi 6. p. 15. c.237.

It is Statute and Ord^ined that all infestments and alienations in Few firm,
or otherwies, and all rentalls, assedationes and disposition^s quhatsumever, in
all time by gane, and to cum, of the Assise-Herring, is null and of nane
avail: Because the said Assise-herring perteinis to our Sovereigne Lord, as
are part of his custumes, and annexed property.

Concerning the Nature and Antiquity of the Assize-Herring, I find this most
authentic account given by Mr. John Skene Clerk of the King's Register,
Council and Rolls, in a treatise de verborum significatione, annexed to the
Laws of Scotland, and Printed at Edinburgh, A. D. 1597. Cum privilegio regali.

Assisa Halecum, the Assize-Herring signifies ane certain measure and quantity
of Herring, quilk perteinis to the King as ane part of his custumes and annexed
propriety. Jac. 6. p. 15. c. 237. for it is manifest that He should have of
every Boat that passis to the drove, and Slayis herring, ane thousand herring
of ilk tak that halds, viz. of Lambmes tak, of the Winter tak, and the Lentrone
tak.

What Dues and Customs the Kings of Scotland had upon other Fish, I know not,
but that He did exact some, and exercised the Dominion of the Sea in reference
to the Fishing there, is apparent by these Laws, ordaining, That all manner of
Fischeres, that occupies the Sea, Seldom. l. 2. c. 11. ex Parliam. 4. Jac. R.
6. c. 6^. and Parl. 6. ejusdem c. 86.
and ^theres persons quhatsumever that happenis to s^ay Hering or Quihte fish
upon the Coast, or within the Isles, or out with the Samen within the Frithes
bring them to Free ports, etc. where they may be sold to the Inhabitants of
the same kingdom, quhui^ by his Majesty's custumes be not defrauded, and his
Hienesse Lieges not frustrate of the commodity appointed to them by God under
the pain of confiscation, and tynsell of the Ueschelles of them that cumes in
the contrair thereof, and escheating of all their movable guddes to our
Sovereign Lords use. -- In this condition were the Rights of the Fishing until
the Dutch did advance themselves to that height and puissance, that they
esteemed themselves able to infringe them, and such was their Covetousness
(which prompts them that are infected therewith to value the smallest and most
unjust Gains) that they determined to do it.

In the year 1594. James VI. King of Scotland, Grotius hist. Belgic. l 3.
apprehending the growth of these Netherlanders, and their influence upon the
English Nation by reason of the multitudes of our Nobility and Gentry which
resorted thither into the Armies, and being desirous to fortify by all
possible means His right of succession to the Crown of England, invited the
States to be Godfathers to his Son, Prince Henry, together with the Kings of
France and Denmark, and Queen Elizabeth: they sent a splendid Embassy Walravius
van Brederode being principal, and so richly presented the Royal Infant, that
they much endeared themselves to King James, and no less exasperated Queen
Elizabeth, in that they should dare to rival her at the Baptism of the Prince,
and also demean themselves with so much munificence, or rather prodigality.
King James, either out of interest to ascertain himself of their Friendship, or
being captivated by their Presents and Flatteries, granted (but not by any
Deed, that I know) unto the Dutch, the Privileges which had been formerly
granted to the Belgic Provinces, upon Leagues betwixt the House of Burgundy
and England, in reference to the Fishing; whereby, according to Articles made
with Philip of Burgundy, and with Charles V. they were to Fish in the British
Seas without any impediment, or the sueing for a special License. It was by
virtue of the same Treaties and Confederacies with the House of Burgundy, that
Q. Elizabeth did permit them the Fishing of our English Seas: for that Queen
did always pretend and declare, A. E. M^teran. hist. Belgie. ad an. 1585.
Cambden ad an. ind.
that by reason of sundry Alliances betwixt England and the House of Burgundy,
she did aid and support the Netherlands. At first, the Dutch, either out of
pure respect (a rare quality in that sort of people) or because their Busses
were not so very numerous as in the subsequent times, did Fish at a good
distance from the Land; and, leaving convenient space for the Natives of
Scotland to pursue their small employment in the Fishery, there was no notice,
or at least no complaints against them upon that subject: But when a series of
prosperous successes (gained by the English and Scotch valor) had raised the
Dutch to a great power at home, and renown abroad, and that their Ships became
exceeding numerous, and their Fleets potent; and Queen Elizabeth's death had
advanced a more peaceable Prince to the English Crown, They began to encroach
upon the English and Scottish shores, to disturb the Natives in their Fishing,
not leaving them so much Sea-room upon their Princes Coast, as to take any
Fish, but such as were the gleanings of the Hollanders Busses; who driving at
Sea do break the skull or shole of Herrings, and then they fly near the shore,
and through the sounds. I find King James to have complained against their
insolence, and the encroachments of the Dutch Fishermen upon His Seas, and to
the prejudice of His Subjects: But that Prince dealt most in Remonstrances, an
ineffectual course with Hollanders, and equipped out no Ships to assert his
rights on the whole British Seas: at last in 1609. He established
Commissioners for to give Licenses, at London, to such as would Fish on the
English Coasts; at Edinburgh, for such as would Fish in the more Northern Sea:
and by Proclamation interdicted all un-licensed Fishers. The Licenses were to
be demanded yearly for so many Ships, and the Tonnage thereof, as should intend
to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of the British
Seas; and the Offenders against the King's Proclamation to undergo due
chastisement. But this Edict of his Majesty proved but a Brutum fulmen, an
insignificant noise and thunder; the Dutch contemned it, and grew more
pervicacious in opposition to His Majesty's Officers which came to disturb
their un-licensed Fishing. The States did mingle their concerns with those of
the Fishermen, and sent Wafters, or Men of War to protect their Busses against
the Spanish Pirates, and to awe the Kings Officers. They refused to pay either
the Assize-Herring, or to take Licenses; and in 1616. M. Brown being ordered by
the Duke of Lennox (who, as Admiral of Scotland, was commanded to vindicate the
Kings's Rights in those Seas) to insist upon the Assize-Herring (which was the
King's Old and indubitable Right) they did contest about it, and after much
dispute paid it according to the Laws and Customs of Scotland. All this
appears out of several Memorials, preserved in the Paper Office; and some are
printed with Mr. Selden's Mare Clausum in English.
But the next year (being the year in which King James did gratify that People
with the Surrendry of the cautionary Towns) the Busses obstinately refused it,
saying, They were commanded by the States of Holland to pay it no more. Mr.
Brown wanting sufficient force to chastise their Wafters, did only take
witness of this their refusal: whereupon the insolent Dutch seized the King of
England's Officer, and carried him into the Netherlands, where He was detained
a while. The King repeats His Complaints at the Hague, and to their Ambassadors
here at London; the Dutch amused him with Treaties, and sent Commissioners to
London, not to submit, or adjust differences, but to heighten them: They
pleaded A right of their own by immemorial prescription; and confirmed it with
diverse Treaties, viz. One of the year 1459, betwixt Philip of Burgundy, and
Henry the Seventh. Another betwixt Charles V. (as Duke of Burgundy) and Henry
the Eighth: by both which it had been agreed, that the Subjects of the Belgic
Provinces should Fish in the English Seas without impediment, and without
License. But what influence have those Treaties upon the Kingdom of Scotland?
Or, how do they extend unto the Assize-herring? For those Capitulations do not
leave them at liberty as to this point, any more than they absolve them from
paying Customs? To observe the Laws, and pay the dues of a Country, are no
illegitimate impediments of Fishing.

To proceed. Suppose we that the Subjects of the House of Burgundy had any such
privileges granted them by the said Treaties; what does this concern the
Rebels of the House of Burgundy? Aristoteles negat eandem esse Civi^a^em*
Reipub. form^ mu^a^a; sicut, inquit, Ha^monia non est eadem, ubi a Dorico modo
transitur in Phrygium. Zouch de jure foeciali, part. 2. Sect. 1. qu. An Idem
populus censendus (...) mulato (...)?
What does it concern the States General of the United Netherlands, who by
their change of Government, and rupture from the majority of the Provinces, are
no longer the same people? They have nothing to pretend unto but the Connivance
of Q. Elizabeth, and the indulgence of K. James, during the time of their
distress: nor does the whole Age of their infant Republic amount unto an
immemorial prescription: And, if in the said Treaties with the House of
Burgundy, the Ancestors of His Majesty did think fitting, in consideration of
other advantages accruing to them by the said agreements, to dispense with the
Licenses unto Belgic Fishermen; where is this consideration now betwixt us and
the Dutch? and, what hinders us to resume our Rights, when the reasons cease
for which we parted with them to the generous and noble House of Burgundy; but
to these Hollanders never? How come we to forfeit the Dominion of the Sea by
such indults, whereas other Nations, French and Spaniards, Lubeckers, etc. did
pay? This plea being null, they had recourse to another, that by the Laws of
Nature and Nations, the Sea was free. This defense seemed intolerable to K.
James, and upon complaint of the Lord Ambassador Carlton at the Hague, they
gave his Majesty this most satisfactory Answer: that the Commissioners went
beyond their limits in their terms of Immemorial possession, and immutable
Droict de Gens; for which they had no order. All that K. James could obtain
from their now High and Mighties, was a verbal acknowledgment of His Right,
whilst it was more and more invaded daily. The Prince of Orange at that time
made a motion to the Lord Carleton, about purchasing the Freedom of Fishing
with a Sum of ready money. But He replied It was a matter of Royalty. The
insolence growing every day greater and greater, and they proceeding to impede,
obstruct and destroy the Fishery of his Majesty's Subjects, King Charles the
First did solicit them about redress: and finding the States intractable, in
1636. He issued out a Proclamation, to restrain the Fishing in the British
Seas without License obtained: and seconded it with a Fleet of Ships commanded
by Algernon Earl of Northumberland, as Lord High Admiral of England. Who with
much honor acquitted himself of that employment: the Journal of his
expedition, signed with his own hand, is preserved in the Paper Office; and I
find thereby, that upon the appearance of the English Fleet, the Dutch Busses
did take Licenses of his Lordship, so that He distributed two hundred, though
he went out late in the year. He exacted twelve pence in the Tonne from each
Vessel; and avows they departed away well satisfied. The Busses were not
defensless, as the Considerer says, but guarded by ten men of War, or more;
and Aug. 20. 1636. whilst his Lordship was busied in dispersing his Licenses
the Dutch Admiral Dorp came to him, saluted him with loring his Top-sail,
striking of the Flagg, and discharging of Guns, and came aboard of Him: He had
in his company 20 Men of War, which (if joined with the other Wafters) made a
greater Fleet than that of the English, yet did he never protest against the
actings of the said Earl, but left his Lordship freely to pursue his design
upon the Busses. The sum which his Lordship received for Licenses was 501 l.
-- 15 s. -- 2 d; besides which at that time, I find that the Dutch paid to
Capt. Carteret, Capt. Lyndsey, Capt. Slingsby, Capt. Johnson, and Mr. Skinner
999 l. for Convoy-Mony.

It is not to be doubted but King Charles the first had vigorously asserted the
English rights and Sovereignty of the Sea, the Earl of Northumberland being
High Admiral, had not the Scotch troubles diverted his cares: the which
troubles and wars were chiefly fomented by these peace-loving Christians of
Holland, that he might not attend unto his Dominion of the Seas.

I observed in the perusal of the Iournal, that when his Lordship was returned
and at anchour in the Downs, he received notice of the arrival of a Spanish
Fleet of 26 sail near Dunkirk, who in the sight of Calais did their duties to
his Majesty's Ship called the Happy entrance.

Concerning the Scottish fishery it may not be impertinent to fortify the
rights of his Majesty: by showing his Original Title to a great part of it; and
it is this. The Kings of Norwey exercised an absolute dominion time out of mind
over the Seas adjacent to Norway, Island, Shotland, Ioh. Pentan. discuss.
histor. l. 1. c. 21.
and the Isles of Orkney, and in a manner over all that part of the North Sea:
nor could any forreigner practice fishing there but by his leave and License,
(the which License was renewed every seven years by the English) as appears by
many Leagues and compacts betwixt that Crown and the English, and also betwixt
it and other Nations: The old Inhabitants of those Scotch Islands are
originally Norwegians, and speak that language. Id. ibid. l. 1. c. 17.
The Islands Hebrides were conquered from the Norwegians by Alexander the
third, King of Scotland, the dominion whereof was confirmed unto him by Magnus
King of Norwey; and the said Cession reiterated by Haquin King of Norwey unto
Robert Bruce King of Scotland; But all this while Shotland and the Isles of
Orkney remained in the hands of the Norwegians, Id ibid. l. 1. c. 17. Seldom*
mare clausum l. 2. c. 31.
until Christierne the first, King of Denmark and Norwey did marry his daughter
Margaret unto James the third, King of Scotland, and upon the marriage did make
an absolute surrender of these Islands unto his Son in Law in the Year 1468.
together with the jurisdictions thereof. As the Scotch title to those Seas is
primarily deduced from the Kings of Norwey, so their jurisdiction and
Soveraignity over those Seas is the same, with that which those Kings
possessed: But the Kings of Norway had an entire dominion and right of disposal
over the fishing in those parts, Ioh. Pentan. discuss. histor. l. 1. c. 21.
so that none could come and fish there upon pain of death, without License
obtained. All which is averred and proved out of the Danish records by Ioannes
Isaeius Pontanus a Dutch writer, of Harderwick in Guilderland, and
Historiographer to the King of Denmark. This discourse does further justify
the present King of England in his rights unto the British Seas, in that He is
not singular in challenging the Dominion of the Seas, and the particular
regality of the Fishing, the like having been immemorially challenged by the
Kings of Denmark and Norwey. Io. Loce^nius de jure ma^^^imo. l. 1. c. 9.
The like Royalty as to fishing is practiced by the Kings of Sweden, who has
in some of his Seas the tenths of the fish, elsewhere he disposes of his
Royalty by special Licenses. The same is done in Spain, Jo. Palatius de domin.
maris, lib. 2 c. 10.

Jacob. Gothof^edus de Imperio maris c. 8. and 12.


and Portugal, Venice, etc.

This Universal Sovereignty and Dominion of his Majesty over the British Seas,
has been acknowledged by Foreigners time out of mind, (even safe conducts and
pasports desired thorough His Seas) and is justified by the precedents of the
Rhodians, the Romans and others, which to relate now were too prolix a work. As
to the Right by which His Majesty holds this Soveraignity, it is a better Title
then most Princes can show for their Kingdoms and Principalities; Territoriu:
dicitur de Terris and de Aquis. Alberi^. Genil. de jure be^^i l. 3 c 17.
Arnold. in v^^b. Territorium number. 2. Per hanc longissimam possessionem
consecuti sunt venet^, ut non ^encantur ^itulum acquisitionis probate.
Covarru^ias in reg. possessor malae fidei pa^. 2. sect. 3. number. 7. and sect. 3.
number. 2. Haec enim praescriptio non requirit titulum sed vim habet tituli.
Cravet de antiq. temp. part. 4. sect. absolutis differentiis. n^mer. 9 Borchol
in cap. un. quae sint regal. number. 27. and dicitur inducere T^tulum. Thesaur.
lib. 1. quaest. 8. numer. 11. and pa^ere praescriptionem juris and de jure,
contra quam non admittitur probatio. Cravet. dicto loco. number. 6^. Peregr. lib.
1. de jur. sise. tit. 2. number. 65. cum aliis quos ibi allogant. Quoniam
aequipollet veritati, and pro veritate habetur. Borchol. d. loco. Arnold. in
verbo Praescriptio number. 27. Julius Pacius de domin. maris. Hadriat. Joan.
Palatius de domin. Maris. l. 2. c. 10. Alberic^s Gentilis de jure belli l. 1.
c. 22. Grotius de jure lelli lib. 2. c. 4.
It is a prescription truly immemorial: we cannot tell the Time when we had it
not; nor by what degrees we arose up to it; But we can thus fortify it beyond
that of Venice, that it was never disputed by any except the Dutch, and that
within the memory of this present Age; and they so disputed it at first, as to
acknowledge our Right, but yet to plead an exemption as to fishing (in nothing
else) by virtue of the Capitulations of Intercourse betwixt the English and
House of Burgundy: the vanity of which claim being so notorious, they at last
began to be so impudent and insolent, as to renounce the Concessions of the
Burgundians, and their own, and now to plead universally that the Sea is the
Lord's, and not capable of, or subjected to the Dominion of any Prince, or
State. It is an unparalleld and most imprudent attempt for these up-starts to
shake thus the Tenures not only of Kings, but even private persons, and to deny
that an Immemorial quiet possession of a Land, or Territory (the Sea is called
a Territory) is a just Title thereunto: whereas hitherto it has been allowed
by those that treat of the Laws of Nations, that he who can allege this, needs
not to prove his Acquest and Title: That prescription does not require any
Right, but supplies it; and does it self create a Right; nor ought there any
proof to be admitted against it. Nothing is more received amongst Mankind,
then that Prescription and Long Usage should be deemed equivalent to mutual
pacts and the assent of the voisinage: And that practice seems to be adjudged
to be legitimate, where all parties, though otherwise interessed to oppose it,
do without any extraordinary awe, or other indirect motive, silently and
peaceably acquiesce. Iephtha when the Ammonites demanded that the Israelites
should surrender up the Cities held by them on that side Jordan; Judges 11.26.
replied that the Israelites had possessed them three hundred years, during all
which time the Ammonites had not redemanded them. The Law of Nations does
generally allow a lesser space to authenticate a Prescription and just
Occupancy: It is esteemed to have an Immemorial prescription, the contrary
whereof no man can say He ever saw done, or heard related by others to have
been done: Alleric. Gentilis de jure bell^. l. 1. c. 22. Livius lib. 34.
Grotius de ^ure belli l. 2. c. 4. sect. 7.
and it is commonly declared that one hundred years of usage or possession do
suffice to determine the controversy. Our case is such that I need not make
use of this last plea (though so many allow of it; and Rome urged it against
Antiochus) it is really Immemorial, and consequently as valid morally as if it
had been conferred upon us at the primitive distribution of Lands: except there
can be produced most unanswerable reasons to the contrary.

I shall therefore examine the Reason all edged by the Dutch to invalidate this
Prescription and long occupancy of his Majesty. The Considerer alleges but
one; which is, That the Dominion of the Sea appertains to God alone, in the
judgment of the States General; and the King of England does usurp upon the
divine prerogative, by assumeing it to himself. I answer, that in the judgment
of them that are as intelligent and more honest then the States General, The
Dominion of God Almighty over the Land is as much appropriated to Him, as that
over the Seas: Since that the same Scripture which says that The Sea is his,
and he made it: does likewise inform us, that His hands prepared the dry land,
Ps. 95.5. and that The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the world
and they that dwell therein. Ps. 24.1. So that without a more express
declaration, a more revealed will of God, we cannot conclude from the Text any
thing else then the General providential Soveraignity of God, which (where He
does not in a particular manner publish his Will; as when He gave the
Israelites the land of Canaan) does no way enterfere with, or exclude Humane
propriety: Otherwise the Earth must likewise become common, and All people live
Free from Subjection to any Government. As to this last point, Cur in
opprobrium vestrum jactabitur hoc proverbium, quod edicta vestra tridua^a
duntaxat sint? M. Schoockius de Imper. Marit. c. 30.
I find M. Schoockius (a Belgic Professor) to write, that it is proverbially
said in the United Netherlands, That the Placaets of the States General are not
in force beyond three days: But they ought not to oblige one minute, since the
world and they that dwell therein are the Lords. Of all the Arguments which
ever I read in behalf of the freedom of the Sea, this is the most Fanatical. If
it were granted, that the Kings of England, France, Denmark, Sweden, etc. were
Usurpers upon the rights of God Almighty, what Commission have these wicked
Hollanders to vindicate them? Si qua Gens unquam tribus hisce peccatis,
superbiae, luxuriae, avaritiae, aperto capite, ela^o brachio, and plena^ animi
dest natione, vacavi^; nae, nos Belge longissime eandem superavimus. Quorsum
exaggerem Sodomae Gomorrha que peccata? Clamor eorum multus est, Genesis 18.20.
Hoc uno forte distamus a vera Sodoma, quod hic pauperis, and egen. is manus
confirmetur. M. Schoock. ib. c. 27.
a people worse then Sodom and Gomorrah (if you believe M. Schoockius) the most
unworthy Delegates in this world. Who made these Skellums to be of the
Star Chamber? May they run before they are sent? Are all Apostles? But, to wave
this foolish pretense; I will for the instruction of the more ignorant, remove
such Objections as men of more High and Mighty reason then the States General,
do press vehemently against the dominion of the Sea.

1. The nature of the Sea is such, Io Palatius de Domin. Maris, l. 1. c. 3.
that it is in a perpetual flux, and never settles in any certain place;
therefore it is not capable of being subjected under a certain dominion,
possession, or prescription. I answer, that though it be not strictly and
Physically the same, it continues to be so Legally, and in respect of its
Bottom, Sand, and Channel. If this Objection were valid, even Rivers would not
be subject to impropriation: they do continually flow, and, which is more,
without reflux: and the same reason would render every man incapable of a
Legacy, or Inheritance; because a constant transpiration varieth our bodies.
Seneca.
In idem flumen bis non descendimus: Neither do we twice swim in the same
river, nor are we the same persons who attempt to swim twice within the same
channel. Besides, a man may retain a propriety in things variable; as in money
lent, and to be repaid in specie, not numerically. A man may have a right unto
the Air, or Light, and an Action lies in case of Nuisance. And shall a remedy
be allowed in case an encroaching Neighbor does obstruct the Light, or annoy
the Air; and shall not a Prince take care that no Foreign Fleets shall, without
warning and license, approach his territories? Provision in this case is much
more allowable, by how much greater the danger is.

2. There cannot be any peculiar and distinct bounds prefixed to particular
dominions upon the Seas: and since nothing can be privately possessed which is
not bounded; therefore God and Nature seem to have ordained the Seas to be
free, since it is not limitable. I answer, That the Inundation of Nile, and the
Storms upon the Libyan Sands do render the bounds undistinguishable; yet are
the Lands subject to propriety. Besides, the Shores, Promontories, etc. may
stand as well for Sea-bounds, as Trees, Posts, Hedges, Rivers, etc. are bounds
on Land: and where they fail, Imaginary Lines and Contrivances may supply the
defect; since we are no more in Contracts betwixt Princes to expect rigor of
Law (but Aequum and bonum) then in mixed Mathematics indivisible Points and
Lines. Several Leagues of this nature have been made betwixt Spain and
Portugal, Sweden and Denmark. In fine, are not the Seas distinct, as the
Hadriatick. Ligurian, Tyrrhene, and in the Articles of Breda the British and
North-Sea? yet are there no precise and Geometrical bounds to them.

3. If the Sea can be reduced under any dominion, then may the Commerce be
hindered by the Proprietor of the same, as to such as He pleases. But Commerce
ought to be free according to the Law of Nature, and Nations; and the denial
thereof, (as also the denying of an innocent passage) or the laying an
extraordinary Tax for License to pass, (which is in effect a denial of Passage
and Commerce) is a just cause of War. Therefore the Sea ought to be free. I
answer, that perhaps the pretense of wants not to be supplied but by Commerce
is not serious and real; but if it be, it does not follow that our domestic
indigency and necessities are to be remedied by the detriment or injury of
others, but we must purchase the opportunities of a supply by complying with
the conveniences of our Neighbors. No man must trespass upon another ground,
because He cannot otherwise attend unto his own utility. The freedom of
Commerce and passage are no solid Arguments, when insisted upon by Hollanders:
both may be refused, if there be a suspicion of danger. I concur with Albericus
Gentilis herein. I am of St. Austins mind (who held the opinion of Grotius in
these cases) provided I may have befitting security that the persons trading or
passing will not hurt me; Teneo cum Augustino, fi nec timend^m sit ne noceatur;
and certum sit noceri non posse. Alb. Gentil. de jure belli, l. 1. c. 19
and that I be ascertained that they cannot hurt me. This is conformable to
sundry Scriptural examples, and the Resolutions of all Ages, before and since
Christianity. Nor does the imposition of a Tribute for the Fishing, or erecting
and preserving of Sea-m^rks, and Light-houses, or Convoy-mony infringe the
Liberty of Commerce, Julius Pa^^us de domin. Maris Hadriat. I. Palate. de dom.
Maris, l. ^. c. 13
but continue it with Security. I do not find that the Dutch have contested
thus about the Customs upon the Rhine, or plead that it is unlawful to pay Toll
upon the passage of several High^ways and Bridges in order to the repairing of
them: Eleganter Baldus in l. qu^dam. D. de rer divi^: a^^ mare esse commune
q^o^d usum; proprietatem vero nullius; sed jurisdicti^nem esse Principi^^ de
^ua jurisdictione in praesentia agitur non de proprietate. Jul. Pacius de
domin. Maris H^driat.
yet a Logician of Holland would by the same reasons condemn those exactions,
and deny tribute to whom tribute is due.

To conclude this point: After so many Treatises and fierce disputes concerning
the dominion of the Sea, upon mature consideration, the Controversy is now
reduced to this State: that as to property the Sea can fall to no man's
dominion, by reason of its fluxile nature: but as to a Sovereignty of
Protection, and Jurisdiction, whereby Tributes are imposed for the defraying of
Convoys, providing of Sea-marks, etc. and Fishing: This may be assumed, and is
lawful as to particular Seas, and Gulfs; but as to the vast Ocean, whose bounds
are unknown, and whose extent makes the Sovereignty to be unfaisible, this is
denied. Thus Io. Isac. Pontanus, Io. Isac. Pontanus discus. Hist. l. 1. c. 13.
and others do decide the Controversy: And this decision establishes the King
of England's Right, whose Seas are not boundless, nor incapable of the
aforesaid Dominion of Jurisdiction. Propitio ac mediis benedicente D. o,
quamdiu salva erit Belgis faederatis haec Maris potentia, salua quoque erit
respub. concidet vero and transibit in manum illius, qui eandem eripuerit and
obtinuerit. M. Schoockius de Imper. Marit. c. 28. Non debet vero haec maris
potentia ita intelligi, quasi vastus Oceanus, in quo nulli limits definiri
possunt, dominii capax sit; sed quod quidam Armis praevalentes, aut in eo
Imperium affectarint, aut in Mari Mediterraneo, quod neutiquam cum Oceano ipso
componi potest, reipsa quoque Imperium illud exercuerint, magis alios
prohibendo illius maris usu, quam reipsa, possederint, id. ibid. c. 2.
Such a Dominion the Dutch Professor says is practicable, and necessary for
the Hollanders; thereby to secure their vast Trade into all parts of the world,
and exclude others from Merchandising into the richest parts. From whence we
may gather what we are to expect from the prevalence of the Dutch, viz. to be
prohibited trading through the Seas, but to what places, and on what conditions
they please: And whilst our King shall be decried as an Usurper of the Divine
Right by challenging the dominion of the Sea; These Hollanders shall affect and
assume (without any such Usurpation) the dominion over the Seas. Which is all
one in effect, the discrepancy is but verbal, and such as any one may see into,
who is not infatuated with the specious and pious harangues of the peace-loving
Christians in Holland.

Another Argument enforced by Them here against his Majesty's lawful dominion
over the British Seas, is this; that since the Subjects of their State do only
subsist by Commerce, and consequently by the Liberty of the Seas; should they
acknowledge the said Sovereignty of his Majesty and the effects and
consequences thereof be reduced into practice upon them; they should be brought
to such a condition, as to expect no less then an apparent and inevitable ruin
after some time. And that, since the King of England challenges not only the
Channel, but also the North Sea, and a great part of the Ocean, as the British
Sea; They should not be able to set sail out of their Ports any whither, but by
the Grace and Favor of the King of England. -- To this I reply, That the King
of England by pursuing his own Rights does them no wrong: But the Dutch by
entrenching thereupon do his Majesty apparent injury, and violate all Divine
and Humane Laws, whereby Propriety is established and secured to particular
Princes and persons, and that community of all things by nature is by a
Subsequent and intervenient Right limited and restrained. And that this may be
done according to the Law of Nations, and the general Equity, no Divine or
Civilian can deny or disprove: Probatur hoc fieri posse, quia mare cum sit
nullius, naturali ratione proinde jure Gentium conceditur occupanti, u caetera
quae communia dicuntur, l. 3. in pr. D. de acquir. rer. domin. ferae verse. quod
enim. Instit de rer. divis. glo. in and quidem. In ver. communia. Instit. eod.
Julius Pacias de dom. mar. Hadriat.
and there is as to this case no difference betwixt the Sea and Land. There is
not any inhability in the nature of the Sea, as is granted by their Writers
(except as to the vast Ocean, and that too in reference to its utmost and
unknown extent, not as to determinate parts of it) and is evident from the
several Kings and Republics which have heretofore, and do now engross the
dominion of it. There is not any Divine Precept against it; no dictates of
nature repugne thereunto: for whatsoever is common by nature may be
imrpopriated by Occupancy: neither can there be a b^tter Title to such things
then Occupancy, Prescription, and Custom. And that his Majesty has this Title
entirely, I have evinced, and Mr. Seldom before me. Whereas They say, that
should any such right be acknowledged to reside in his Majesty, they should not
be able to Fish in the North-Sea, or to drive on their necessary Commerce by
Navigation: This is no argument for their unjust actings; any more then it
would justify upon land that one Prince or private person should usurp upon
another Territories or Freehold, because it was most opportune for his
Trading, or requisite to his subsistence in a flourishing condition. I do not
read that this pretext was ever any cause of War betwixt England and the House
of Burgundy: The Turk, Pope, Emperor, and King of Spain might urge the same
reason against the Venetian Sovereignty in the Adriatic Sea; there not being
the least part of a passage for their adjacent Subjects, which is not, in
respect of their pretended Sovereignty, belonging to the Republic. But these
Princes understand the difference betwixt Right and Wrong; whereas the Dutch
comprehend nothing but what is advantageous and disadvantageous. They detain
Renneberg, and other strong Towns belonging to the Duke of Bradenburg, the
Bishops of Cologne, and Munster, because their Provinces cannot be safe without
them. They would usurp our Seas, because they cannot manage their trade
without them. And they will seize hereafter upon our principal Ports, because
their Navigation cannot be secure without them. Certainly it is not a sufficient
ground for them to deny his Majesty the Proper Rights of the British Crown,
because They do not know How He will use them. They have no reason to imagine
that He would entreat them worse then His Royal Predecessors have done, who
never made the utmost advantage of their just Rights against the Netherlanders,
nor ever practiced such a Sovereignty as the Venetians exercise in their Seas.
It Is true that the case is much altered by their questioning his Royalty, which
was never before disputed by them, or any else: and it is but equitable that
they should be in some manner frank in their acknowledgments, who have been so
arrogant in the contest. They that begin a president are more criminal than
they which follow it; and since they by an ungrateful insolence have instructed
others to imitate their demeanor, it is but just th^^. They should contribute
to the necessary charges whereupon They put his Majesty to ensure that Royalty,
which They above all others (being supported by Queen Elizabeth, and owned for
a Free State by the interposition of King James, and strengthened by the
surrendry of the Cautionary Towns upon most easy terms) should not have
controverted; at least not in so barbarous a manner, as to say, That all the
world holds the King of England'^ Claim to be impertinent. Whereas it may be
with more truth said, That All the world in all Ages, has and does justify
his Right in general, or in Thesi; And it is manife^^ by the concessions of all
Princes concerned, and of the House of Burgundy, and of the Hollanders
themselves as to the British Seas; or in Hypothesi*

Whereas They deny that ever They Fished in our Seas with License and
permission of the Kings of England: It is a Lie; For since They hold their
privilege of Fishing by means of a general License or League contracted
betwixt the Crown of England and the House of Burgundy; it is manifest that
whosoever Fished in the English Seas before, did Fish with a particular
License, (from which they were then exempted) and that from thenceforward They
did Fish all by the General License or indult of the Kings of England in that
League. I have already showed his Majesty's right unto the Fishery, and How it
has been exerted: and there is Equivocation in what They say concerning the
Tribute for Fishing, that They never paid it to the King of England 's father.
The Fishing Busses did pay Tonnage-mony for their liberty to Fish, unto the
Earl of Northumberland, as Admiral under the present King of England his
Father. They, knowing the Legality of the thing, paid it with much
satisfaction, not regretting, or protesting against it. The Dutch Admiral Dorpe
did not except against the actions, much less oppose the said Honorable
person: nor do I find that the States General did remonstrate against that
Tonnage-mony as an exorbitant and illegal demand: But, according to the usual
demeanor of these Hollanders, They gave it out all over Europe, that they
would not pay any more, and that They refused it in 1637. To show that this was
but a scattered report, not any public complaint, or refusal of the States
General at that time; behold this Extract of a Letter from Mr. Secretary
Windebank to Captain Fogge, who at that time commanded five or six Ships under
the Earl of Northumberland.

Here has been a Report raised here that the Hollander's have refused his
Majesty's Licenses to Fish in his Seas, pretended to have been offered them by
Captain Fielding. But it is utterly mistaken, seeing Captain Fielding was sent
to the Busses to offer them protection; His Majesty having understood that the
Dunkirkers had prepared great strength to intercept them in their return from
the Fishing, which his Majesty in love to them sent Captain Fielding to give
them notice of, and to offer them safe conduct. This you are publicly to avow
wheresoever there shall be occasion; and to cry down the other discourse as
Scandalous and derogatory to his Majesty's Honor.

Aug. 10. 1637.

Thus you see (to return upon them their own language) It is a Lie that the
said Tonnage-money was protested against: It is a Lie, that It was no more
demand^d: for Captain Fielding did demand it (I am sure by Letters in the
Paper-Office) though I have not had leisure to examine what b^ r^ceived. And it
i^ a foolish report, to say that The single attempt of the Earl of
Northumberland, being violent, could not create any Right: Wh^^eas we do not
claim it in right, because it was then paid, but because, as an Immemorial
Royalty, it was always due, and acknowledged by them to be so.

I cannot allow of that Parenthesis of the Considerer, That violence can create
no Right, no not by continuance. For, if Prescription of an hundred years (or
less time, according to particular Countries) does create a Right, how violent
and unjust soever the first Occupancy be,, according to the Law of Nations,
which formally approves thereof even betwixt Prince and Prince: and
fundamentally according to the Law of Nature, Io. Palatius de domin. maris l.
1. c. 13.
which disposes us to mutual peace, and amicable Society, and to the means
conducing thereto, in the number whereof is Prescription, Occupancy, and
Custom; How then can He say that Violence can never create a Right? How do they
hold their Freedom, but by violence? Are these the Principles of the
Peace-loving Hollanders? Do not these suggestions tend to the involving of all
the World in Blood!

As to the meeting of the Yatc^t with the Fleet under Van Ghent in the
North-sea, and their not striking Sail or Flag: The Considerer yields it to be
a Ship of War by reason of its Equipage, Seldom Mare claus. l. 2. c. 15.
Commission, and Standard: and so it was according to the presidents of our
Law, which styles Barges and Ballingers, if armed for War, to be Ships of War,
But neither He, nor any man else can say that The refusal to lowre the Topsail
and strike the Flag, was not a breach of the Treaty at Breda. It is alleged,
that This happened in the North-sea, which is not the British Sea, being
distinguished there from in all Sea-plats, yea, in the English Map, and (which
in this case is an invincible Argument) by reason that in the seventh Article
of the Treaty at Breda the same are distinctly mentioned one from the other;
where it is expressedly said, that All Ships and Merchandises, which within
twelve days after the peace are taken in the British Sea, and the North-Sea,
shall continue in propriety to the Seizer. -- Out of which it plainly appears,
that even according to the King of England's sense, the North-sea differs in
reality from the British Sea. -- These reasons are so far from being
invincible, that they are null and altogether invalid. For the Argument from
popular Mapps and vulgar Sea-plats imports nothing at all: Those being made for
common instruction in such cases as they are usually made for: but not to
decide Cases at Law. There are several Counties in England, which are not
specified in the Mapps, which yet the Laws do exempt from those in which the
Mapps do include them. The distinction in the Article at Breda betwixt the
British and North Sea, is popular, and mentioned only to prevent future
quarrels about Prizes taken, not to decide the King's Rights unto that Sea, as
one of the four Seas: and, that taking place, it is not an invincible argument,
but an affected ignorance in this Hollander to urge it here. In the Treaty at
Torstrop betwixt the Dane and Swede, I read that Schonen and Wien were
distinctly named, and consented unto by the Dane to be transferred unto the
Swede: and in a subsequent Agreement at Roskild the Swede has only Schone^
transferred by name; hereupon He claims also Wien, the Danes deny the
rendition, and evade it as the Dutch do now: the King of Sweden rejoyns thus,
and any man may accommodate the passage to our Case. Though the Danes do grant
there has ever been a Joint Alienation of the said Isle with Schonen; See the
King of Swedens reasons for continuing the War with Denmark, Printed at London,
165^.
nevertheless, they would fain wave this by an odd Exception, pretending that
Wien could not really be alienated as a member of Schonen, because in the
Treaty Wien is expressly named as well as Schonen, which they allege need not
have been, had it been inclusive in Schonen. But this poor plea, is of little
importance, if it be observed, that in the Charter of Alienation, where Wien is
separately named with Schonen, there also Lister is separately named with the
Province of Blekingen, which however the Danes do unanimously acknowledge to be
a part of Blekingen; it being distinctly named rather for prevention of further
disputes, than out of necessity, Nam c^ausula abundans non nocet, ut nec ejus
absentia obest.

I shall conclude with two brief observations upon the remaining part of this
Paragraph, not yet replied unto.

1. The Considerer says that the striking of the Flag is but a Civility to his
Majesty's Ships, and consequently not to be enforced, but must proceed from a
free willingness and an unconstrained mind in those that show such respect. --
They that will not learn manners, must be taught them; yet it is a difficult
task to teach the Boores of Holland. But where did He learn that the striking
of the Flag in the British Seas was merely an Act of respect? Or How can he
say, that the Dutch, or others, might not be constrained to strike, considering
the Instructions of our Admiral, Mss. Commentar. de rebus Admiral. fol. 28.
Seldom M^re claus. l. 2. c. 26.
and the usage of England? Whosoever refuses to strike, is to be prosecuted as
a Rebel, not as an uncivil person And I find that the Crown of France, where
it pretends to any Sovereignty of the Sea, does enforce the striking of the
Sail and Flag in an uncivil manner, Zouche de jure faeciali, part. 2. sect. 8.
qu. Virum quod Nau^ae, principis alterius navi bellicae vela non submittant,
Navis pro prada capi possit?
since those that refuse to do it, are to be attaqued with Cannon-shot, and, if
taken, their Ships confiscated. The same is done by the State of Venice, and
universally. The World is coming to a fine pass when these Butter-boxes presume
to teach all Europe Civility!

2. The Considerer says, that since the Yatcht did not meet with any single
Ships, or Vessels of the States, but run in amongst a Fle^t riding at Anchor,
It cannot be maintained with any fundamental reasons, that the Lord Van Ghen^
by virtue of the said Article was obliged to strike. -- I answer, that the
Article does make it Fundamental to the Peace; and the Admirals Instructions,
and the Usage of England do expound the same sufficiently to the prejudice of
Van Ghent. Is this the sincerity, the bona fides, with which they observe the
Treaty? Our Laws and Customs of the Admiralty know no distinction betwixt a
Ship or Fleet found riding at Anchour, or met under sail: Nor do they
distinguish betwixt a casual meeting, and a voluntary seeking of Foreign Ships,
o^ Fleets: nor whether our Ships be at Anchor, and the Foreigner under sail; or
both be Navigating: And it is the duty of our Men of War, in case they
discover, or hear of any foreign Ships, or Fleets upon our Seas, to make up to
them, and to see whither they come in a peaceable or hostile manner, by
demanding them to strike their Sails and Flags. I need not add any thing to
this point, every one may sufficiently comprehend the Case, but these
Hollanders that will not understand it.

The conclusion of this Paragraph does manifest the Integrity of his Majesty in
the penning of His Declaration; seeing that the Considerer acknowledges, That
the States General did offer to strike the Flag and Sail unto his Ships of the
Navy Royal, upon condition He would assist them in this juncture (for that they
mean by his observing the Triple Alliance) and provided no construction thence
should be made to prejudice them in the free use of the Seas, viz. in reference
to Fishing, as well as Sailing. It is hence evident, that His Majesty did not
represent the arrogance of the Dutch in so heinous a manner, as He might have
done without injuring them. The Considerer has done it; and I refer it to the
consideration of all Englishmen.

Thus I have exactly replied unto all that the Considerer has alleged against
the Declaration of his Majesty, and what else He has written in reference to
the present Quarrel: and I think I have made it evident to the meanest
capacity, that the present War is authorized by all those circumstances which
make it Just, and Honorable, and Necessary.

I intend in a Second part to address my self to my fellow subjects* as the
Considerer does to his, and excite them to do no less to avert injuries, and
defend their Honor and the Rights of His Majesty* than He exhorts the Dutch,
to do, contrary to all right, to our detriment and dishonor: I will therein
show those that were concerned for the War against the Dutch under the
pretended Commonwealth, that the Quarrel is fundamentally the same now that it
was then, and that they cannot have any tenderness for the Hollanders at this
time^ who did so hainously complain of their Oppressions and Usurpations then:
The Hollanders are the self-same People still; As much Hollanders in Europe, as
they are at Iapan, or ever were at Amboyna: I know not why we should not
demonstrate our selves all to be as true^ English men; And to convince such
persons, I will Print the Speech of Mr. St. John's, their Ambassador to the
States, at the Hague, during the pretended Commonwealth.

FINIS.

