A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT HERTFORD, IVLY viii. 1689.

By JOHN STRYPE, M. A. Vicar of Low-Leyton in Essex.

IMPRIMATUR, Iulii 22. 1689. C. ALSTON.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

To the Right Worshipful Richard Hutchinson, Esquire HIGH SHERIFF of the County of
HERTFORD.
SIR,
I Acknowledge it a Satisfaction to me, that this plain SERMON, preached at the
late Assizes, found such a general good Acceptance both from the Judges and
Gentry, insomuch, that many of them put you upon obliging me to make it
public. But it added much to the satisfaction, that the subject matter of the
Discourse was so well approved by so great a Body of Honor and Quality, as
then appeared. Nor does it a little tend to the Reputation of that County, that
the Magistrates and Gentry thereof allow so well of Discourses of this nature,
showing hereby their True Affection to the Protestant Religion, and to
Christian Peace and Love, and how sensible they are of the singular Mercies and
Deliverances vouchsafed by God to this Nation, both in former times, and of
late especially.

Sir, You have the honor to be reserved for the First Sheriff of
Hertford-shire, under the Auspicious Reign of KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY. And
it was your Happiness, as well as your Honor, that you were laid aside from
serving that Office the last Year, after you were pricked and published in the
Gazette, in the List of the High Sheriffs, as being judged, no doubt, too good
an English man, and too true a Protestant, to serve the Turn that was then
driving on.

I have, you see, in compliance with your desire, exposed what I preached to
public view, praying God it may be of some benefit to you, and all others,
that shall take the pains to read it, for the promoting of Christian Wisdom and
Sobriety; and then I have my end. I am,

SIR, Your very much obliged humble Servant, JOHN STRYPE.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes at Hertford, IVLY viii. 1689.
I SAM. XII. vii. Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before
the Lord, of all the righteous Acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to
your Fathers.
I Come not here to instruct Judges, not to teach Magistrates their Duty: As
this would not become me to do, so neither, I presume, do they need it, whose
great Wisdom And Gravity is able to direct them in the Businesses that lie
before them. Their Office indeed is as Weighty, as it is Honorable, to
distribute Justice, to see good Laws well executed, to right oppressed
Innocence, to bring Wickedness to Shame; in a Word, to maintain the Kings
Peace, and the Churches Peace; a Great and Divine Employment. But where there
be Principles of Loyalty, and a Love of Justice planted in the mind,
accompanied with Piety to God, and a grave Judgment, and many Years Experience;
these are far better Monitors than the best Preachers can be: And I am
persuaded I have Men enriched with such Endowments to be my Auditors at this
Time.

That I may not therefore seem to misdoubt your Integrities or Abilities, Right
Honorable and Right Worshipful, nor expose my self to the Censure of too much
Assurance and Presumption; and yet that I may speak in some proportion to this
present occasion, I have chosen these Words, which are part of the Charge of a
great Judge in Israel, of whom the Scripture gives this Character, 1 Samuel 7. 16.
That he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Miz^^h,
and judged Israel in all those places: And so you see the Words may be suitable
in respect of the Person that spoke them. And they were delivered at a very
great and solemn Convention of People, as yours now is; and so they are
suitable, in regard of the Auditory, that heard them: And the Matter of them,
being a serious Exhortation to reflect upon God's Goodness, and their own
Ingratitude, can neither now, not at any time else, be unsuitable for Ministers
to preach, nor Christians to hear.

Here, then, we have Samuel, the Judge, beginning his Charge; Now therefore
stand still, that I may reason with you before the Lord of all the righteous
Acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers. The Word, which we
translate, Let me reason with you, (...)
is a Law Term among the Hebrews, and signifies, To plead and contend in
Judgment for some wrong done: And is as much as if the should have said, Let me
plead on God's side against you. A good Judge is always an Advocate on God's
behalf, and zealous in his Cause. Israel had wronged God, dealt unjustly with
him. How so? By sinning against him: For every Sin is an Injury done to God.
Samuel now stands, and takes God's Part against them, by showing them how
gracious God had been to them, and how well he had deserved at their Hands, by
his Mercies and Favors, expressed toward them; for so the Word, which we
render Righteous Acts, (...)
often signifies: And by showing them withal, how illy they had requited the
Lord, disobeyed his Commandments, and rebelled against their Heavenly King.

And that his Expostulation with them, from the Topic of God's Goodness, might
make the deeper impression upon them, he descends in the following Verses to
enumerate the Righteous Acts of God toward them: Ver. 8.
When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your Fathers cried unto the Lord, then the
Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your Fathers out of Egypt. So
that their Escape out of Egypt was one of these Righteous, or Merciful, Acts of
God to them.

And then it follows, And made them dwell in this place. This place; that is,
The Land of Canaan, where they now were. That was another of these eminent
Favors, or Righteous Acts of the Lord.

And when they forgot the Lord, Ver. 9.
be sold them into the hand of Sisera, Captain of the Host of Hazor, and into
the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the King of Moab; and they
fought against them. And they cried unto the Lord, Ver. 10.
etc. And the Lord sent Ierubbeal, Ver. 11.
and Bedan, and Iephtbah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your
Enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe. They had Enemies, it seems, round
about them, that plotted and combined to destroy them; but GOD always
interposed for their safety: This is a Third Mercy of GOD vouchsafed them.

And upon these three signal Manifestations of GOD's Goodness to them, the
Prophet Samuel grounds his reasoning with them: For indeed they were Favors of
that nature, that the Jews could not think of them, but they must needs have
been touched with a quick sense of the Distinguishing Love of GOD to them, and
under what mighty Obligations they were to Him; as namely, to review them again,

I. That GOD had brought them away from Egypt; where they were a poor,
miserable, oppressed People, under intolerable Slavery, crouching to an
insulting proud Tyrant, who laid unconscionable Tasks and Burdens of hard
Labor upon them. Ex. 1. 14.
Their Taskmasters, says the Scripture, made their Lives bitter with hard
bondage in Mortar and in Brick^ and in all manner of service in the Field. Chapter
2. 23.
All their service, wherein they made them to serve, was with rigor. Insomuch,
that it is said, They sighed and groaned, by reason of their bondage. From all
this Severity and Anguish did their gracious GOD in due time give them an
eminent and famous Freedom.

II. Another of God's Righteous Acts toward them, was the planting them in the
Land of Canaan; where they were not only free from the former Servitude, but
lived plentifully and prosperously. A Land therefore it is described to be,
flowing with Milk and Honey, fruitful, and yielding all things for their
service, use, and delight. And here they lived under their own Laws, in a wise
and well constituted Government, having the true, standing, divine Service of
God settled among them. Oh, what a blessed Change was this to them, to exchange
Egypt for Canaan, the unmerciful Impositions of a Tyrannical Prince, for the
sweet and good Laws of their Gracious and Heavenly King.

III. The third Favor of God to Israel, that Samuel here mentions, is not so
much one single Mercy as a Constellation of them; namely, Their many
Deliverances, after their settlement in Canaan, from their Enemies round about
them, that envied their Peace, that were jealous of their Happiness, and that
labored, and contrived, and combined together, either to reduce them to their
old Slavery again, or totally to ruin and root them out: But as often as they
rose up against them, so often did their good God appear on their behalf, and
by strange and miraculous means sheltered this people from their Malice, and
continued their Church, and preserved their State, in spite of all attempts to
the contrary.

And these are the Righteous Acts of the Lord, upon which this holy and good
man is going to reason with them. This is the Foundation, upon which he builds
the strength of his ensuing Discourse. That considering these great
Vouchsafements of God, how obliged they were to fear him, and cleave unto him
with their whole Hearts: And, Of what an high nature would their Transgressions
be, after all this kindness; and, What shame, what sorrow, what repentance
would suffice to balance their ingratitude.

And this is the method of Samuel's arguing with the Jews, from the Mercies of
God to them; and, no doubt, it made a very notable impression upon their
Hearts: An excellent Platform and Direction this is for us to follow in our
Exhortations, and when we call upon Men to consider their ways, and to amend
them; We cannot take a better course, more probable to have a good effect, than
this, which the Prophet Samuel here uses; that is, To set before Men the
gracious dealings of God to them and their Fathers, what Comforts and
Refreshments he has bestowed on them; what Deliverances and Salvations he has
wrought for them; what visible and remarkable Tokens and Footsteps of his Grace
and Goodness they have seen and felt; and then hereupon to argue and
expostulate with them.

And seeing, my Christian Brethren, we of this Nation, with the Jews, have
received great and eminent Mercies at the hand of God, and with the Jews also,
our carriage and behavior toward him has been no ways correspondent, I
shall therefore at this time follow the same course and method that Samuel here
does; and for this purpose, give me leave in the first place to bespeak you in
Samuel's very words. Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you
before the Lord, of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to YOU and
YOUR Fathers. And here I shall set before you the Mercies of God to you and
your Fathers, and then reason with you in the presence of the Lord concerning
them.

I.
Let me recollect the Righteous Acts, or the Mercies, of the Lord. As for
private and personal Mercies, I shall not at all insist upon them, but limit my
Discourse only to those that are public and national, such as have happened to
us as a Nation; for such are the Righteous Acts meant in the Text. And here let
us reflect a little upon what God has done for us of this Nation. And upon
search and examination we shall soon find, That his Goodness has been
mavelous and abundant toward us. Certainly, whatsoever great things other
Kingdoms may boast of, as received from the hand of God, we of this Kingdom
have had our share. And truly, I think, if a man should go all the World over,
and take an account of every People and Language, this Island of our Nativity
would be found to be the Happiest. And though doubtless all others have reason to
be sensible of the Goodness of God to them in many respects, yet we of this
Nation have far greater reason. We have swam in a greater Sea of Mercies, and
our Cup has more overflowed: God has given more notable and famous marks of
his Favor to us Englishmen.

It will be convenient to mention some of them, because particulars do more
affect; and as Samuel in this Chapter insisted chiefly upon three sorts of
Mercies vouchsafed to Israel; so by way of Parallel, I will at this time reduce
the Mercies of God to our Nation, under three Heads.

I. The Deliverance of our Force-fathers from the Spiritual Egypt, viz. The
Bondage of Popery.

II. The placing us in a good Land, a second Land of Canaan.

III. The Protections that God has given us, from our Enemies round about us,
that combined together against us, like the Canaanites and the Perizzites, and
the rest of the seven Nations, against Israel.

I. I begin with the Deliverance of our Forefathers from the Tyranny of Rome,
and the bondage of the Popish Religion. A Yoke, which our Fathers, both Kings
and People, many a year, had grievously labored under; when a foreign Bishop
had usurped Authority over our Estates and Liberties, our Souls and
Consciences, in that sort, as though we had all been made only to serve the ends
of his Ambition and Covetousness; and which was saddest of all, our immortal
Souls were in imminent hazard, by reason of the wretched Ignorance,
Superstition, and false Worship Men were then nursell'd up in.

But the good GOD in due time looked down upon us, pitied our Bondage, and
brought us up out of this Egypt, moving and emboldening the Hearts of our
Governors to vindicate themselves from the Usurpations of Rome, and to dismiss
Superstition and Idolatry from among us, and to set on foot a blessed
Reformation from those notorious Abuses and Corruptions, in which our poor
Church had been so long wrapped up before. The Scriptures, that show unto us the
Way of Salvation, locked up before, were now opened: Our Prayers, that were
hidden in an unknown Tongue before, made intelligible: Worshipping of Saints,
and making Addresses to Wood and Stone, abrogated: The Holy Sacrament of the
Lord's. Supper, polluted by a Mass of Fooleries, and Corruptions, and Errors,
restored to its Primitive use and practice; and a reasonable Service
celebrated, and Preachers appointed to teach and instruct men, concerning the
Contents of our Holy Religion; and Means of Saving-knowledg more and more brake
in upon us And thus we were then delivered.

And this Mercy of God will appear to be the greater, if we consider what a
small part of Christendom, in comparison, enjoy it beside our selves. God
seemed to have picked us out from the rest of the World, to manifest This his
Kindness to; for the greater part of Christians still sit in Darkness,
concerning CHRIST and his Religion; and while their Priests pretend to keep
knowledge, they communicate little enough to them; they tell them, it is enough
for them to believe as the Church believes, That they must resolve their Faith
into the Authority of the Church: But what the Faith of the Church is, they
need not trouble themselves to know, let them but hear Mass and mumble over
their Rosaries and their Latin Prayers; let them but kiss a Crucifix, and kneel
before a Saints Image, and sprinkle themselves with Holy Water, and arm
themselves with the sign of the Cross, and it is enough.

This, I say, is the condition of most Christians; but God has dealt more
bountifully with you my Brethren; He has given you means of more perfect
knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, and of the way and means of Salvation by him.

In a word, We have our Christian Religion, that had been defaced, blotted, and
blurred by Popish Superstition, cleansed from its Corruptions, and restored to
us as it was in the Primitive Ages; a most invaluable Mercy and Blessing! so
that nothing now remains for us to do, but to live according to the knowledge
and means of Grace which we have. And this is one Rank of Divine Favors
vouchsafed us of this Nation, viz. Our deliverance from the Bondage and Tyranny
of Rome, answerable to that of the Jews from Egypt.

II. Another singular Mercy of God to this Nation, parallel to that God
vouchsafed the Jews, is the good Land, wherein God has planted us. As the
former concerned our spiritual Good, so this our Temporal; indeed a blessed
Country ours is, a true Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. The British
Islands were anciently and truly reckoned one of the best and happiest Soyles
in the World.

And here I might insist upon the Fruitfulness of the Land, the Plenty of all
things for the Life and uses of Men; the Temperature and Wholsomness of the
Clime; the Health and long Age of the Inhabitants; the Manners and Dispositions
of the People, who are naturally Loyal and True, Sober and Manly, Courageous
and Valiant: For so the ancient Inhabitants were reputed to be; and if they are
not all so now, it is owing to their Sins, whereby many of us have marred and
emasculated our Natures.

Moreover, I might insist upon the happy Situation of this Island, walled about
with Seas, to defend us from Foreign Invasion, that ambitious Princes may not
so easily make Inroads upon us, and bring in their destructive Armies; God has
placed us in a World by our selves, and we were therefore sometimes called,
Alter Orbis, The other World.

Under the consideration of the Happiness of our Country, I might likewise
entertain you with a Discourse of our moderate and easy Government, and
wholesome Laws: Our Kings rule by Law, and are not arbitrary; our Laws are
framed and modelled by our own Representatives; and so, in effect, we are under
Laws of our own making. And among the rest of the Privileges of the English
Nation, this must not be forgotten, at this time especially, That for the
saving us both the Labor and Expenses of long Journies up to Westminster Hall,
the Reverend the Judges leave their Seats there for our Ease and Convenience;
and are sent down among us, twice a Year, in these their Circuits, to hear and
determine our Grievances, and to do us Right, and to take Vengeance on
Malefactors, the common Mischieves of a Country. And thus Justice is brought
home, as it were, to our own Doors.

In all which Respects, many wife Men, not only our Countrymen, who may be
thought to speak partially, but Foreigners, have held the English Government,
To be one of the best constituted Governments in the World.

These things I can now but mention; but these, well thought on, will enhance
the Value of this second Rank of Mercies, referring to the Country, wherein God
has placed us, insomuch that we may truly use the Words of the Psalmist, The
lines are fallen to us in a pleasant place, and we have a goodly Heritage.

III. There is another Mercy still behind, wherein God has resembled us to his
own People the Jews; and that is, The Protection of our Church and our Land
from the Malicious and Unwearied Attempts of our Enemies. Miraculous have been
the Deliverances that God has wrought for us, from Foreign Invasion and
Domestic Conspiracy.

I need but mention the Invincible Armada, in the Year 88. when the Pope and
the King of Spain, and the Princes of Italy, marshalled up all their Strength
and Wealth, and set forth the greatest Fleet that ever the Sea bore, with an
intent to invade our Land, to massacre our Persons, and to reduce us to the old
Egyptian Bondage again: But here the Winds and the Seas were on our side, and
fought for us; and then God showed strength with his own arm, and scattered the
proud in the imagination of their hearts.

I can but name that prodigious and unheard of Plot of Gun Powder, that should
have made but one stroke of the three Estates, and cut them off at one blow;
whereby both our Civil Government and our Protestant Religion should have been
dispatched at once: But this, God, by a strange Discovery, disappointed also.

And when, of later times, we were embroiled in lamentable Civil Wars, and the
Lord's anointed, our Natural Sovereign, slain by wicked Hands, and our ancient
Government subverted; in due time did the good God take pity upon the sad
Estate of these Kingdoms, and brought back our Natural Prince, and restored our
Counselors, as at the beginning, and gave us our old Government again in
Church and State. And thus God delivered us then also.

But there are later Deliverances than any of these, fresh in our Memories;
wherein our merciful God has aggrandized his Mercy, and magnified his Goodness
to us; namely, in the two last Kings Reigns, when so many Plots and mischievous
Projects were hatching and secretly carrying on against us; and of late more
openly and avowedly, by our implacable Enemies of Rome, to enslave our
freeborn Persons, to overthrow our ancient Government; and, which was worst of
all, to extirpate our excellent Protestant Religion; having also the
countenance of Authority on their side; and a powerful standing Army to back
them: And they thought, and so indeed did we all, That their Work was as good
as done; nor had we the least Crevise of Hope, but began to prepare for
Suffering, and to submit our Necks, as patiently as we could, to that heavy
Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. But, behold! in this
very juncture, (...), did God, beyond our Hopes, or very thoughts, raise up
another Cyrus to his People, who by a train of Miraculous and Strange
Successes, which we ought piousty to attribute to the special Influence of
Heaven, recover and restore this despairing Nation to its Property, Liberty,
Peace, Religion, and every thing else that was dear and precious unto us; and
we have a very fair Prospect, if our Sins and Follies do not prevent, of much
future Tranquillity.

And truly, to add this to the rest, It is a Mercy of God, not to be forgotten,
that notwithstanding the Jesuits and Emissaries of Rome, have all along from
Generation to Generation, from one King's Reign to another, been so busy to
overturn us, though they bring up Youth in Foreign Schools, founded on purpose
to plot Treasons, and compass the Ruin of our Kings and Kingdom; they have
never yet these hundred Years and upwards, been able to effect their cursed
Designs: And what is all this to be attributed to, but the special Providence
of God over us? God still blasts them, disappoints them, discovers them,
countermines them, makes them false to one another; and we have, blessed be
God, a Protestant King, and a Protestant Religion still; such, such have been
the miraculous Appearances of God for this Church and Nation.

O nimium dilecta Deo -- O thou Nation of England, beloved of God, too much,
beyond thy Deserts.

And thus I have set before you the Mercies of God, his righteous Acts toward
us and our Fathers: Thus Good, thus Gracious has he been, so happy has he
rendered us, so often has he delivered us, so tender has he been of us, as if
he had adopted us for his second Israel; he has dealt with us, indeed, as his
Children, as his Friends, as his Beloved: How abundant, O Lord, is thy goodness
to the Sons of Men? the memorial of thine abundant goodness shall be showed,
and men shall sing of thy greatness: One generation shall praise thy works unto
another, and declane thy power.

And thus I have finished the first Stage of my Discourse, and that was, To
recollect unto your Thoughts the Righteous Acts of the Lord.

II.
And now I come to reason with you hereupon, What shall we say to these things?
But that my Reasoning with you may be the more effectual, and make the more
deep and lasting Impression, I should discourse, if I had Time, from these
three Heads.

I. To consider what such gracious Dealings of God, do in all Justice and
Equity call for.

II. What our behavior has been.

III. To expostulate and reason with you upon the whole Matter.

I. To consider what such gracious Dealings of God do in all Justice require of
us: for natural Reason will dictate to us, That there does arise an Obligation
upon us from Favors received, so that in Point of Equity certain Duties are
owing to our Friend, or our Deliverer, or he that has contributed toward the
Comfort of our Life; but above all, when the great God of Heaven and Earth, who
is infinitely above us, takes Care of us, and is some ways or other notably
beneficial to us; What is Man now to do? certainly his Heart ought to be lift
up in Thankfulness to the great Benefactor: His Mind ought always to bear the
Characters of the Divine Goodness engraven upon it, as it were with the Pen of
a Diamond: And this Sense of Divine Favor ought to express it self by
demeaning our selves loyally toward that God, from whose Hands these Favors
have fallen; by loving him, fearing him, obeying his Commandments, and
complying with his blessed Will, and by devoting and submitting our selves
entirely unto him. But,

II. Let us see what our Behavior has been: We have been such as have
participated, in a large manner, of the Bounty of Heaven, as I have shown you
already; the Paths of God have been all Mercy and Truth to us, and to our
Fathers before us. But now, to come nearer to you, What have you done for God?
Where has your Gratitude, your Loyalty been to him? Have God's Mercies made us
any whit the better? Nay are we not the worse? Have we not kicked against him,
when he has sed us to the full? Have not the Lives of many of us been such, as
if they were led on purpose to confront him? As if we were resolved to offend
him? As if we cared not for his Favor? How often have we sinned against God,
when with the same Ease we might not have sinned, or have done somewhat that
might have pleased him? How frothy and unchristian have our Words and
Discourses been? How unjust and unrighteous, and uneven our Dealings? If we
have been in Prosperity, how forgetful have we been of him? How insolently have
we carried our selves? How have we trampled upon our Inferiors, and oppressed
our Underlings? If we have been in Adversity, how unadvisedly have we spoken
with our Tongues? into what Indecencies has our Passion, or Anger, or Sorrow
driven us.

But particularly, what little Correspondence have we born toward that
infinite Mercy of restoring the true Religion to us? We pretend, indeed, to
value and love our Religion. We speak much of our Happiness in professing it;
We show great Dislike and Abhorrence of Rome and her Practices; but alas! our
Lives bear no Proportion to our Words and Professions.

And here I may take up the Complaint that an English Protestant Writer, Tho.
Deacon in his Preface to his Jewel of Joy.
in the very beginning of the Reformation, and of Fame in those Times, used in
reference to this Matter: What a Swarm of gross Gospellers have we among us?
who can prattle of the Gospel very finely, talk much of the Justification of
Faith, crack very stoutly of the free remission of all their Sins by Christ's
Blood, avaunce themselves to be of the number of those, which are predestinate
unto everlasting Glory: But how far does their Life differ from all true
Christianity? they are puffed up with all kind of Pride, they swell with all kind
of Envy, Hatred, Malice and Enmity against their Neighbor; they brenne with
unquenchable Lusts of Carnal Concupiscence; they wallow and tumble in all kind
of beastly Pleasure; their greedy covetous Affections are unsariable; the
enlarging of their Lordships, the increasing of their Substance, the scraping
together of worldly Possessions, infinite, and knows no End. In fine, all
their Endeavors tend unto this End, to show themselves very Ethnicks, and
utterly estranged from God in their Conversations, although in Words they
otherwise pretend* all their Religion consists in Words and Disputes; in
Christian Actions and godly Deeds, nothing at all And so he goes on.

This then you see has been a Charge; that has stuck on the Protestants from
the very first Times of our Reformation, in the Reign of Edward VI and I am
afraid those Complaints may more truly be taken up against them in these
degenerate, backsliding Days of ours; I appeal to your selves for the Truth of
these things. Thus good has God been to us, and thus froward and disingenuous
have we been to him.

III. And now, in the third Place, let me expostulate and reason with you upon
the whole matter: Is it possible, that the goodness of God has had no better,
Success upon us? Have we thus required the Lord, foolish People and unwise?
What strange Stupidity possesses us, that we carry our selves so untowardly
toward the best Friend we have in all the World? Was ever more disingenuity or
folly known? Disingenuity, to affront so good a God, to be so base there where
we have been so kindly dealt with; and Folly too, in exposing our selves to the
Effects of that Fury, that is begotten of Kindness abused.

Let us at last be persuaded to leave these Courses: Oh! be not so weak, to
suffer so vile a thing as Sin to impose upon thee? What? Shall I dishonor my
God? Shall I displease him? Shall I be guilty of so gross Ingratitude to my
dearest Benefactor? And all this only to gratify a Lust? Shall I sooner listen
to a Passion, to a Folly, than to my God? Has Sin deserved better of me than
God has? Oh! far be it from me. And certainly this Expostulation will take
hold of all Men* that have any Spark of Ingenuity in them. For these things,
that I am now discoursing, touch upon the tenderest part of the Soul, and make
a very close Address unto the igenuous Part of it.

I shall propound one or two good Counsels to you, with reference to the
present Discourse, and so make an end.

I. In reference to the Mercies of God in general, endeavor to bear and keep
up a quick Sense of them always upon your Minds: Oh! bear about with you these
Marks of Divine Love and Favor: The Remembrance of them will be of excellent
Use for the checking us in our Careers of Sin, and the forwarding us in the
Course of Piety; for a Man can scarcely think of God's Goodness to him, and at
the same time play the Villain and the Rebel against him. But on the contrary,
God's Mercies will enkindle a Love of God in our Hearts; and if we love him, we
shall obey him, and do and suffer any thing for his sake. And therefore, I say,
let not the goodness of God depart out of your Minds, but frequently call upon
your Souls, Psalm. 103. 2, 3.
as David did upon his, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me,
bless his holy name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

II. and lastly, as to the Mercy of the Protestant Religion in particular, the
Counsel I would give you in relation to this is, that we walk answerably unto
it; and that our behavior be such, as may become it. And there are two things
that are great Ornaments unto it, and that will set a mighty Luster upon it,
and indeed are indispensably required by it: The one is a Peaceable Spirit, and
the other a Holy Life. Peace and Holiness, which are both joined together in
one Verse, Heb. 12. 14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness; and they are recommended unto us by
the most prevalent Argument that can possibly be invented, because without them
no man shall see the Lord: seeing the Lord in Heaven, in Glory, being made
Partakers of the blisful Vision, depends upon the pursuit of Peace and Holiness.

First, Peace, That venerable, sacred, inviolable thing: Peace, the great
primary Law of our Holy Religion; the truest distinguishing Character of a
right Christian; the best Prop and Pillar of Christianity. Quid est
Christianismus si Pax absit? said Erasmus, What is Christianity it self without
Peace? As though it could not subsist without Peace, that there could scarce be
Christianity without it. Nay, it is the Happiness of Heaven: There is nothing
there but a sweet union of Spirits, and harmony of Souls; and, in a word, it is
the Name that GOD himself is called by, viz. The God of Peace. Heb. 13. 20.


And therefore this is to be preserved sarta tecta, by all the care and means
possible. And because our difference in Opinion is so apt to do violence to
this Sacred Badg of Christianity, let us take great care, whatsoever our
Judgments be, that it have not that very bad influence upon any of us. And to
remedy this, either let us sacrifice our private Opinions to Peace, which is of
far greater value than our Opinions can be; or, if we do not that, yet by
providing by all possible means against disturbances and clamor, and all
bitter zeal: And that we may do, partly by concealing our different Judgments,
and having our Faith to our selves, Romans 14. 22.
as the Apostle advises; partly by complying with, and submirting to the
Customs of the National Church, as far as we can possibly, that so far as lies
in us, we may live peaceably with all men; partly by being modest in our
Sentiments, not confident or stiff in our own Conceits, apt to think charitably
of those that differ from us; not fond of a Party, nor crying, I am for Paul,
and I for Apollos; nor cherishing Prejudices against all that are not of our
own way. It is a thing of a very bad consequence, and oftentimes falls out to
the breach of Christian Peace and Love, that we usually espouse a Side, and
then we are partial to our selves, and very critical in espying faults in
others, and rigorous in censuring and condemning the Practices of all besides
our own Party.

It brings to my mind a Passage, that we read in our Books, Gilbert. Foliot.
God. Caral. of Bishops,
of a certain Bishop of Lendon in King Henry II. his Reign. This man
discoursing one day with a Friend of his, concerning this temper, says he,
When I first entered into a Monastery, I was wont to blame very much the
sluggishness of my Governors: When I became a Prior, I would complain of
Abbots: Afterward arising to the Honor of an Abbot, I favored my
fellow-Abbots, but ceased not to reprehend Bishops: And lastly, When I was a
Bishop my self, I began to see how much more easy a thing it is to find Faults
than to mend them. By which he did show, in himself, the temper of most men,
how apt they are to favor their own side, and how diligent to accuse their
Superiors, and how ready to be angry with all of a different Order, Sect, or
Persuasion. And withal, upon maturity of Years and Judgment, he gave us to see,
how unreasonable and childish this is; and therefore, that it is much better to
be of a charitable modest Spirit, to cover some defects that we espy in others,
and not to think our selves without fault, always remembering, that There is
nothing perfect under the Sun. And this would prove an excellent means for the
composing and pacifying the Minds of Christians to one another, and for the
promoting of Peace.

Let us then labor after the things that make for peace: Let us seek peace and
ensue it, and approve our selves the true Disciples and genuine Followers of
the loving and peaceable JESUS, by being peaceable and peace makers our selves.
He was of a peaceable Spirit, and underwent much for Peace sake, and was the
great Pacificator between GOD and Man; the infinite Benefits whereof, such as
the Pardon of our Sins, and the blessed Hope of everlasting Peace, we
Christians feel, to our great and endless Comfort; the consideration of which
Blessed things, brought about by our great Peacemaker, should make us Friends,
and Sons of Peace.

Secondly, To Peace join Holiness; and indeed the one is a proper Door and
Entrance into the other: The peaceable Christian is the only probable Man to
make a truly holy Christian. When the Soul is calm, and the storms of Passion
and Contention are all laid and still; then the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of
Peace and Love enters. Let not the profession of Christianity serve thy turn,
without the Spirit and Life of it. Be very conscientious in all the great and
divine Laws of it, Mortification and Self-denial, Justice and Temperance,
Humility and Patience, Meekness and Charity, Love and Good Will, subduing our
Humors, and bridling our Passions, and bringing our Spirits under Discipline,
and framing our Minds more and more to a relish and delight in holy Exercises,
to a love of God, to a contempt of the World, to an ardent desire to be
admitted into that Celestial State above.

This is the true divine Life and Spirit, that becomes all the Professors of
the Gospel, that should be their chief End, and their great and earnest Care,
as they would walk worthy of that holy Name, whereby they are called. And when
all is done, after all our talk and dispute; after all our heats and contests;
after all our Books and Writings, there is nothing so effectual to make God our
Friend; nothing so much adorns our Excellent Protestant Religion, and better
secures it to us and our Posterity: In a word, nothing treasures up so much
solid Peace and holy Assurance unto our Souls, as the sincere honest
application of our selves to the Practicals of RELIGION.

FINIS.
ERRATVM.
Page 23. in the Margin, read Thom. Beacon.


