BABYLON's Fall in MARYLAND: A fair WARNING to Lord Baltamore.

OR, A RELATION Of an Assault made by diverse Papists, and Popish Officers of
the Lord Baltamore's against the Protestants in Maryland; to whom GOD gave a
great Victory against a greater force of Soldiers and armed Men, who came to
destroy them.

Published by Leonard Strong, Agent for the people of PROVIDENCE in MARYLAND.

Printed for the Author, 1655.

Babylons fall in Maryland. A fair warning to Lord Baltamore.
IN the year 1649. many, both of the congregated Church, and other
well-affected people in Virginia, being debarred from the free exercise of
Religion, under the Government of Sir William Barkely* removed themselves,
Families, and Estates into the Province of Maryland, being thereunto invited by
Captain William Stone, then Governor for Lord Baltamore, with promise of
Liberty in Religion, and Privileges of English Subjects.

An Oath to the Lord Baltamore was urged upon this people soon after their
coming up, which if they did not take, they must have no Land, nor abiding in
the Province. This Oath was very scrupulously looked upon: first, In regard it
binds to acknowledge and be subject to a Royal Jurisdiction and absolute
Dominion of the Lord Baltamore, and to defend it and him against all power
whatsoever. This was thought far too high for him, being a Subject, to exact
upon such terms as it was exacted, and too much unsuitable to the present
liberty which God had given the English Subjects, from Arbitrary and Popish
Government; as the Lord Baltamore's Government does plainly appear to be.
Secondly, It was exceedingly scrupled on another account, viz. That they must
swear to uphold that Government and those Officers who are sworn to countenance
and uphold Antichrist, in plain words expressed in the Officers Oath, the Roman
Catholic Religion. And for these people to own such by an Oath, whom in their
hearts they could by no means close with; what could it be accounted, but
Collusion?

Yet nevertheless the people that were then come up to Providence, considering
Lord Baltamore to be Lord of the soil, and willing to acknowledge him, and pay
him his due Rents and Services; upon that account took an Oath which was much
qualified and moderated from its former rigor: but this, though it was
accepted by Captain Stone the Lord Baltamore's Lieutenant, yet utterly rejected
by his Lordship, who gave order, That the Oath absolutely should be urged; and
gave special instructions and charge to his Leiutenant to proclaim, That all
that would not take the Oath within three Months after publication, and pay
Rents, and sue out Patents, should be expulsed the Province, and the Land
seized to his Lordships use; who required his Officers to see the contents of
the Proclamation executed.

Now the people having been formerly sensible of such yokes, imposed contrary
to what was promised them before they came into the Province, complained by
their Agent in England,

First, to the Lord Baltamore, desiring his Lordship, That such burdens as the
Oath and other great inconveniences mentioned in our instructions, might be
removed. But the Lord Baltamore rejected the motion. Our Agent presented a
Petition to the then Council of State, where it has been depending near four
years, without any hearing, Answer or Relief; which has brought unspeakable
troubles upon this Province, and now at last occasioned the shedding of much
English blood; yea, of the Saints in Maryland. God grant that Right and Justice
may have a more open course to flow into all the Dominions of England, without
obstructions; and, that innocent blood be not shed any more for want thereof.

In the year 1652. Richard Bennet Esquire Colonel William Clayborne, and Captain
Edmund Curtis, Commissioners from the Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of
England, arrived in Maryland, in the Guiny Friggot to reduce that Province into
the obedience of the Commonwealth of England, according to their Commission;
which was effected by them, first, in their taking away the Commissions and
Powers of the Lord Baltamore, in the hands of Captain William Stone his
Governor, and Thomas Hatton his Secretary, and the rest of the Lord Baltamores
Council; as they had very good cause so to do; for none of the English
Dominions had more need of being reduced; and caused them to take the
Engagement to the Commonwealth of England, as it was then, without King or
House of Lords. And so they might have continued in their places still, only
to the Commonwealth of England; but they would not yield to issue out Writs in
any other name, then Lord Baltamore's, because of their Oath to him.

In the year 1654. upon some Instructions and Relations from the Lord Baltamore
out of England, Captain William Stone, and Mr. Thomas Hatton, and the Popish
Counselors, rose up against the Reducement, displacing those whom the States
Commissioners had placed, and introducing the old Popish Council; calling that
which was done by commission from the Council of State in England, Rebellion
against the Lord Baltamore; and those that were Actors in it, Factious and
Seditious Persons: which was done by a Proclamation full of railing terms,
published at Providence in the Church-meeting.

The Commissioners for the Commonwealth of England, hearing that new Orders and
Instructions were come to Maryland from Lord Baltamore, and that one
Scarborough a mischievous instrument of the Lord Baltamore was gone up
Maryland, resolved to come and see in what condition their affairs stood. And
finding a direct contradiction to, and receding from that obedience to the
Commonwealth of England, which was promised, but not performed, by the Lord
Baltamore's Officers, applied themselves in a peaceable and loving way to
persuade them into their due and promised obedience, yet became the said
Commissioners were given to understand, That there was a mischievous design by
Lord Baltamore's Officers and their Accomplices, to apprehend their persons, and
to raise Forces against the lawful Power of the Commonwealth of England;

The said Commissioners desired some to come down from Providence, and some
from Putuxent to guard their Persons, and defend themselves and people from
that power of me^ in Arms, which by this time Captain Stone had pressed in Lord
Baltamore's name, upon pain of death to assist him against the said
Commissioners, and gathered together in a formidable manner. But the said
Commissioners being greatly desirous of peace, and willing to avoid the
shedding of blood, applied themselves to the said Captain Stone* to bring him
to a parley and conference; where, after some arguing, the said Captain Stone
resigned up the Government which he took up in the Lord Baltamore's name, into
the hand of the Commissioners of England; promising to be obedient to that
Government, which by their Authority should be set over them, under his
Highness the Lord Protector.

The ordering and governing the affairs of Maryland, was then committed to
Captain Will. Fuller, Mr. Rich. Preston, Mr. Richard Durand, Mr. Edward Lloyd,
etc. others mentioned in the Commission, who were required to attend the
Engagement of the Commonwealth of England, to keep Courts, etc. and to summon
an Assembly in October following. At this Assembly there was a full and lawful
Representative of the whole Province, where the Act of Reducement of this
Province by Commission from the Council of State in England to Richard Bennet
Esquire Colonel William Cleyborne, Emund Curtis, was freely and fully acknowledged
by the whole Assembly; the Burgess of every respective County and Limit
confirming the same, and submitting thereunto. And did pass, and record an Act,
That whosoever did publish any Writ or Summons, Declaration or Proclamation,
either in the Lord Baltamore 's or any other name, then the Government so
settled as aforesaid had and received, should be accounted a Delinquent against
the Commonwealth of England, and dealt with accordingly.

The same Assembly did make Protestation against a Declaration sent over by his
Lordship, and recorded by his Secretary; wherein the said Lord did declare the
people at Providence, by him called Annardundel, to be Rebels; and strictly
charged his Officers efficaciously to deal with them accordingly: but no ground
or reason thereof could be found, But their not compliance with his Arbitrary
and Popish Government, and the adhering to the Engagement and the Reducement
aforesaid, and Government settled by the aforesaid Commissioners.

After this Assembly, the Province was quiet, and so continued until the later
end of January; about which time, the Ship Golden Fortune, whereof Captain
Tilman was Commander, arrived in Maryland.

Then the Lord Baltamore's Officers, and the Popish party began to divulge
abroad, and boast much of power which came in that Ship from his Highness the
Lord Protector, to confirm the Lord Baltamore's Patent to him, and to
re-establish his Officers in their former places under him: which pretended
power they assumed to themselves; Captain Stone and the rest giving out
threatening speeches, That now the Rebels at Putuxent and Severne, should know
that he was Governor again; giving Order, That neither Act of the said
Assembly should be observed, nor Writ from the power established by the
Commissioners aforesaid obeyed, but what should issue forth in the name of the
Lord Proprietory, viz. Lord Baltamore. And further, the said Captain Stone gave
several Commissions to the Papists and other desperate and bloody fellows, to
muster and raise men in arms to be ready upon all occasions, giving out that he
would go to Putuxent, and seize the Records of the Province at the place where
they were appointed to be kept by an Act of the Assembly, and to apprehend Mr.
Richard Preston also, at whose house they were; which shortly after was
effected by Virtue of a Warrant in Captain Stone's name, without Proclaiming,
or showing any power by which he acted such high Robberies. But in threatening
speeches declared, That they would have the Government; and for the terror of
others, would hang some of the Commissioners, which were entrusted with the
Government by the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England, under his
Highness the Lord Protector, namely, Captain William Fuller, Mr. Richard
Preston, and Mr. William Durand.

About this time Captain William Fuller, Mr. William Durand, Mr. Leonard
Strong, and Mr. Richard Ewen, to whom among others the Government was
committed, sent two Messengers of quality and trust with Letters to Captain
Stone, in a way of peace and love; desiring him to make it known by what power
he surprised the Records; and desiring him, the said Captain Stone* to give an
Answer, as by the Letter, relation thereunto being had, more at large
appears: But the said Captain Stone, instead of giving a satisfactory Answer,
imprisoned the Messengers, and in much wrath and sury said he would show no
power: at last he affirmed, that he acted by a power from Lord Baltamore; and
that the Lord Protector had confirmed the Lord Baltamore's power. If so, Sir,
said one of the Messengers, if it be confirmed, let that appear, and it will
satisfy. Confirmed, said Captain Stone, I Will confirm it; and so sent them
home. After this, the said Captain Stone and his Officers proceeded in their
wicked design; yet to color it over, the said Captain Stone published a
Proclamation to deceive the amazed and distracted people at Putuxent; wherein
he called God to witness, that he intended not to use any hostile way to them
or the people at Providence. Which Protestation how false and feigned it was,
the following proceedings of himself and Officers, will clearly evidence to all
the World: for notwithstanding this Proclamation and Protestation, the said
Captain Stone sent up to Putuxent one William Eltonhead and Josias Fendal, and
with them twenty men in Arms, who did beset and entered the house of Mr. Richard
Preston, with intent to surprise him; but not finding him at home, took away in
Guns, Swords and Ammunition to the value of 30 l. sterling; rans^cked every
place in and about the house, to seek for the said Richard Preston; and as some
of the Company then said, with purpose to hang him for his rebellion against
the Lord Baltamore. At the same time they surprised John Sutton, who was
appointed by the Assembly and Secretary to attend the Records, for any that
should have occasion to use them, either for search or Copy; and carried him
away Prisoner with such Guns and Ammunition he had, and kept him about twenty
days; even so they dealt with Lieutenant Peter Johnson; several other houses
at Putuxent, they served in the like kind. And when they were desired to show
by what power or Commission they so acted, they would in a proud bravado clap
their hands on their swords, and say, Here is a Commission. This was no sooner
effected at Putuxent, but presently they mustered in Arms two hundred or two
hundred and fifty men at the house of the aforesaid Eltonhead, which Eltonhead
and Fendal sent up by night several Boats with armed men, and forced many of
Putuxen whether they would or not to go with them upon their warlike Expedition
to Providence; taking all the Guns, Powder, Shot, and Provision, they could
anywhere find. And when they had done what they pleased at Putuxent, they bent
all their Forces toward Providence, the chief place of the residence of most
of the Commissioners, and people that were forced out of Virginia by Sir
William Barkely for conscience sake. Some of the said Company marching by Land,
others by Water; they that marched by Land, did much spoil and robbery in all
the Houses and Plantations where they came, breaking open Doors, Trunks and
Chests. In this barbarous manner they carried it for about forty miles.

Now again the Commissioners at Providence sent other Messengers with a Letter
to Captain Stone, still complaining his proceedings, and seeking the knowledge
of his power; and that some better accommodation might be attended to prevent
the ruin and desolation of the whole Province, which this course was very
likely to bring to pass. If he were resolved to come to no Parley or Treaty,
they protested in the said writing, that by the help of God, they were resolved
to commit themselves into the hand of God, and rather die like men, then live
like slaves. This was also rejected by the said Captain Stone and his
Accomplices, the Messengers apprehended, their Boat seized, and only three of
six escaped to bring the report of their desperate and bloody design, and that
they were upon their march in a hostile way.

Capt. Stone and his Company still drew nearer to Providence, unto a place
called Herring-Creek, where they apprehended one of the Commissioners, and
forced another man of quality to fly for his life, having threatened to hang
him up-at-his own door; and not finding the man, affrighted his wife, and
plundered the house of Ammunition and Provision, threatening still what they
would do to the people at Providence, and that they would force the rebellious
factious Roundheads to submit; and then they would show their power.

Having now left the Country behind them bare of men, save only such as fled
into the Woods from their cruelty and rapine, as also of Arms and Ammunition;
the poor women urging this to them, What should they do if the Indians should
come upon them, being thus stripped of men and Arms to defend them; and in what
a sad and sorrowful condition they were left: These merciless men answered
scoffingly, It matters not, your sorrow is our joy.

And indeed, it is too apparent, that the Indians waited upon their motions,
and by examination it was found at Providence, that the Indians were resolved
in themselves, or set on by the Popish faction, or rather both together to fall
upon us: as indeed after the fight they did, besetting houses, killing one man,
and taking another prisoner.

Now the people at Providence perceiving such a tempest ready to fall upon
them, and all messages rejected, prepared for their coming, looking up, and
crying to the Lord of Hosts and King of Ston, for counsel, strength and
courage, being resolved in the strength of God to stand on their Guard, and
demand an account of these proceedings, seeing no other remedy, for so great a
mischief, could be found.

About this time Captain Stone sent two men to publish a Proclamation quite
against the Law established by the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of
England, and against an Act of a lawful Assembly; which being read, and having
no other Treaty to offer, they were quietly dismissed to their own Company, to
whom they might have gone if they would.

That night Captain Stone and his Army appeared in the River of Severne at
Providence, with eleven or twelve Vessels greater and lesser, some of which had
plundered by the way, in which their whole Army were wafted.

Capt. Fuller and the Council of War appointed at Providence Mr. Will. Durand,
Secretary, to go aboard the Golden Lion which then lay at Anchor in the River,
and to fix a Proclamation in the main mast, directed to Captain Heamans,
Commander of the said Ship, wherein he was required in the name of the Lord
Protector, and Commonwealth of England, and for the maintenance of the just
Libertyes, Lives, and Estates of the free Subjects thereof, against an unjust
power, to be aiding and assisting in this service.

The said Captain Heamans at first was unwilling; but afterward seeing the
equity of the Cause, and the groundless proceedings of the Enemy, he offered
himself, Ship, and Men for that service, to be directed by the said William
Durand.

The Enemy was come within the command of the Ship at the shutting in of the
evening: the Captain of the Ship was required to command them aboard by a piece
of Ordnance. The Enemy with a great noise rejected the warning. Then another
Piece was levelled where they heard the Boats rowing; the shot whereof lighting
something near, but doing no hurt; A Messenger came aboard; but had nothing of
any message to deliver, save only, that Captain Stone thought the Captain of
the Ship had been satisfied. To which the Captain answered, Satisfied, with
what? I never saw any power Captain Stone had, to do as he has done; but the
superscription of a Letter. I must, and will, appear for these in a good Cause.

That night the Enemy run into the Creek, where they landed out of the reach of
the Ship.

But in the morning, all their Vessels were blocked up by a small Barque with
two pieces of Ordinance, which was commanded to lie in the mouth of the Creek,
and so kept from coming out.

The same day being the first day of the week, and the 25 of March, the Enemy
appeared in a body upon a narrow neck of the Land, near their Vessels, and with
Drums and shoutings said, Come ye Rogues, come ye Rogues, Roundheaded Dogs;
which caused the Captain of the Ship to give fire at them, and forced them to
march further off, into the neck of Land.

In the mean time Capt. Will. Fuller with his Company came up the River with
shoutings and courageous rejoycings, and landed with a hundred and twenty men,
six mile distant from the Enemy: and immediately sent away all their Sioaps and
Boats, committing themselves into the hand of God: he marched directly where
the Enemy lay waiting for him. The Enemies Sentry shot; immediately they
appeared in order. Captain Fuller still expecting, that then at last, possibly
they might give a reason of their coming, commanded his men upon pain of death
not to shoot a Gun, or give the first onset; setting up the Standard of the
Commonwealth of England: against which, the Enemy shot five or six Guns, and
killed one man in the front before a shot was made by the other. Then the word
was given, In the Name of God fall on; God is our Strength, that was the Word
for Providence: the Marylanders Word was Hey for Saint Mary's. The Charge was
fierce and sharp for the time; but through the glorious presence of the Lord of
Hosts manifested in and toward his poor oppressed people, the Enemy could not
endure, but gave back; and were so effectually charged home, that they were all
routed, turned their backs, threw down their Arms, and begged mercy. After the
first Volley of shot, a small Company of the Enemy, from behind a great tree
fallen, galled us, and wounded diverse of our men, but were soon beaten off. Of
the whole company of the Marylanders there escaped only four or five, who run
away out of the Army to carry News to their Confederates, Captain Stone,
Colonel Price, Captain Gerrard. Captain Lewis, Captain Hendall, Captain
Guither, Major Chandler, and all the rest of the Counselors Officers and
Soldiers of the Lord Baltamore* among whom, both Commanders and Soldiers, a
great number being Papists, were taken, and so were all their Vessels, Arms,
Ammunition, provision; about fifty men slain and wounded. We lost only two in
the field; but two died since of their wounds. God did appear wonderful in the
field, and in the hearts of the people; all confessing him to be the only
Worker of this victory and deliverance.

Examinatur per me, William Durand, Secretary of MARYLAND.

The Postscript.
THus God our Strength appeared for us; and the blood which they thirsted after
in others, was given to themselves to drink; the miseries which they threatened
to the innocent, fell upon the guilty; the pit which they dug for others,
themselves fell into; the cords which they brought to bind us, bound
themselves. This is the Lord's doing, it may well be mavelous in our eyes.

What has been written, is but a very abstract of those great and various
providence of God toward his people, and against Antichrist; a great Volume
would not contain the wonders which the Lord himself has wrought and
manifested to the hearts of his people in this dispensation. The sum is, Satan
and his seed, rising up against the seed of the woman, bruises the heel of
Christ, but destroys himself utterly. The further evil men proceed in their
own way, the nearer to destruction: so is it with all flesh, it works it self
into ruin, through the adored depths of the wisdom of God.

Those who are acquainted with the clear and familiar appearances of God to his
people in times of distress, can understand and rejoice in what may be now a
little further hinted.

First, the Lord confounded the Language of Babel in the hearts, projects, and
consultations of his people, when they were devising to defend themselves from
this danger, till they came to that condition of Jehosaphat, We know not what
to do, but our eyes are toward thee; will thou judge them? for we have no
strength against this multitude.

Secondly, Now the Lord gives testimony from himself in the Spirits of many of
his Saints, in a wonderful, plain, yet glorious manner; (for the secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him) so that as well women as men spoke, or rather
God spoke in them an express testimony what should be the issue of this
conflict, that is, glory to God in the highest, deliverance to his people,
destruction to Babylon, Songs unto Sion: which was revealed so powerfully,
evidently, and certainly, that it ravished the hearts of some, astonished
others, and encouraged the heart both of General, Captains, and Soldiers, as
well as others that could not fight, to a Triumph before the Engagement, and
the enjoyment of a victory by the assurance of faith, before one stroke of the
battle.

The bow of the Lord was made quite bare, to be seen of all that had an eye to
see, and his arrows were seen to be sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies
before they fell under him. God made the feeble to be as David, and David as
God: they were carried out in the strength of the Lord, who gave this testimony
to one of the Captains, just as the Enemy came up, The Victory is yours; but
God shall be seen, and not man in it. After the battle, what acknowledgement of
God in is was in every mean Soldiers mouth, as well as the Commanders, what
praising of God, is beyond expression. They run through all the Company, Give
God the glory, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

FINIS.

