LESSONS Moral and Christian, FOR YOUTH AND OLD AGE.

In TWO SERMONS Preached at Guildhall Chapel, London.

Chiefl^ intended for the Use of this City.

Published at Request.

By JOHN STRYP, M. A. Vicar of Low-Leyton in Essex

LONDON, Printed for I. Wyat at the Rose in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

TO THE READER.
THO the publishing of Discourses of this Nature need no Apology, being
designed for so good an End, to Reclaim, if possible, this degenerate Age of
ours; yet in truth the Cause of the Author's Printing these Sermons, was a
Letter sent him from some well-disposed Person, wholly unknown to him: Which is
as follows: SIR,
Hoping that you will not be offended at my Resolution, I make bold to acquaint
you therewith; Which is as follows. That whereas you did Preach before the
Honorable the Lord Mayor on Sunday last, it so fell out that I was then your
Auditor. And truly I want Words to express the Satisfaction I took in that
Discourse, and withal do judge, that it would be of mighty Advantage to Aged
Persons to have that Sermon made Public, there being not as I know of, any
Discourse of that Nature made public; especially in Words so plain and
expressive of the Duty and Demeanor incumbent on them. And therefore Sir, I am
bold to tell you, that as that Sermon was then taken in Characters, so I intend
to make it public, unless your self prevent my so doing, by causing it to be
Printed by your own Order. Which indeed I rather desire, since it must needs
come more perfect out of your Hand, than it can out of the hands of one, who
writing in haste cannot but commit some Oversights: And especially since you
mentioned another Sermon before Preached in that Audience, which was addressed to
Young Persons. Which Sermon I did did not hear; but if there be in it those
Marks and Tokens of a Christian Spirit as appeared in that other which was
addressed to Aged Men, it is pity but the same should be made public with it.
And I hope you will do it, if you think fit to prevent this my Resolution,
which I shall forbear to put in execution, till about a Month be past, that I
may understand your Determination.

Sir, I humbly beg your Pardon for this Boldness, and hope you will not take it
in ill part, since it is the Good of Mankind, that constrains me thereunto,

Who am yours I.




This Letter induced me to make these Two Discourses Public, hoping they may
prove as useful as they were by that Gentleman supposed to be. Tho I confess I
have not been hasty to do it, till now a good while after, upon a particular
occasion, Preaching one of them again, some that heard it thought it so
seasonable for their own Spiritual Needs, that they desired to have it to Read,
Consider, and make their Better use of; which is the True Cause of hastening
this Impression. And thus wishing God's Blessing to accompany the reading of
this Little Book, I bid the Reader Farewell.

J. STRYP.

Admonitions TO YOUTH.
TIT. II.6. Young Men likewise exhort to be sober minded.


THIS Honorable Auditory will excuse the Subject I have taken for my present
Discourse, when they shall consider, how much the Future Good of the Universe
depends upon the Sobriety of Youth. If they that are to come next upon the
Stage of the World, to act their Parts there, would but avoid the Folly and
Wickedness of the present Age, and frame themselves to better and wiser Courses
than are now commonly taken, how much happier would the Condition of Mankind
be? For it is a very bad World we live in, (that we all feel, and as many as are
Good, lament). And such Root have Vices got in the Hearts of Men, that there is
little hope to see any Amendment in our Days. And there is no Way but one to
mend this Degenerate World under the mighty Grace of God; and that is, that
Care be taken, that the next Generation be made better.

And to make that so, Youth must be better Principled, and better minded.
Extraordinary Care must be taken of the Education of the Younger Sort; that
they imbibe in their tender years Sobriety and Virtue; That their Souls may be
imbued with a true Fear of God, and with right Apprehensions of Virtue and
Vice. They must be taught from their earliest Days to hate Sin; and they must
be shown the Baseness, the Disorders, the Irregularities and Mischievousness of
it. And they must be inwardly convinced of the Amiableness, and the Rectitude,
and the Profitableness of a sober and just Life and Conversation. They must be
learned to have a great Sense and Awe of Almighty God upon their Minds, and to
make a great Conscience to Love their Neighbors, and to do them all exact
Justice and Equity; and to be willing to be at Pains and Charges to do Offices
of Friendship and Compassion to Men in their Necessities.

Could Young Men, who are the Expectation of the next Generation, and who must
Act and bear their Parts in that* could they, I say, be thus Disciplined, What
a Golden Age would return after this cruel Iron Age of Ours?

This will be sufficient to justify the Subject I have taken in hand to Treat
of before you. Worthy Citizens, namely, To give some Seasonable Admonitions to
Youth; which is such a considerable Part of this great City: Some Thousands of
Young Persons being transplanted hither every Year from all Parts of the
Nation, to learn Trades and Ocupations, and for the necessary Services of it.
And these are in the next Generation to supply your Places, and to be the
Traders, Members and Magistrates of London. The Wisdom and Sobriety of the
Inhabitants whereof has such a notable Influence upon the Welfare and
Prosperity not only of the City it self, but of the whole Nation.

Let us therefore review the Text, and the Occasion of it. Young Men exhort to
be Sober-minded.

St. Paul had sent forth Titus to be a Preacher of the Gospel, and to instruct
Men in the Ways of Christian Piety and Peace. And here in this Epistle to him
he is instructing the Instructor, and directing him in a faithful Discharge of
his Ministry. And particularly he admonishes him to apply himself and his
Instructions to the People with respect unto their Age. To those that were well
grown in years: Aged Men, Ver. 2. That he should exhort those to be Sober,
Grave, Temperate, etc. Aged Women, Ver. 3. that he should remind them to be in
Behavior as became Holiness, not false Accusers, etc. And then Ver. 6. the
Apostle directs him also to suit his Instructions to the Young as well as to
the Old: Young Men likewise exhort to be Sober-minded.

There be various Vices incident to Persons according to their several Ages.
The Elder Sort is addicted to such and such evil Ways and evil Qualities: And
the Younger and more Gay, to many other sorts of Folly. And particularly as
their Spirits are more hot and vigorous, so they are more violently carried out
toward external Objects, that promise them Pleasure in the Enjoyment. And they
cannot bear any Restraint. They must have their Desires, however inconvenient
or unlawful they be. Their Lusts, and their Appetites and Passions, must be
satisfied. And they will break through all Bars and Impediments whatsoever for
the Gratification thereof. The Pleasures and Vanities of the World impetuously
assault them; and they cannot withstand. And they want an Ear to listen to
Reason and good Counsel, whenever these would stop them in their Careers.
Their Humors must be gratified, whatever come of it. And it is not Counsel and
Consideration, nothing but Force, can keep them in. And therefore it is so
necessary for such to be under Tutors and Governors.

And this is the proper Weakness and Frailty of Young Men; Great Addictedness
to Pleasure, and Violent Pursuits of it. Now the contrary to this is Modesty or
Sobriety. Which therefore Titus is bid here to take care to exhort them to. To
be Sober-minded, (...). It signifies to use a Bridle, to be Modest, and to keep
in our Lusts and our Passions within their due Bounds and Limits. That we
gratify them not at any time, or in any thing, whatever Cravings they make, if
God forbid it, if Reason disallow it, if it draw Sin or Inconveniency after it;
if God should be thereby disobeyed, or Religion dishonored, or if it bring a
Guilt upon Conscience.

And thus you have seen what it is to be Sober-minded, and what Reason the
Apostle had to advise Titus to exhort Young Men so to be. My Business now shall
be only I. To do that which the Apostle here exhorts Titus, and in him all
Gospel Ministers to do, namely, To instruct Young Men to be Sober-minded. II.
That my Exhortation may take the better Effect, I shall propound to them diverse
Motives and Considerations. And III. I shall Conclude all with some short
Address to them.


I.
To Exhort Young Men to be Sober-minded. And they have certainly great need of
it, because there are so few that are so. The younger sort is sadly corrupted,
and vitiated ever from their tender Age. They have imbibed loose Principles,
that may best comport with loose Inclinations, and suit to their Lusts. And as
they grow up in Years, they grow up as fast in Folly and Rashness. They do not
love Advice, and Detest sober Counsel, and hate to be checked in their Pursuits
and Appetites: and are apt to despise and scoff at their Elders, and to think
themselves far wiser than they: That they may the more securely and
uncontrollably follow their Vanities. And so they commonly stain their Souls
with grievous Blots of Sin and Wickedness. It is a sad Consideration indeed to
observe how viciously disposed the Youth of our Age for the most part is. And
it is a rare thing to see a Man young in Years, Sober, and Modest in his
Manners, Ingenuous in his Behavior, choosing good Courses, and treading in the
Steps of Virtue. This I say is somewhat rare to see; scarce one in a Thousand.
And this I speak, not only of the Youth of the common sort, but of the
Superior Ranks and Degrees among us: the Children of Worshipful and Honorable
Families: Who, if they live, must have a great Influence upon many their
Dependents, their Servants, Tenants, and Inferiors, that will follow their
Example. So that whole Towns, whole Counties, the whole Kingdom is in danger to
be corrupted and spoiled by their Means.

And therefore surely there is high Reason most earnestly to deal with Youth by
all the Ways and Means possible, to Season their early Years with Sobriety, to
excite them to be Wise, and to lay Restraint upon themselves, and to prevail
upon them not to run out into those Excesses of Riot and Wantonness that others
do. To all Young Men therefore, I say, as St. Paul did to young Timothy; Flee
also youthful Lusts. But follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure Heart, 2 Timothy II.22. Flee these Lusts, as
ye would flee from a Serpent. For they have as much deadly Venom. But that my
Exhortation may take the better Effect,

II.
I shall in the next place propound diverse Motives and Considerations for this
Purpose.

1. Let young Men consider Seriously what Obligations lie upon them from God.
Oh! let them remember how peculiarly good and gracious he has been to them.
And will not they express their Sense of Gratitude to this their good God, by
being Sober, and keeping his Commandments? It was his Goodness that brought
them into the World, and provided them kind and indulgent Parents, that
cherished them, and most tenderly brought them up in their helpless Infancy.
Their helpless Infancy I say. For a Humane Creature of all others, when it is
first born, is most unable to help it self, and must inevitably perish from the
very Womb, without the mere Mercy of God incline others to interpose their
tender Care of it, to feed, and cloth, and keep it warm, and defend it from
Injury. This is God's Goodness, thus to incline the Hearts of others to us in
this poor forlorn State wherein we are cast, when we first come into the World.

And it is God's Goodness still to us, that under all the Troubles and Sorrows
we create our Parents and Friends, and our many unhansome and disobliging
Carriages toward them, while we are thus young, their Tenderness and Patience
toward us still perseveres and holds out. And as we grow up in Days and
Months, and Years, they take care of our Youth, to Educate and Instruct us, and
to Supply us with whatsoever we need, Streightning themselves for our
Accommodation; and procure to have us informed in such Knowledge, Arts and
Sciences, as may enable us to provide for our Selves, and to live comfortably
when they are dead and gone, and can take no more Care of us.

These Instincts of Love, Tenderness and Kindness, are all owing to God, that
inspired our Friends and Relations with these Indulgences toward us.

Moreover, it is his Goodness to thee, O Young Man, that he has made thee a
Rational Creature; given thee Reason and Understanding, and advanced thee above
the Rank of inferior Creatures; That teaches thee more than the Beasts of the
Earth, and makes thee Wiser than the Fouls of Heaven, Job xxxv.11. It is
Elihu's Contemplation.

Again, It is his Goodness to thee, O young Man, that when thou have not
remembered thy Creator, but have so often, and so sadly forgotten him, he has
spared thee, and not punished thee with some grievous Judgment in the Act and
Commission of thy Sin. Thou have broken his holy and awful Commandments (it may
be from the first Commandment to the last) notwlthstanding thou have known
them, and been taught them by thy Parents, and by thy Instructers. Nay, and in
the mean while thou have been so far from Repentance, that thou have hardly
been sensible what a young Rebel thou have been to thy great and good God. And
yet he has forbore to strike thee, as he justly might.

This, and a great deal more might be added to show, what mighty Obligations
young Men lie under to their Maker. And should not this stir them up to love
and fear him, and to restrain themselves from doing any thing to offend and
anger him; but rather to lead their future Lives in that Sobriety, Care and
Watchfulness, that would be so acceptable to him?

2. Young Men have a Prospect of a longer Tract of Time to live, than the more
Elderly. And therefore Sobriety is necessary for them, that they may order and
dispose themselves, that the Series and Course of their Lives may be
comfortable and happy to them. Which it cannot be, if Men begin with Vice and
Licentiousness. Man's Life is a Race. Now if a Man were to run a Race, and
should set out with all the Violence and Irregularity that ever he could, he
were like to Tire before he were got half way: And so should render all the
rest of his Way very wearisome and irksome to him. But if he began with more
Deliberation, and set out with more Sobriety, he would with more Ease and
Comfort hold out all along the rest of the Way he was to go. And just so it is
with our Lives. Most Men set out this Race of humane Life with a violent
Propension to Evil, and a continual Gratification of the Lusts and Desires of
the Flesh; Spend their Health, and their Credit, and their Estates oftentimes
too, in Debauchery and Disorder. And so the Thread of their Lives is either cut
off in the midst, or if it be not, all the rest is spent in Vexation and
Trouble, in Sickness and Sorrow, in Poverty, and a Thousand Miseries, that our
first and early Follies have drawn upon us.

And therefore, O young Man, as thou would pass that Life that God has
allotted thee in this World, (how long or how short soever it be) with Peace
and Comfort, the best way is to begin it well, and to avoid those Follies and
Errors that are so apt to defile that Age. For

3. Consider further, how the Sins of our Youth will create much Uneasiness and
Sorrow afterward, when we grow further into years. And this will appear in
these two respects.

First, God sometimes punishes a Man many years after for the Iniquities of
his Youth. There be many Afflictions and Calamities that befall us from the
Hand of God, which make our Lives not seldom very grievous unto us. And in our
Search into the Causes of them, one Rank of them must be the Sins of our Youth.
To this it was that Job attributed his present Extremities, Job xiii.26. Thou
make me to possess the Iniquities of my Youth. Job was a good Man. He set
God's Fear before his Eyes, and particularly he was a Man of great Charity and
large Compassion to all poor, necessitous People. And that made him speak so
largely in his own Justification. But yet he was it seems, in his early Age
carried away as well as others with youthful Lusts and Pleasures, and did not
remember his Creator as he should have done in those days. And this he
concludes was a Reason why God laid his Hand so heavy upon him: Thou make me
to possess the Iniquities of my Youth. And that is the Observation that Zophar
one of Job's Friends, makes of those that begin early in Sin, That their Bones
are full of the Sins of their Youth, Job xx.11. It seems to mean, those
Diseases that the Sins of Men's Youth oftentimes leave behind them in their
Bodies. It sticks to their very Bones; and is appointed by God to be a severe
Remembrancer, as long as they live, of the vile and wretched Courses that they
took when they were young.

Why did David pray to God not to remember the Sins of his Youth? Remember not,
Lord, the Sins of my Youth, Psalm. xxv.7. Remember them not now, O Lord, in mine
elder Age to punish me for them. David had left the Vanities of his Youth, and
was become a Man after God's own Heart; and yet David met with very great
Afflictions and Sufferings; and God seemed ^n them to have remembered the Sins
and Follies of his Youth. For God, tho he Pardons Sins, and imputes not unto
us our former Iniquities, where he sees a penitent and reformed Heart and Life,
yet it is seldom but he takes some temporary Punishments upon Man for them
first or last. As he pardoned the Sin of the Golden Calf, yet when he Visited,
he would visit upon the Israelites that Sin. And therefore a good Man as long
as he lives in his Prayers and Devotions, among the rest of his Sins, prays for
the Pardon of his Youthful Sins, and that God would be merciful to him, and not
punish him for them; which he very often does, to the rendering the Christian's
Life bitter unto him, it may be as long as he lives.

Secondly, The Sins of your Youth will create much Uneasiness and Sorrow to
you, in respect of the Reflections that your Consciences will make against you
many years after. The Remembrance of your former Sins will be like a heavy
Burden upon your Conscience. Conscience will put you in mind, it may be twenty,
or thirty, or forty years after, of the Wickedness of your Youth; of your Lies
and Shifts to conceal your Extravagances, of your Disobedience and Obstinacy to
your indulgent Parents, of your Scoffing at their good Counsels, of your
Stealing from them to spend upon your Lusts, of the Griefs and Afflictions you
have caused to their gray Heads; and of all the rest of your Uncleanness, of
your Debaucheries and Excesses. And if you have any Grace in you, and have not
utterly sinned away Conscience, these things will now and then fly in your
Face, and be like so many Worms, to bite and sting your very Hearts.

I dare appeal for the Truth of this unto your Selves, (as many as God has
given Grace unto afterward to grow wiser and better) how your youthful Lusts
and Sins do rise up sometimes and reproach and upbraid you; and the thoughts
that you have been so bad, and committed so much Sin in secret, do still by
Fits molest and trouble you. I have known a Person that has condoled to me
some particular Follies and Errors of his Youth thirty or forty years after,
with excessive Bitterness and Anguish of Mind. And tho, as he told me, he had
most heartily repented of those Rashnesses and Sins, yet the Conscience thereof
made his whole Life uncomfortable to him, and so interrupted his Devotions and
Services of God, that he could not look up to him with any Comfort, but was so
Self-condemned, that he was afraid that God would throw all his Service like
Dung back into his Face, because they proceeded from so unworthy a Wretch as he
had been.

And therefore let that be another Motive to young People to take heed now to
themselves, that they preserve themselves in Sobriety and Virtue, that they may
not afterward have such severe Reckonings, and lay a Foundation of so much
Trouble and Sorrow to imbitter their future Days.

4. On the other hand, consider the Comforts that will arise to Age from an
innocent well-spent-Youth. When we come to Years, and begin to grow Gray, and
our Age puts us in mind of our Mortality, and that we must not, can not tarry
much longer in this World then we begin, I trust, to think seriously what sort
of Entertainment we are like to meet with in the other World, and how God will
look upon us when we come to dye; and how it is like to fare with us to all
Eternity. And this will put us upon thinking on our past Lives. And our
Thoughts will run back to our early years; how we led our Lives then; how God
was sought and served by us from our Youth. And if after this Search we find,
that God's Grace restrained us from youthful Follies, and that we remembered our
Creator in the Days of our Youth; that we were just and honest, sober and
clean, then there cannot happen a greater comfort to us: It will mightily
strengthen our hopes, that we are among the Number of God's Elect, and that our
Lot is among the Just.

Besides, the Comfort of our Youth spent soberly and well, appears in this,
that a Man has kept up his Credit and Reputation throughout his whole Life;
that from his Youth to his Old Age he has constantly walked as became a good
Man; that he has never stained nor bespotted his Life with deliberate and
habitual Sins and Evils: that his Life has been all of a piece, and his Youth
has not shamed his Old Age. What a Comfort and a Rejoicing will this be? There
were two Sorts of Old Men among the Jews: One Sort were such as had lived
loosly in their younger days, and afterward took up, and grew Sober and Wise.
But there was another sort among them, whose Youth and Old Age both were well
spent. They began well, and so they continued. These two Sorts of Old Men in
one of the great Feasts at the Temple, used to stand in one of the Courts, and
pronounce these Words: The former sort said thus, Blessed be our Old Age, that
has made amends for the Sins of our Youth. But the latter said with more
Comfort, Blessed be our Youth, that has not shamed our Old Age. For indeed
there is a Shame belongs to a Man as long as he lives, for the Intemperance and
Vices of his younger Years. But when any of us have had the Grace to spend our
young days well, it will be a Reputation and Honor unto our Old Age. And the
Consideration of it, as it is matter of Thankfulness to God, that has given us
such Grace in our Youth, so it is matter of Peace and Comfort unto us, that we
have kept up a fair Name in the World all our Days.

5. Young Men are subject to Death as well as the Elder. Nay, sometimes the
younger are taken off, when those that are gone further into Age and Years
remain behind. And therefore ought not they to be Sober, that whenever they
dye, they may not be taken unprovided? It is a foolish thing to put off the
Purposes of a good Life on this Score, that Men are young, and may have many
years more to live, because nothing is so uncertain as the Life of Man. And we
see Thousands of Instances of Men, young in Years, strong in Body, vigorous in
Health, cut down suddenly by Fevers, or some Accident or other: And they dye
and go to their long home, as well as such who have lived to Gray Hairs. And
what a sad thing would it be for a young Man to suffer himself to be so cheated
out of Heaven and Happiness, because of the Conceit that he was young, and
might have lived many years more? Oh! it ought to be every Man's Care above all
his other Cares, to think of Death, and to prepare for the main Chance; that
when he goes out of this World, he may pass into a better, and leave a good
Name behind them. And of all the Madnesses of Youth, certainly this is one of
the greatest, that they are so apt to put away the Day of their Death from
them; and to indulge to all Sensuality, as tho they were sure of many future
years; and to cry, that it will be time enough hereafter to grow Sober. And
then (Alas!) Death comes on a sudden, and surprises them with all their Sins
and Faults, and Follies about them. And so they are undone to all Eternity.

And therefore it is the only wise Course for young Men to take, Viz. To Fear
God in their Youth, and to Depart from Evil at this present Time, that in case
Death should overtake them, as it has done others as young and flourishing as
they, it may not endanger their Everlasting Well-being.

6. To name no more, in order to a sober Conversation, let young Men consider
some notable Instances, of Persons that have been exemplarily good from their
Youth. For, thanks be to God, however corrupt the Generality of Youth are and
have been, yet there have been some admirable Instances, of young Men that have
begun, and held out well in a holy, chaste, wise and Godly Conversation. And
methinks these Examples should inflame Youth to labor to imitate them, and to
live and to do as they have done. Youth is apt to Aspire, and to be Ambitious,
and to reach after high things. Certainly there is no Ambition, no Aspiring,
like that of endeavoring to come up to that Perfection and Glory, that some
young Men like themselves, have done.

What a brave young Person was Obadiah, one of Ahab's Courtiers. A wicked
Prince, and a wicked Court; but yet Obadiah was not infected by either; but
feared the Lord from his Youth, when almost all the rest had cast him behind
their Backs. He would not turn Idolater, when the King and every one else did.
No, he feared the Lord from his Youth. So he tells Elijah; But I thy Servant
fear the Lord from my Youth, 1 Kin. xviii.11. And that made him do such an
adventurous Act, to hide God's Prophets by Fifty in a Cave, and feed them with
Bread and Water, when Iezabel had slain so many as she could find; and probably
had made it Death to conceal them. And what a World of Good did that single
good Man in those wicked Times? And that chiefly, because of that Fear of God
which possessed his Mind from his Youth; and so influenced all his after-Age.

Again, What an incomparable Person was young King Josiah; and what admirable
Service did he do for God and his Honor, when his Kingdom had been by the
Default of former Kings, so polluted with Idolatry? What a Reformation did he
make in Judah, when he was very Young? What Zeal for God was he endued withal;
and how sweet is the Remembrance of him unto this Day, through so many
successive Generations of the World? That a Man so young in years should have
such a great Sense of God upon his Soul, and have the Courage to do so much for
him. Of him thus does Jesus the Son of Syrach speak, Ecclus. xlix.1, 2. The
Remembrance of Josias is like the Composition of the Perfume that is made by
the Art of the Apothecary. It is sweet as Honey in all Mouths, and as Music at
a Banquet of Wine. He behaved himself uprightly in the Conversion of his People
(he means from their Idolatry) and took away the Abominations of Iniquity. He
directed his Heart unto the Lord, and in the Time of the Ungodly he established
the Worship of God. And that which was the Glory of all the rest, this he did
even in his young and tender Age. In the Eighth Year of his Reign (that is when
he was but Sixteen years old) while he was yet young, he began to seek after
the God of David his Father, 2 Chronicles. xxxiv.3. And in the Twelfth Year (that
is, being but Twenty years of Age) he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from
the high Places and the Groves, etc.

Job also from his tenderest Age was disposed and addicted to Piety. He loved,
and was tender of the Poor even from his Childhood; as he tells us himself: If
I have withheld the Poor from their Desire, or have caused the Eyes of the
Widow to fail: Or have eaten my Morsel my self alone, and the Fatherless has
not eaten thereof, Job xxxi.16, 17, 18. And then observe what follows, For
from my YOUTH, he (that is, the Fatherless) was brought up with me as with a
Father. (From his Youth he was as a Father to the Fatherless.) And I have
guided her (that is, the Widow before spoken of) from my Mother's Womb. From my
Mother's Womb; he means, from his very first Age, when he was very young, he
had a Love and a Compassion for poor Widows; and when he was but a Child, he
showed himself a Father to Orphans. And as he grew on in years, still he
persevered in the same charitable, compassionate Sense of their Wants; and
according to his large Ability and Authority, relieved them.

Such another early good Man was Jesus the Son of Syrach, who was the Compiler
of that excellent Book of Ecclesiasticus, so replenisht with Sentences of great
Wisdom, and Rules of Admirable Morality and good Life. This Man from his Youth
thirsted after Wisdom, (that is, the Fear of God) and prayed to God to bestow
it on him; and added his own Endeavor, and obtained it. Which he thus relates
to us himself, Ecclus. Li.13, etc. When I was yet young, or ever I went abroad,
I desired Wisdom openly in my Prayer. I prayed for her before the Temple, and
will seek her out even to the End. Even from the Flower till the Grape was
ripe, (that is, from the Spring of his Years till the Autumn of his Age) my
Heart delighted in her; my Foot went the right way. From my Youth up I sought
after her. And so he goes on relating his Youth spent in the Pursuit of Virtue.
I purposed to do after her, and earnestly I followed that which was good. My
Soul has wrestled with her, and in my Doing I was exact. I stretched forth my
hands to the Heavens above, and bewailed mine Ignorances of her. I directed my
Soul unto her, and I found her in Pureness; (that is, in my Pure Age, before
the Defilements of Age corrupted it) I have had my Heart joined with her from
the Beginning. And this excellent young Man was Jesus the Son of Syrach.

But there was another young Jesus, greater than this Jesus, even our ever
blessed Lord and Master CHRIST JESUS. We have not much recorded to us of his
young years, till he came to display himself for the Messiah about the Age of
Thirty. But what is set down in Holy Writ before that time concerning him,
shows, how early his Piety appeared. It is said of the Days next after his
Infancy, That the Child grew, and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with Wisdom,
and the Grace of God was upon him, Luke ii.40. However weak in Body, young in
years he was, yet he was Strong in Spirit, and filled with Wisdom. And the next
News you have of him was, that being but Twelve Years Old, when he and his
Parents came to Jerusalem to Worship God, he goes into the Temple, and sits
among the Doctors to confer with them upon Points of Religion; and thought
himself obliged so early to be occupied about his Father's Business. As he
tells his Parents that had lost him, and found him at last in the Temple; Wist
ye not that I must be about my Father's Business?

To all these admirable Examples of excellent Young men in former Times, I will
add one modern one; And that is of K. Edward VI. our English Josiah. Of his
rare Parts, and extraordinary Learning even in his Childhood, I shall not
speak: But of his good Disposition and Religious Mind, I shall make a little
mention, for the enflaming of Youth, (especially Youth of Nobility and Blood)
to labor as much as they can to be such as he was. He was addicted to a Fear
of God from his youngest years. And that appeared in the mighty Reverence he
bore to the Holy Scriptures. When something he was minded to have was somewhat
higher than he could well reach, and one of his Play-fellows brought him a
great Bible to stand upon, he refused it with Indignation, abhorrring to show
any such Irreverence toward that Holy Book, as he conceived it would be, if he
should have trod upon it.

He came to the Crown at the Age of Nine Years, and Two or Three Months; and
there is an Author, that lived in those Times, Bal de Vir. Illustrib.
and knew that young King well, that at his Coronation, when Three Swords were
presented to him, in token of the Three Kingdoms to which he was advanced, the
Royal Youth said to the Nobles about him, that there was one Sword yet wanting.
And when they asked him what that was, he answered, The Bible. That Book, added
he, is the Sword of the Spirit, and much to be preferred before these other
Swords. He that Rules without it, is not to be called God's Minister, nor ought
to bear the Name of King. Under that we ought to Live, to Fight, to Govern. And
when he had said these, and the like Words, he commanded the Bible to be
brought and with the greatest Reverence to be carried before him.

When he was between Eleven and Twelve Years of Age, he wrote, without the Help
of any Instructor, an ingenious Tract in French, against the Abuses put upon
the World by Popery. Wherein by Reason and Variety of Places of Scripture, he
confuted most of the Popish Errors.

Throughout his Short Reign, he had a peculiar Care of Religion, and gave all
Encouragement to the right Reforming and Settling of it on Scripture
Foundations.

He gave free Invitation and gracious Reception to all Foreign Professors of
the Gospel, persecuted at home for their Religion. So that tho he were but a
Child, he was a Father, a true Nursing Father, to God's Church and People. And
truly it was not without a notable Providence of God, not to be forgotten, and
which under God was the great Cause of the Preservation of the Reformed
Religion, that while the Gospel at that Time was miserably oppressed, almost in
all Parts of the World, in Flanders, in Germany, in France, in Spain, in Italy,
in Poland (for in all these Countries the Religion had already taken sooting)
and Combinations were entered into by the Rulers of the World to extirpate it
every where; England was in this King's Reign the common Asylum for Religious
and Learned Men to fly unto. And hither they flocked daily both for Shelter and
Subsistence. And Abundance of Annuities and Pensions did the young Godly King
grant unto them out of his own Treasures; and bestowed many of these Exiles in
Places in the Church, and in both the Universities.

And such was his Care for the Education of Youth in good and Christian
Manners, that during his Short Reign, which was not Seven Years, he founded
more Schools throughout all Places of the Nation, than I believe did all the
Norman Kings that Reigned before him put together. And I find that in little
less then the space of twelve months he founded at least twelve Free-Schools.
And his Care of the Education of Youth, further appeared in the Order he took
in his own Family for his Henchmen, that is his Pages, and other Youths
attending him. For whom he appointed a School on purpose, and retained a
Schoolmaster. And for his Encouragement assigned him a Salary for Life.

And as for his Charitable Mind, it was scarce to be paralelled. And this City
feels the good effect of it to this day, and will do I hope to the World's End.
For excited by a Sermon, which was preached before him by Ridley the Martyr,
then Bishop of London, he settled upon your City for the Relief of your Poor,
the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, the Gray-Friars Church near Newgate, now
called Christ's Hospital, and Bridewell the Ancient Mansion of the English
Kings, and the Savoy too, with the Lands thereof. But this last Gift he lived
not to finish. Yet he had such a real Intention to pass it to the City, that he
left it in his Will, That the Grant made to the Mayor and City of London
touching the Savoy and the Lands thereof, should be performed.

And as he lived so he dyed, most piously and devoutly, recommending most
heartily himself and his Kingdoms to God. He had a grave and manly Mind in a
Young Body. All Foreigners that saw or heard of him, admired him, and wrote
vast Characters of him. Cardanus the great Philosopher, who saw and talked with
him, reported in a printed Book, That all the Graces were in him, and that he
looked like the Miracle of a Man. Caelius Secundus Curio, another great learned
Foreigner of Basil, called him a Prince of Divine Hopes, and a Godlike Youth,
adding, That had he lived to adult years, and had come to the Government of the
Kingdom, freed from the Tuition of his Courtiers, (which were none of the best)
what Realm on Earth had been happier, what Nation ever more blessed? But God
was minded only to show him to the World, and suffer him no longer to abide in
it. But I must refrain, begging your Pardons for saying so much, it being hard
in such a pleasant Subject to contain my self.

To hasten to a Conclusion. Are not young Men stirred up by these brave
Examples that I have set before them? Can they consider these Men, how well
they began their Lives, how Serviceable and Zealous they were for God and his
Glory, and what Seize they made in Virtue and Goodness, even in their
tender Years; and are they not inflamed to follow such notable Patterns? Is it
not more for their Reputation and Honor, for their Comfort and the
Satisfaction of their Consciences, than to run with the Heard of Youth in this
our evil Age toward all Looseness and Licentiousness, Filthiness and
Uncleanness in their Words and Deeds, to the Pollution of their Souls, and the
drawing down the Anger of God upon them.

III.
And now to make an end, I cannot think but that all ingenuous Youth, after all
that I have said, will feel strong Inclinations in themselves to take the
Apostles Counsel, to be Sober-minded: To Watch their Affections, to lay upon
themselves the Bridle of Continency and Modesty, to curb and rein up their
Passions and their unruly Desires; to choose the Fear of God rather than the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season. If you want direction in this Work; if you would
know how you should keep your selves clean, David will teach you: Who asks
this needful Question, and answers it full well: Wherewithal shall a Young
Man cleanse his Way? By taking heed thereto according to thy Word, Psalm.
cxix.9. Or, according to the Old Translation, By ruling himself after thy Word.
Oh! Let God's Word be thy Guide and thy Rule. And then thou have God himself
and his Holy Spirit to be thy Directer: Who is best able to instruct thee, and
show thee the Courses thou ought to take, and which will prove most
advantageous to thee. Stir not an Inch from the Prescriptions of God's Word.
Let that be thy Maxim and thy Principle.

It Is a dangerous World we live in, and we ought to have our Wits about us, how
to behave our selves in all the various Circumstances of humane Life: lest by
some Slip or Error, or Inadvertency in the Beginning of our setting out, we
draw misery and trouble upon our selves ever after. And we ought to have some
Wise Person to be our Counselor for this Purpose. But there is no Counselor
so safe as God himself. And then we have him for our Counselor, when we take
his Word for our Rule, and ask Counsel there. Oh! therefore let all young Men
diligently read the Scriptures, and make them their Study and their Practice.
And let them never doubt to follow most strictly the Counsels and Admonitions
thereof, however at first Sight they may seem inconvenient or dangerous to
take. For be assured Integrity and Righteousness, Truth and Innocence, and an
Awe of God, upon which all the Precepts of Holy Scripture are founded, will
bear a Man out best at the last, and give our Lives the best Conclusion.

I conclude all therefore with the Son of Syrach's Exhortation to young Folks
to get the true Wisdom; Draw near unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the House
of Learning. Buy her for your selves without Money. Put your Neck under the
yoke, and let your Soul receive Instruction. She is hard at hand to find --
Work your Work betimes (that is, while you are Young) and in his time he will
give the your Reward, Ecclus. Li. 23, 25, 26, 30. Unto which Reward God
Almighty bring us all, Amen.

Admonitions TO THE AGED.
TIT. II.2. That the Aged Men be Sober, Grave, Temperate, Sound in Faith, in
Charity, in Patience.


THe last time I was called to speak in this Audience, I took upon me to be a
Remembrancer to Young Men, and exhorted them with many Arguments to Virtue and
Goodness, from the sixth verse of this Chapter, where the Apostle bids Timothy
exhort Young Men to be Sober-minded. Now I shall carry over my Discourse from
the Young unto the Old, and speak, if I can, something in season to you that
are the grave Magistrates and Citizens; on whom lies the Government of this
great City, and the present good Estate of it so much depends: You that have
lived in former Days, and are able to tell of the times that are past; You, to
whom God has shown many Noble Acts of his Power and Providence. Give me leave
now to be your Monitor also, that joining with your Experience a prudent, a
sober and a godly Conversation, you may in your Places and Callings, contribute
to the bringing down God's Blessing upon your selves, and upon us all.

And truly it is sad to consider, what very Slaves to Vice and Sin many Aged
Men are. Their Passions and their Follies are grown up with them. The sinful
Frailties of their Youth are turned into the very Habits of their Old Age: and
the longer they have lived the worse they have been, instead of growing better
and wiser. They have smarted many times past of their Lives for their Vices and
Iniquities, and yet have not had the Grace to mend them, nor to forsake those
things that have cost them dear. Their bought Experience has not made them
wiser. They have felt God's Hand many a time upon them for their Sins, and yet
they remain as bad as they were before. And so they grow Old and Gray Headed in
their Evil Courses, as tho they resolved to live and dye in them. Days should
teach Wisdom, says the Spirit of God somewhere; but neither Days nor Years
have taught them Wisdom. Vanity and Folly has been bound up in their Hearts
from their Childhood; and it is so fast bound up there, that it remains with
them even to their Old Age; and none of God's Rods of Correction have driven it
out. How many Men and Women have we known, nay perhaps do know, far gone in
Years, that have spent Forty or Fifty, or Threescore Winters in the World, and
are passionate and hasty, Covetous and Worldly minded, unclean in their
Desires, Blasphemous and Vain in their Speeches, woefully negligent of God and
their Souls to this Day. They draw near to Eternity, and yet little think of
it. They are going to their long Homes, and have one Foot in their Graves, and
yet take no care to make themselves fit for that other World: And have little
regard of putting their Souls in such a Posture as they may be able with
Comfort to stand before God. Gray Hairs are here and there upon them, and they
consider it not.

Well then, be you Judges, whether even Aged Men have not need to be called
upon, and to have a Monitor as well as the Younger. St. Paul knew this well
enough; and therefore he instructs Titus to exhort the Aged to be Sober, Grave,
Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience. In all which respects the
Aged in his Time were oftentimes too defective, and perhaps were neither Sober,
Grave nor Temperate, however Old they were, nor Sound in Faith, in Charity nor
Patience. But sure it is, these things are mighty becoming Years, and are
proper Lessons and Practices for Elder Age; Namely, Sobriety, Gravity,
Temperance, Soundness in Faith, in Charity and in Patience. These, O Fathers
and Brethren, will be very great Ornaments of your Age; and not only Ornaments
of your Age, but of your holy Profession too.

Now that I may discourse suitably and profitably upon this Argument, I shall
do these two or three Things.

I. I shall show you what that Behavior is that is suitable unto Aged Men. II.
Unto this holy Behavior I shall excite and stir them up by some
Considerations. III. I shall make a Practical Conclusion of my Discourse.
I.
I shall show Elderly Men what that Good Behavior is that they should follow
after, and make their Practice: And for that I shall refer my self unto the
Apostle in the Text. I shall not offer mine own Conceptions here to the Aged,
but what Paul the Aged, nay Paul the Saint, the Inspired, offers to them. He it
is that would have them instructed to be 1. Sober, 2. Grave, 3. Temperate, 4.
Sound in Faith, 5. Sound in Charity, 6. Sound in Patience. And that you may
know the full Import and Meaning of each of these, which will make a very
accomplished Old Age, I shall speak of them distinctly.

I. Aged Men must be Sober. This Word our Translaters do interpret sometimes,
To be Watchful, and sometimes, To be (...), Sober. And therefore Bullinger in
his Exposition of this Place uses both words, Vigilantes ac Sobrios. Which two
Expressions may inform us of the full Sense and Meaning of it.

First, They must be Sober, that is, Abstemious in Drink; avoiding all Excess
in that. That it may not impair their Health, nor their Understanding: Both
which Age renders so infirm, and places in so uncertain and ticklish a
Condition. And therefore especially Men in Years should not be Drunkards or
Sots, but use Wine or Strong Drink moderately. Which if they (especially) take
in too great Quantity, it will soon wear their Bodies out, and weaken their
Minds, Memories, Judgments and Understandings. Which Age of it self will do at
last, and needs not to be helped and furthered by our own Vices. And indeed to
see an Old Man a Drunkard, to see him intoxicating himself, and falling into
all the frantic and foolish Frolicks that that Sin draws with it, how odious
is it; how unbecoming that Gravity that Years call for? And what an abominable
ill Example will this give unto Children, and the younger sort? And what a
Sport and Pastime will an old Drunkard render himself unto such, who are called
upon to reverence the Aged, and to respect Gray-Hairs? And what an Aggravation
and weight of Guilt will it add unto the old Man's Drunkenness, that he who by
his Age ought to excel others, and to go before them in a virtuous and sober
Demeanor, should hereby invite them to Sin, and tempt them to follow him in
these Excesses? A thing which Young People are very apt to do, viz. to follow
such Examples; especially if they have a Dependence upon the Elder: If they be
their Masters, or Fathers, their Landlords, or Superiors.

This then is one Sense of the word Sober, that is, Not addicted to too much
Wine, and to use no more than may tend to the supportation of Nature, and
preserving the Body in Health.

Secondly, They must be sober, that is, they must be watchful. For so the word
also signifies. And therefore Watch, and be sober, are the Phrases that the
Scripture puts together, as being very near of kin, or all one. Therefore let
us not sleep, as do others; but let us WATCH, and be SOBER: So St. Paul. 1 Thessalonians. v.6.
And so the Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet. v.8.
Be SOBER, be VIGILANT, or Watchful. But in other places, this very Word, Be
Sober, is translated Be watchful. So St. Paul exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy iv.5.
(...)
Watch thou in all things. And so St. Peter, 1 Pet. iv.7. (...).
Watch unto Prayer. Where the word Watch is of the same Original, with the word
Sober, in the Text. Hence we may infer, That the Meaning of this word, and
perhaps the chief Meaning and Sense of it, relates to Watchfulness.

A great and a proper Duty and Exercise for Aged Men above all others, To watch
for their Lord's Coming, whose Time is so near spent in the course of Nature.
To watch, and be in Expectation of their Departure into another World. To Watch
unto Prayer, in the place before mentioned, (...).
or In Prayers, as the Words may be rendered. That is, to be always praying unto
God; lifting up their Hearts to him in holy and devout Ejaculations, spending
much of their Time in converse with their Maker, and in earnest Addresses to
Him, to forgive unto them all their past Errors; to beg and implore his Grace
to be their Comfort in their old Age, and that He would not leave them in the
needful time of their Trouble, their Sickness, their Pain, their Dying Hour.

Again, They must be watchful, to keep themselves clear and free of Sin, to
preserve themselves in a holy, blameless Behavior; that they may be fit to
meet the Lord, and to make their personal Appearrance before their Judge, which
they are so suddenly to do. And therefore Let not them sleep as do others, but
let THEM (especially) Watch, and be Sober, as the Apostle advises all
Christians, 1 Thessalonians. v.6.

This Watchfulness also consists in their diligent Attendance upon all God's
holy Ordinances. As for Example, in a conscientious celebrating of God's
Sabbaths, resorting unto the Places where his Honor dwells, with all
Devotion and Seriousness of Soul; and and there hearing God's Word read and
explained by his Ministers, with an humble, obedient Ear; joining their Hearts
and their Mouths in the Prayers and Supplications that are put up there, for
our selves, and for all the Wants and Necessicities of our Fellow Christians;
in an universal spreading Charity: And as often as the holy Communion is
administered, repairing unto God's Table, with Earnest Minds, and holy
Affections, to partake of that comfortable Commemoration of Christ's Death, and
Passion; whereby he has procured of his Father the Pardon and Remission of our
Sins, to our endless Comfort and Benefit. And by these Ordinances, we draw near
to God, and acquaint our selves with Him against the Time we hope for ever to
dwell with Him, and to enjoy His Blessed Face. In these Ordinances we hold a
Communion with God, and God with us; and we do accustom our selves to those
very Exercises, that, if ever God vouchsafe to bring us to Glory, shall be in
effect our great Employment there.

Thus the Aged Men should Watch. And what a happy thing would it be for them,
if Death should find them thus Watching. They should (and I hope they do)
consider, that God will e're long send for them. And therefore it should be
their Endeavor, that whenever He does send, He may find them upon their
Knees, or at their Devotion, or busied in some holy, good, charitable, or at
least warrantable, Exercise. And this is the first great Point of that
Behavior, that is so suitable to the Aged, That the Aged Men be SOBER, or
Watchful.

II. The Aged Man must be Grave; that is, his Carriage and outward Deportment
must be managed in that Decency and Reverence, as may bespeak the inward
Goodness of his Mind. He must so demean himself, that it may appear, That there
is within him a true Sense of God and Goodness, and an Aversion to every thing
that is foul, unjust and dishonest. All Lightness, Idleness, Vanity of
Behavior, Frothiness of Speech, Playing, Toying, Sporting, Chamberring and
Wantonness in Words and Actions, and such like, so contrary to the Decorum of
their Age; these things are by all means to be avoided by Men of Age and Years,
so dissonant to Gravity. There must be a Severity in their Behavior: They must
not endure to see or to hear any thing that is immodest, or unseemly, much more
that is vile and wicked. And if they are Magistrates, they must show their
Dislike of it, by punishing and correcting it: If of more ordinary Rank and
Quality, they must reprove it, or withdraw themselves from it, or give some
plain Evidence of their Disallowance and Disapprovement of it.

There is a Lightness, and Frothiness of Conversation, which this present
Generation of Ours is too much addicted to. And it is this in a great measure,
(more than most are aware of) that does so indispose and prejudice Men against
Religion; which indeed will not away with it. For that is a Serious and Solid
thing. It will not allow of that Airiness of Behavior, that Vanity and
Idleness of Speech, and Trivial Conversation, that is in too great Fashion and
Vogue among us. It was a Saying of one of the Fathers, Ludicra Christianorum
debent esse seria.
Even the Sportings of Christians ought to have a kind of Seriousness in them.
Every Man should do that which becomes him. And there is nothing becomes a
Christian, but what is virtuous, what is just, what is innocent, and what is
modest, and what has the stamp of Truth and Goodness on it. A Heathen gave us
this Advice: Quod bonum est, hoc tantum te decere puta.
Reckon that nothing becomes you, but what is good. And it is the Apostle's
admirable Council to his Philippians, in the Conclusion of his Epistle to them;
Whatsoever things are true, Phil. iv.8. (...).
whatsoever things are HONEST, (The word in the Text) i. e. Whatsoever things
are Grave, or Decent, or Agreeable to your most holy Profession) Think on these
things,

This then ought to be the Deportment of all Christians, all that have taken on
them Christ's holy Name; but chiefly all Elderly People. Their Years call upon
them to be Grave; countenancing what is Good, discountenancing what ever is
Evil. Which will show the inward Good, and Godly Temper of their Minds and
Spirits. The aged Men must be Grave, or Serious: that is their second
Qualification.

III. They must be Temperate. An Aged Man must be a Man of Temper. Temper in
his Passions. He must not be testy, morose, and froward: a Vice to which Old
Men are wont to be addicted. He must not be a Demea, as he in Terence, a
peevish, fretful, captious Man. He must not be a Nabal, as he in the Book of
Samuel, such a Son of Belial, that a Man cannot speak to him. There must be a
Temper also in his Wrath. He must not let that impotent Passion rule him, and
carry him beyond all the bounds of Reason and Decency, and hurry him away into
Transports. Which commonly make a Man utter many blasphemous Oaths and Curses,
take up wicked and ungodly Resolutions, and put him forward to unchristian
Revenges, and implacable Animosities. This also an Aged Man must take heed of.

There must also be a Temper in his Desires of Earthly things. It is highly
disbecoming a Man that is going into another World, to be griping and scraping
for the Things of this. To oppress and vex his Creditors, his Tenants, his
Underlings; to prog and cark for Wealth, and to fill his Bags, and to labor
night and day for more and more of these fading Riches, and in the mean time to
neglect the true Riches, that will make a Man rich to God, and furnish him with
Treasures that will do him good in another World.

Thus the Aged must be Temperate. (...).
The Word indeed signifies, and is often translated Sober; and is the same Word
with that in the sixth Verse, where Young Men are exhorted to be Sober-minded.
It seems Sobriety is a Duty necessary to be urged both upon Old and Young: That
is, both ought to lay Restraint upon their Lusts and Passions, to govern their
Appetites, to keep themselves within due Bounds, and to be temperate in all
things: Which is the true Notion of Sobriety. For the Old as well as the Young
are apt to fly out, and to go beyond their due limits, that God and Nature has
set them: And so to draw Misery, Trouble, Guilt and Destruction in the end,
upon themselves. That is the Third: The Aged must be Temperate, or Sober.

The three other Directions for Aged Men that remain, do more particularly
respect them as they are Professors of Christian Religion: Which mainly
consists in Faith, in Charity, in Patience. And therefore Aged Christians
should be sound in all these Graces. Age has rendered them frail, and weak in
their Bodily Strength; but they must not be so in their Graces, but SOUND in
them. And the longer they live, to the more Healthfulness in Spirit, and
Soundness in all Christian Virtues they must aspire: And especially they must
be sound in these three.

I. In Faith: That is, in the Christian Doctrine. They must hold fast Christ's
Truth; that which is called Sound Doctrine, in the first Verse of this Chapter.
This they must Hold fast, and maintain in their old Age, and not let go those
holy Doctrines, that they have been taught, that Form of sound Words, wherein
they have been instructed. And not as some are wont to do in their elder Years,
to Apostatize and Backslide, and to forsake the ancient Truth for new
Doctrines, and be carried away with errors, by the subtle Invention of
Deceivers and false Prophets, that come in Sheeps Clothing. But the Aged who
are come to Maturity of Years, should be of Mature Judgment, and to be too well
grounded and principled in the Truth, to be enticed away by such as lay in wait
to deceive unstable Souls. Thus the Aged must be sound in Faith.

Or else he must be sound in Faith, taking Faith to signify more particularly
Faith and Trust in God. When Age comes upon us, and various Infirmities, Pains
and Sicknesses attend it, and Troubles and Cares do now more than ever oppress
our Minds; and the Reflections it may be upon the infinite Miscarriages of our
past Lives deject us, what need have we then of this Faith in God, to enable us
to rely upon him, and his Goodness, and his Promises? What need to put a firm
Trust and Confidence in him? To have an Eye of Faith to see him that is
invisible, and a Hand of Faith, to take fast hold of him, and not to let him
go? I mean to be possessed with a good and well grounded Assurance, that he will
not leave us in our Old Age, nor lay to our charge the Sins and Follies of our
past Life, since we have repented of them, and forsaken them. And this is to
sound be in Faith.

II. In Charity. Aged Men above all, who are going into another World, must not
harbor Malice in their Hearts against any; but reduce themselves to an hearty
Love, and Good Will to every Man universally. The Man of Years must be endued
with that (...), that Well-pleasedness of Mind to others, that (...), that
Friendly Affection to Mankind, that God has declared himself to have toward
us all. For he is going, as he hopes, to that God. And if he be not of that
gracious, kind Temper that he is of, he must never expect to see his Face, nor
to dwell in his Presence. For we must be like him, if ever we intend to live
with him.

III. Lastly, he must be sound in Patience. In Faith, in Charity, and in
Patience. Patience in the New Testament often signifies Perseverance in the
Faith of Christ, and Persistance in well-doing, notwithstanding all the
Discouragements and Persecutions of an evil World: Upholding a Man's self by
the strong and vigorous Expectation of the infinite Rewards to be bestowed in
God's good Time. And this Patience, or patient Expectation, the Aged should be
sound in: Waiting for the Time when his God shall call him to himself to bestow
upon him a Crown of Life, and say to him, Well done, Good, and Faithful
Servant, enter into the Joy of thy Lord. He must be sound and strong in this
Patience.

Or else, he must be sound in Patience, as it imports a quiet bearing of
Sufferings and Pains, and Afflictions: Which in Old Age are wont to be more and
greater than at any other Time. He must not be fretful and peevish under the
Weakness and Infirmities of Old Age. He must not be angry, and displeased, and
froward under the Calamities that lie upon him: but bear them with an even and
constant Spirit, with Equanimity and Silence, not opening his Mouth in
Impatience: As remembering that it is but the condition of Humane Nature; and
that it is what comes from God, for the Correction of our Faults, and for the
Exercise of our Patience, and the Trial of our Graces. And after this manner
should the Aged be sound in Patience.

And thus I have, under the Direction of this excellent Text, shown what that
becoming and truly Christian Behavior is, that Men should exercise, when Age
and Years are come upon them.

II.
I am now to endeavor by Arguments and Considerations to excite the Aged to
this wise and good Demeanor. And for this purpose I shall lay before them
these five or six Things.

I. Age expects Honor and Reverence to be paid it. And that deservedly; and
the Scripture requires it: Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and honor
the Person of the Aged. And God did most signally once punish a parcel of loose
Youths, for despising an aged, holy Man, and crying to him in Derision, Go up,
thou bald Pate, Go up, thou bald Pate, 2 King. ii.23. They were torn in pieces,
Forty Two of them at once by Bears out of the Wood: A Warning to all succeeding
Generations of the World, that the younger are to respect and reverence the
Aged. There is in truth a Deference to be given to Years: and we do with good
Reason require it from the younger Sort.

But Alas! mere Age without some other Qualifications, will reconcile to us
little Honor. An old Drunkard, an old Sot, an old Humorist, an old Sinner; who
can honor such, who have in that manner dishonored themselves, and treasured
up Shame to their Old Age? But when Age is accompanied with Gravity and Wisdom,
and the Fear of God, that makes Age to be truly Honorable; and all Men will
rise up to such an Hoary Head. His Hairs are a Crown of Glory to him. The Hoary
Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness, Prove.
xvi.31. When a Man walks in the way of Righteousness, and holds out therein
unto old Age, that is the way to make Men revere and honor him: and that not
only in the Body and the outward Deportment to give them Respect, but inwardly,
to Love and Affect them.

II. We expect to find Wisdom and Counsel with the Aged. Years teach Wisdom;
and Men that have lived a great while in the World, and seen Changes and
Vicissitudes in Towns, in Cities, in Families, in Kingdoms, make Observations
hence, and learn much Experience, and treasure up to themselves Understanding,
and are able to give Advice, Counsel and Instruction. And therefore Princes
usually make use of the Aged for their Counselors, to consult with them about
their weighty Matters, as they do of the younger Sort for Action. And surely
that Man has spent his Years to little purpose, that is a Child in his Old
Age; and tho he wears a Gray Head, has still but a Boys Understanding; that is
rash and foolish, vain and frothy still, after he has lived it may be Fifty or
Sixty Years. What will ye never be Wise? Never know how to govern your Tongues,
and your Appetites? Never be Men, capable to Counsel and Avise your selves as
long as ye live? To what purpose have ye spent so many a fair year, and seen so
much? To be Fools at last, and to dye as Fools dye, in their Sins and Follies?

We use to say, every Man at Thirty Years of Age is either a Fool or a
Physician: That is, by living so long he has learned by Experience the State
and Condition of his own Body; so that he is become in a tolerable sort able to
be his own Physician, to know what is good and what is bad for him; Or else he
is a Fool. But how many are there that have lived to Thirty Years of Age twice
told, that are very sorry Physicians to their Souls, and but mere Fools still;
void of all Understanding to take the proper Courses for their Souls Welfare?
To such elderly Fools I may, I think, cry out as Wisdom does, O ye simple Ones!
how long will ye love Simplicity? Prove. i.22. How long? What? to Old Age? What?
to the Day of your Death? This ye see, O ye Aged Men, reflects closely upon
your Understanding at this Time of Day. For with the Aged we all look for
Wisdom and Counsel. But

III. To pursue this Argument a little further. Aged Men and Women have lived
long enough to be thoroughly convinced of the Vanity of the World, and of the
miserable Issues of Sin. And will they not yet be Sober, Grave, Temperate?

First, They have seen by long Experience the Vanity of this World. So that
methinks they should be able to say as David did, I have seen an end of all
Perfection, Psalm. cxix.96. And as Solomon, I have seen all the Works that are
done under the Sun, and behold all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, Eccl.
i.14. All these Things that Men are apt to set their Hearts upon, to mind too
much, to the neglect of their Duty to God and to their Neighbors, and to
themselves: to pursue Night and Day by Right and by Wrong: Imagining Honor and
Wealth, and these fading Pleasures of the World to be brave things. And alas!
in the End they are but mere Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit.

They are Vanity. They are vain, they are false, they are lying. They deceive
us: they promise us more than they can perform. Or else they are Vain, they fly
away from us, and leave us in a Fools Paradise.

And they are Vexation of Spirit. They Vex and Disturb us; they gall and chafe
us a Thousand Ways; and our Spirits find no Rest, no Satisfaction in them. Does
not every Aged Person, that has lived any considerable time in this World,
perceive and learn this by the Observations he has made in himself and in
others?

And therefore is it not time now for him, (if he has not hitherto been so) to
be Sober, Grave and Wise, considering the long Experience he has had of these
Vanities of the World, and how it has frustrated his Expectations.

Secondly, Aged Men have also seen by long Experience, the miserable Issues of
Sin: and will they still continue in it, and never forsake it? Have they in
their Time seen Hundreds and Hundreds undone and ruined by it, and yet will
they follow them, and take no Warning still? Have they in their Days seen
Thousands of Sinners fall on their Right Hand, and Ten Thousands on their Left,
by their own Follies and vicious Practices? Have they beheld, how God has met
with those that have set themselves against him by wicked Works, and has
struck them down with his Mighty Hand? And this done sometimes in such a
manner, as if God had intended that all might see it and take Warning. Have
they not seen, how God has cut off the Posterity of the Wicked; and how Riches
got by Wrong, Knavery and Oppression, have not continued? Have they not had
abundance of Experience of these and the like remarkable Conclusions of Sin and
Violation of God's most holy Laws and Precepts? What Advantages are these
administered to the Aged to make them Sober and Wise, to leave those Follies
that to their Knowledge others have so smarted for?

And it ought to be looked upon by them as the wonderful Grace of God to them,
that he has spared them so long, to see and be convinced of these things; that
they may repent, and dedicate their Old Age unto God and his Service.

IV. How many remarkable Providence has God exercised the Aged with through
the long Course of Life they have lived? And to what Purpose, but to remind
them of him, to reclaim them from some evil Ways they have chosen, to make them
recollect themselves, repent and amend, to grow wise and good? It is Religious,
to look upon all the Notable Accidents of our Lives as peculiarly coming from
God for holy and good Ends toward us. And it is a great Fault in Men, when
they have escaped some imminent Danger, or obtained some extraordinary Benefit,
or fallen into some sad Sickness, or Calamity, I say, it is a great fault in
any, when it thus happens to them, not to acknowledge God in this, nor to see
his Hand; but to pass it over stupidly, without any particular Contemplation of
God, or Remembrance that this was his Doing; This is highly blameworthy. As
Jacob spoke in another Case, Surely God was in this Place, so ought we to say
upon any extraordinary Providence, Surely God was here; The Finger of God was
in this Deliverance. In this Emergence God called me to remembrance. This
severe Stroke was God's Rod: This Loss was God's Correction, to bring me from
such or such Sins, to which I have been too much addicted.

Of these remarkable Providence of God we have all partook, but most of all
they that have lived long in the World. If they would but bethink themselves,
what a vast Number of them has happened in their Lives? What long Stories may
they tell of the Dealings of God with them; what a Train of Mercies has
followed them; What Straits he has delivered them out of; What Preservations
he has wrought for them even in the very Jaws of Destruction? How has he
brought them up even from the Valley of the Shadow of Death? How has he
sometimes given them that which they have most earnestly sought for and
desired, to the infinite Comfort and Satisfaction of their Lives? And how has
he it may be sometimes not granted them that which they desired, out of Mercy
and Goodness. Which Desire if they had had fulfilled to them, would have proved
their Undoing, or their perpetual Affliction. Such ill Choosers we oftentimes
are for our selves. How many, sundry and various have these Dispensations of
God been to Aged Men? And should not all this make them turn to God, Love him,
and Fear him, and adhere to him, and frame the last Scene of their Lives to
such Courses as may please him?

V. What a sad Sign will he give of desperate Stupidity and final Impenitency,
that still even in his Old Age lies soaking in his Sins, and wallowing in the
Mire of his unclean Lusts and Passions? I know that God has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my
Counsel, said the Prophet to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. xxv.16. And we may say to the
same effect, We know too, that God has purposed to destroy a Man, when his
Wickedness continues with him in his Old Age; and the last Days he has to live
in this World are even of the same Thread with the former: And negligently
enough spent. One may conclude it some judicial Obduration sent from God upon a
Sinner, when his Old Days are his worst Days, and the longer he lives the Worse
he is. When under all the Means of Grace, and the Calls of God by his Ministers
for many hundred of Sabbaths that he has lived, he remains like a Stock or a
Stone, and has not left a Sin, nor parted with one Folly, to which he was
addicted before.

Oh! lay this to heart, and tremble all you Aged People, that are Aged in Sin
too. It looks I say like a desperate Stupidity, or a Judgment of Impenitency
sent upon you by God in terrible Justice.

VI. Lastly, Ancient Folks are drawing near that solemn day, when they must
depart out of the World, and give up to their Judge an Account of the spending
of their Lives. They are as St. Paul speaks of himself, ready to be offered up,
and the Time of their Dissolution draws nigh. Should it not therefore be
their Care to bring themselves to such a Frame as to be able to say, as he does
upon the same occasion, I have fought the good Fight, I have finished my
Course, (or my Race) I have kept the Faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy iv.7, 8. O happy that ancient Man that can
sustain his Soul in these Contemplations! that can look back upon his past Life
with Comfort, and that can look forward upon the Life he is entering into
without Fear. Whose sincere Love to God casts out that Fear that has torment
in it, that tormenting Fear of Hell, and of going into everlasting Perdition,
the sure Reward of a loose exorbitant Life.

The Aged are waiting till their Change comes. The Sands of their Glass are
wasted: their Strength and Vigor abated: Diseases and Infirmities creep upon
them; and they know their Time here cannot be long: and they have one Foot, as
we say, in the Grave already. Does it not infinitely concern them to be Sober,
Grave, Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience? That when God comes
and calls for them, they may be found in him, and receive his Well done, good
and faithful Servant.

And thus I have finished those Considerations that I had to recommend unto the
Aged in order to the rendering them Sober and Virtuous.

III.
And nothing now remains, but to make some Conclusion of this Discourse. Which
must be by way of Address to those elderly Persons that hear me this Day.

You O Fathers and Brethren! are by the great Patience and Favor of God,
arrived to Maturity of years; You have seen Abundance of Chances and Changes in
your Days. You have seen wonderful Revolutions in Kingdoms and States. You have
seen the Policies of the World baffled, and strange Disappointments happening
to humane Affairs: And even there where Men have been most confident: And many
other Things of such a Nature, that you cannot but acknowledge an Almighty Hand
and Wisdom therein. You must own that there is a great King that sits above,
and that controuls all Sublunary Things, and exercises a notable Providence
among us; and takes particular Notice of Men and their Doings. And do not you
fear and adore this great and mighty God? And whatsoever others do, those that
have not seen so much of God's wondrous Works as you have, yet for your Part,
you, I hope, Sanctify him in your hearts, and make him your Fear and your
Dread. I write unto you Fathers, (or Ancient Men) because ye have known him
that is from the Beginning, 1 Ioh. ii.13. St. John takes it for granted, that
Fathers, Men of Years and Experience, know him that is from the Beginning. They
know him, that is, they so know him and have Experience of his Doings, as to
fear, serve and obey this God that is from the Beginning, from all Eternity.

O take you heed to your selves; and you that are Gray in Hairs, be not Gray in
Sin. Carry not your Guilt with you to your Graves. But let your Years remind
you of the years of Eternity. Make amends for the Vanities of your Youth, by
the Sobriety and Discretion, and Godliness of your Old Age. Serve the Lord now
at last with the most vigorous Affections, and dedicate the remaining Sands of
your Life t^ his Glory. Let an aged Mi^^^ be in an aged Body. And the nearer
you come to the end of your Days, make your selves the fitter for God. Become
more Devout, more Serious* more frequent in Prayer and Meditation, and the more
willing to depart and to be with Christ. Which God of his Mercy grant that we
may do through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.


