The Perilous and most Unhappy VOYAGES Of JOHN STRUYS, Through Italy, Greece,
Lifeland, Moscovia, Tartary, Media, Persia, East India, Japan, and other Places
in EUROPE, AFRICA and ASIA.

Containing, I. Most accurate Remarks and Observations of the distinct
Qualities, Religion, Polity, Customs, Laws and Properties of the Inhabitants:
II. A due Description of the several Cities, Towns, Forts and Places of Trust,
as to their Site and Strength, Fortifications by Nature, or Art, etc. with
other things worthy of Note: and, III. An exact Memorial of the most disastrous
Calamities which befell the Author in those Parts (viz) by Shipwreck,
Robberies, Slavery, Hunger, Tortures, with other Incommodities and Hardships.


To which are added 2 Narrativs sent from Capt. D. Butler, relating to the
Taking in of Astrachan by the Cosacs.

Illustrated with diverse curious Plates, first designed and taken from the Life
by the Author himself.

Rendered out of Nether-dutch by JOHN MORRISON.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard
MDCLXXXIII.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
Ingenuous Reader,
HISTORY, which is the Light of Truth and Life of Memory, has two Eyes, viz,
Chronology and Topography: That, giving Evidence of Things and Actions as to
the Time, This, as to the Place. Among Histories (says an incomparable Doctor)
Itineraries have the pre-eminence, in which we have the most memorable Things
and Events faithfully related ex (...), (as he phrases it) or, from
Eie-wittness: The Utility and Certainty whereof may be mesured from the
Reputation and Conscience of the Relater.

AND these, as they are more delectable to read, because ever interspersed with
Actions as well as Things, so they are more to be valued in respect of their
Credit. Thucydides that most excellent Historian was highly accounted of by
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Cicero, Fabius, and others famous in the World; but
abov all by Demosthenes the noble Orator of Athens, who to make his works the
more familiar to himself, is affirmed by Lucian to have copied them 8 times
over; and all this for his Faithfullness and Credit, being himself a chief
Captain in the Peleponesian Wars, and an Eie-wittness from the Beginning to
the End. Even so is Strabo justly preferred before Pomponius M^la, Ptolomy and
other Geographers, for that he is said to have written about no Place but what
himself had seen, as partly may be gathered out of those words of Blancan
Blancan. in Chronol. Mathem.
Strabo eruditissime ac fuse orbis situm, cujus magnam partem peragraverat,
descripsit. And what a veneration has the World for that of R. Benjamin, the
famous Jewish Geographer? not only for his elegant manner of describing Things
memorable and worthy of Remark (in which, says Neander, he was second to none)
but that he took little or nothing upon Credit, having himself travailed through
the most considerable part of the World, and consequently (with the help of his
great Judgment and Experience) able to correct the Mistakes of others, who had
made too bold Conjectures. Experience every Age makes a new Discovery of old
Errors, and Mercator often givs Ptolomy the Lie.

-- Aetas semper aliquid adportet novi.
-- Seris venit usus ab annis.
SUCH Observations as pertain to various Regions and Diversity of Countries may
also seem to giv a more general Satisfaction, and to be of greater Utility than
Descriptions peculiar to one place; Semper laudata fuit historia quae non unius
regionis cancellis constringitur; sed quam late terrarum termini extenduntur,
expatiatur. They are L'Empereur's Words.

BUT as it is not needful that I should make many instances of such
Observations in general, as to their Usefullness, so I shall not weary my
Readers Patience further than what I shall say to these in particular, which is
the only reason I have to use the formality of a Preface, that might as well
have bin left out, if some few reasons had not urged me to the contrary, but
chiefly to anticipate what I presage some will object against them, as well as in
consideration of what a Great Man in the last Age said, Erasm. de Utilit.
Colloqu.
Non tutum est ullum emittere Librum nisi satellitio munitum: as if he would
say, It Is not safe to put forth any Book unless guarded with a File of
Musketeers.

OUR Traveller without doubt will frustrate the expectation of some, in not
giving a more ample account of every Country he has seen, by an accurate
noting down of the Religion, Polity, particular Rites and Customs of the
Inhabitants, nor making a further scrutiny as to the Antiquity and Original
Descent and Offspring of the People as some have don. It Is undeniably so, for I
find him more busy in recording the circumstances of his own personal
condition, and what befell him in remote Places, than remarking the State and
Quality of the Land and People, nor do I hold it consistent with the Duty of
him that would be a faithful Interpreter to do that Office for him;
notwithstanding the Freedom some has assumed in another Language (or shall I
say, Another Work) to leav out more than 70 entire Paragraphs, in several
places through the Book, and supplied the vacancy by transcribing out of other
Journals, which I am confident is not to be found either in the Authors
Autograph, or Printed Copy.

THE Gentleman's reason, I conceiv, was because the Matter of what he thought
good to ommit was not so solid, containing some homely Passages not to be taken
notice of, and consequently would not endure such soaring Language, as things
more sublime and important would, for, Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. Nor
had it bin less warrantable for me to have don the like, and tacitly to have
passed over such humble Matter as would rather challenge an expression of
homely Sentences than festivity of Style, which the friendly Reader will find
I Am no where guilty of.

THIS Journal, I am bound to say (notwithstanding the main Advantages our
Author wanted, both in Estate and Parts, which you will readily infer no
Traveller ought to be without, that would bring his Observations upon the
public Theater of the World) have nevertheless found a gremious entertainment
amongst all sorts of Men, being already published in several Languages: nor can
I find any reason to fear, but, as it is for a more universal Perusal taught to
speak English, 'twill be as acceptable to our own Nation, as it has bin abroad
in other Countries, where they are in general more inclined to read Fictions
and Fables, than true Philology, and such as may justly be convinced by that of
an obscene, but witty Martial. in his 10th Book of Epigrams.
Poet: Qui legis Oedipodem calligantemque Thyestem,
Colchidas and Scyllas, quid nisi monstra legis?
Quid te vana juvant miserae ludibria chartae?
Hoc lege, quod possis dicere jure, Meum est.


OBSCENE indeed inclusivly, but justifiable enough in this, for, as the great
Casaubon in his modest Answer to the Epistle of Cardinal Du Perron says, E
fell mero mel merum interdum existit, so there is nothing so corrupt or
putrid, but that something sound may be extracted from it.

CERTAINLY the Discrepance of Men's Fancies must be notedly great, if the Price
and Perusal of this small Volum should seem too great and laborious to the
Buyer and Reader, which has cost the Author so much Time and Pains in Travail,
for the greatest part of Six and Twenty years, during which time he has bin
attended with continual Perils on the one hand and unspeakable Sufferings on
the other: by Land in perpetual Jeopardy of his Person for Robbers, Cannibals,
Ravenous and venomous Animals; by Sea for Pirates, Shipwracks, etc. and by both,
subject to Hunger, Thirst, Scorching Heats, Colds, Sickness, and other
unavoidable Extremities and gravaminous Solitudes; besides the lamentable
Condition of Slavery, in which I found him both among Turks, Tartars and
Persians, yet after all returned home in safety, and at this present here in
London.

IT is a thing no less customary than unmannerly among some, who will hold all
things for forged and false, except what themselves see, and would have all
themselves say to be received for Oracles. It Is not long ago that a young
Sycophant (and one perhaps, who thought himself something prejudiced) affirmed
that the Pourfiles of those Persian City and others, were but imaginary
Fictions, and that, I beleev, because the Etcher had set the Letter [ In.] for
[ Invenit] after his Name as who should say, but that every Engraver and Etcher
understood s^ much Latin, as rightly to distinguish between Pinxit, Invenit,
Sculpsit, Fecit and Excudit, which they often use promiscuously for each other:
but besides my knowledge of our Travailers ability in Drawing, I have other
reasons to give credit to him, as to his faithful Delineation of those Places,
which, for this time being so narrowly circumscribed, I am forced to ommit.

THE first Voyage perhaps may not affoard such satisfaction as some will expect,
and by consequence give the Reader no Appetite to go forward; but he whose
leisure will permit him to go forward, will in the 2d and 3d Voyages find
amends for what is defectiv in the first.

IT was intended also to publish his 4th. Voyage with this, which has not as
yet bin printed in any Language, but finding the Authors leisure not answerable
to those Intentions, we shall deferr it for the next Edition, if this prove but
so acceptable, as to give occasion for another: which we know is not usual with
Books of this nature, that serve no more than for once reading, and not for a
daily recourse.

IN the first Voyage we find him imbarqued for Genoa in a new Ship, which, with
another, was built for that State at Amsterdam in the year 1647. From Genoa he
went to the East Indies, where by the way he gives a very exact Description of
the Salt-Islands, Sierra Liones, Madagascar, Syam, (with the most horrible
Massacre committed upon the greatest Personages in that Kingdom) then proceeds
on his Voyage for Iapan, where he gives you an account of that Island and
Formosa.

IN the second the most remarkable is the Engagement between the Venetians and
the Turks, by Sea, in which the former fought a signal Victory. In this Voyage
I also find a very accurate Description of the Greek Islands, as they are now
peopled, with several Footsteps of Antiquity.

IN the third, and last as yet extant, he goes to Moscovia to serve the Czar
aboard a new Ship which was built on the Wolga, whereby the way he gives you a
Description of Lifeland and its Inhabitants, as also Moscovia and the Imperial
City Moscou; then proceeding forward he comes at last to the Wolga, where
setting sail for Astrachan, notes punctually what every day occurred. Arriving
there he gives you an account of the Insurrection and Proceeding of the
Cosac-Rebels, and the occasion why he and his Company fled over the Caspian
Sea; with the great hardship they suffered till they got ashore, where besides
many cruel Torments were made Slaves by the Tartars, in which condition he
continued till he was redeemed by order of the Governor and Council for the
Dutch East India Company at Batavia, whither he travailed through Persia, and
being by order of the said Company sent home aboard the Ship Europa, which was
taken by the English in the last Dutch Wars; he himself was sent for Ireland
with about 300 more of his Countrymen. Where arriving imbarques himself for
England, and so home.

St. Albans July 30, 1683. I.M.

A TABLE, Or Summary Comprehension Of every Paragraph in the Three VOYAGES Of
JOHN STRUYS.
The FIRST VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. THe first Occasion of the Authors going to Travel. A Sea-Storm.
Arrival at Gibralter, at Genua, with it is Description, at Velez Malaga.
Rescontre with 9 Corfairs of Algiers. Arrival at Boa Vista. A Description of
the Salt Islands, Ilha Mayo, Ilha del Fuogo, St. Jago and Ilha del Braeva.
Proper Climat of those Ilses. Arrival at Sierra Liones; The great Incivilitie
of the King, allured to come aboard, fettered, and afterward thrown over board,
A Description of Sierra Liones. Page 1. CHAP. II. Arrival at Madagascar. The
remarkable Chance of the Commander, meeting with the King. The Death of the
Vice-Commander Benning; and the disorders thence arising. Both the Ships put in
a Fighting Posture, and ready to give each other Battle. Voogt yields, and is
fettered. The description of Madagascar; it is Fertility, Store of Cattle;
Goodness of their Sheep; Many kinds of Monkeys. Nature of the Inhabitants,
Form, Habit, Housekeeping, Marriages and Funerals. Their impious cruelty ever
their Children. Their Religion, Policy and Wars. Page 12. CHAP. III. The
Author's departure from Madagascar, Arrival at Sumatra. Four Prizes belonging
to Atchin taken. The beastly Sensuality of some of the Ships-company upon a
Woman. The Ship whereon the Author was, taken as Prize, and brought up to
Batavia. The men plundered, and their Chests broken up. The Author admitts
himself into the Service of the East India Company, his Voyage to Siam. An
accurate description of that Kingdom. Page 24. CHAP. IV. The nature and way of
Living of the Siamers. Their several Trades and Profession. Travail of their
Merchants. Government and Polity. The great State of the Emperor, and
Magnificency of his Throne: his Cavalcade, and manner of showing himself to his
People. The Riches of his Vessels, and the Elephants served in Gold and Silver.
The Wars about the white Elephant, against Ava and Pegu. Page 29. CHAP. V. The
Revenues and Treasury of the King of Siam. The Religious zeal of those Kings in
building of Temples, and Houses for pious uses. Soldiers without pay. The great
Slavery and Charges of the Citizens and Plebeians, their Obedience, and
Liberality in Devotion. Ample Revenues of the Spiritual. Habit and Function of
their Priests. The Multitude and monstrous bigness of some of their Idols.
Their Ceremonies in Worship; wherein congruous to those of the Romish Religion.
Page 34. CHAP. VI. Good materials for building in Siam. Their manner of
Housekeeping, and entertainment of Friends. Neatness and cleanliness in their
Houses and Bodies. Their way of dressing themselves, both men and Women.
Strange Contracts of Matrimony. Early marriage. Education of their Children.
Learning and learned Men had in great veneration. Rites about their deceased.
Urbanity in their Conversation. The great Affection of the Emperor toward
Strangers etc. Page 37. CHAP. VIII. The Sieur van Muyden invited to the
Exequies of the Princess. A stately Scaffold erected for the Solemnity of the
day. A magnificent and sumptuous Altar. Ornaments of the Corpse. The Train
attending the Ceremony: Order of the same. Money thrown among the people.
Stages erected for the Almosners. Artificial Fireworks. The vast Charges of
this Preparation. Page 41. CHAP. IX. The Body of the Princess burnt. A
remarkable token, whereby, it was concluded that she was poisoned. The Kings
fury against all the Domestics of the Princess, who are committed to custody.
The cruel Punishment of the suspected Parties. A strange way to find out the
guilty. Elephants used as Executioners. Fifty men and Women executed in one
day, some by Elephants, others buried in the Earth, to the Head, where they are
suffered to starve. A Young Lady with her Brother taken and dispatched. Their
Candor, and free resolvedness to die. Page 44. CHAP. X. The proud, and
blasphemous Titles of the King of Siam. The great Preparations used to assuage
the Waters of the Ganges. Page 50. CHAP. XI. Departure from Siam. They take a
Junk. The Cambodiers put in a Ship without Rudder or Sails. Arrival at Formosa.
The Junk and all the Men cast away. A Description of Formosa, with an account
of its Products, and the Nature of it is Inhabitants, as also their Houses,
Habit and Customs. Page 54. CHAP. XII. The Author departs from Formosa. His
arrival at Japon. The Description of Nanguesaque. The Condition of the Town. A
dreadful fire at Nanguesaque. The Stature, Nature, Habits, and Customs of the
Japoneezes. Departure from Japon. Arrival at Formosa the second time. Their
return to Siam, where they take in Elephants. The Author beat with a ropes-end
at the Mainmast, and why. His return for Holland, and End of the first Voyage.
Page 59.
The SECOND VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. AN account of the Authors undertaking his Second Voyage. A great Sea
Storm. His arrival at Yarmouth, and at Leghorn, with a Description of that
Town; as also of Pica and Florence, and lastly of Bologne. Page 65. CHAP. II.
The Author departs from Bologne, and arrives at Ferrara. Assailed by a Robber:
His Arrival at Venice, where he lists himself in the Armade. He arrives at
Sante. A great storm between Milo and Argentero. The Ship called The Golden
Cock split upon Rocks. A sad Shipwreck. A Woman wonderfully saved. The Authors
arrival at Candia: Departs with a Tartan to the Venetian Armade. Their
Appearance before Mytilene, where they obtain much Spoil and Provision; at last
assaulted by 200 of the Turkish Chevalrie. Their Encounter, and return aboard
the Fleet. Page 73. CHAP. III. The Authors Arrival at Sante Monte; and at Troy.
The Galleys of Bay come with the Turkish Armade. An English Ship engaged with
the Turks; defends her self manfully, and at last burned. The Author made
Slave, and put in a Galley, with an old Russ: Consult to escape: Betake
themselves to Water, and are discovered. The Russ shot with an arrow. They come
both to the Venetian Armade. Page 78. CHAP. IV. The fugitiv Slaves brought
before the General. The manner of their Encouraging their Men. Number of the
Venetian Ships and Galleys. Names of the Commanders and Chieftains. The
Malteezes join with the Armade. The Turkish Fleet sail up, endeavor to break
through, and are hindered by the Malteezes. The Turks throw up two Batteries. A
dreadful Engagement, and playing off the Cannon for three days together. The
Turks begin to settle. The Stability and valor of the Venetians. The Turks
loose their Courage. Page 82. CHAP. V. The Wind turns in favor of the
Venetians. The Turks flee and are obstructed. The brave Courage of the Galleys
of Bey. General Marcello killed. The manly Behavior of Lazaro Mocenigo, who
looses one eye. Two Dutch Ships, to wit, Het Wapen van Nassan, and Den David en
Goliath, blown up with their own Powder. The Turkish Capitana yields. The
General and disorderly Flight of the Turks. Their total overthrow, and loss on
both sides. Page 87. CHAP. VI. The Siege of Tenedos. The two Castles
surrendered. A description of Tenedos. Lemnos, it is Situation, and taking in.
The present state of Greece. I. Struyl's arrival at Pathmos and Samos. Taken by
the Turks with 6 of his Companions, and soon after ransomed. Page 90. CHAP.
VII. The Author admitts himself again into the Service of the Venetians.
Arrival at Corfu with an account of it is Strength, Bulwarks, Sconces and other
Fortifications, near, and about the City. Fertility of the Island. Arrival at
Cephalonia, it is Fertility, Situation and Strength. Arrival at Sante, an
account of its Strength, its Villages, Scarcity of fresh Water. Arrival at
Cerigo: Situation of that Island, Relics, or Ruins of the Temple of Venus.
Page 96. CHAP. VIII. The Author's arrival at Sante, or Xante, It Is admirable
Strength, Villages, and great Scarcity of fresh Water. Their Dough for bread
kneaded with Wine in stead of Water. Arrival at Cerigo; Situation of that
Island. Relics of the Temple of Venus. Arrival at Candia, with it is
Situation. A Description of the City, as to it is Strength, Inhabitants, the
most eminent Buildings and Churches, Climat, Soil, Vintage, Fruits, Vegetables,
Cattle, Fowl, Plenty of Silk and other Commodities, as also the modern Habit
and Attire of the Candians. A Description of Standia. The famous Fight between
Lazaro Mocenigo and the Tributary Auxiliaries of Argiers, Tripoli, Theunis and
Zoeli. The Fort of Zouaschi taken in by the Proveditor Mocenigo. The Turks
attacque Tenedos, but in vain. The Turkish Armada come out of the Dardanelli.
The Beginning of the Engagement. The Turkish Emperor comes with an Army of
20000 Horse, and 80000 Foot down to the shore, where from a high Tent he sees
the Engagement. The Turks loose their Posts, and Sail off. The incomparable
valor of Mocenigo and Bembo, who are unluckily killed by the fall of a
Sail-yard. Their Galley blown up with 400 Men. The Loss and Gains both on
sides. Page 98. CHAP. IX. The Venetian Armade appear before Napoli di Malvazia,
where they attack a Redoubt, which is surrendered. The City treats with the
Governor. The Fleet appears before Santorini; 2 terrible Earthquakes: Wine
good and cheap. The Author sent ashore to buy Provision. The Fleet under Sail.
The Turks come upon the Island, and the Author in danger of being made Slave;
hidden by the Greeks, and brought to Embro with a Barque. Arrival before
Nicsia, The Ruins of Apollos Temple. Arrival at Metelino, it is Situation and
Strength; plenty of Marble, Cypres wood, Wine, and Cattle. Nicsia the
Winter-haven for the Turkish Galleys. S. Georgia de Scyro. Delos: Relics and
Ruins of Heathenish Temples and Images of Apollo, Minerva and Diana. The Castle
of Tenos blown up with it is own Powder. The Island Milo, it is Situation,
Strength, Harbors, Inhabitants, Religion, store of Provision and Victuals. The
Dutch Ship De Princes, springs a leak. The Author goes aboard a Privateer,
leaves her and goes for Holland. Page 106.
The THIRD VOYAGE.
CHAP. I. THe Author undertakes his Third Voyage for Moscovia. The Names of the
Officers and others employed with him on that Journey and Voyage. Their
Difficulties in going out. Arrival at Riga, with a Description of the Town, and
their Departure from thence. The Nature of the Lifelanders their Houses,
Customs, Condition, Religion, and quaint form of an Oath. Arrival at Wolmar,
with a Description thereof. Their difficult Travels through Lifeland. Page 113.
CHAP. II. Arrival at Pitsiora, and at Pletskow, A strange Passage of a hungry
Bear. The Spindle-bone or Shank of a Giant. The Pleasant Prospects and
delightsom Landships of Moscovia. Arrival at Novogorod. The Antiquity and
former Glory of that City; how taken by the Moscovian, and Fortified by the
Swede. Their Departure from Novogorod, Rescounter with a Company of Robbers,
and Arrival at Colomna. Great abundance of Wolvs. Coldness of the Climat. Page
120. CHAP. III. A Quarrel with the Russians, Eight Dutch Merchants murdered in
a Wood. Arrival at Tweer, Another Rescountre with a Party of Robbers. Money
sent from Moscou. Pursuit of their Journey. They enter Moscou. Their good
Reception. The great Bear-Garden. Wolf and Bear-baiting. Death of the Empress,
and the pompous Exequies. Page 125. CHAP. IV. Situation of Moscou. It Is
Divisions and Wards. Kitay-Gorod the first City. The great number of Churches
and Cloisters. High Towers. Noted Humility and Obedience of a Russian
Gentleman. The greatest Bell in the World at Moscou. The Church of Jerusalem,
Zaar-gorod the second, Skoredous the third, and Strelitza Slowoda the fourth
Town. Great number of Houses within the City Moscou. A great Fire, whereby many
Houses within the City Moscou. A great Fire, whereby many Houses were consumed.
The coldness of the Climate. Diseases proper to the Country. Fertility and
Products of the Land. Page 130. CHAP. V. The Form, Nature and Property of the
Russes. Their ordinary Diet. Their great esteem of Brandy. Their ordinary
Habit. Women use painting of their Faces. The manner of their Marriages, and
nuptial Solemnities. Page 137. CHAP. VI. Divorcement among the Russes and the
sundry occasions thereof. Their Superstition about Cleanness and Uncleanness.
Baths, and the use of the same. The Hardiness and patience of the Russes in
suffering the Extremities of Heat, or Coldness. Some strange customs among the
Russes. Solemnities at the Burial of their Dead. Page 146. CHAP. VII. The
Religion and Church Government of the Russians. The Patriarch and his Office.
Of their Sacraments, etc. Page 151. CHAP. VIII. The Jurisdiction of the Czaar,
his Titles, Revenues and strict Justice. Page 155. CHAP. IX. Celebration and
Solemnity of Palm Sunday. The Departure of the Author out of Moscou to
Astrachan. Heads and Officers. They set Sail. A heavy storm. Arrival at
Nisen-Novogorod; Plenty of Provision at Nisen. A description of the famous
River Wolga. Beginning of the Cerem-or Crim-Tartars Their Customs and Nature.
Their Idolatry. Ceremonies about the Dead. Their Habit, Polygamy, etc. Page
175. CHAP. X. The Ship set fast upon a Foord. The great Utility of the
Linden-tree. Some of the Company drowned. Fertility and excellent Soil of the
Banks of the Wolga. Arrival at Casan. Casan taken in by the Russes. The
Casan-Tartars fight the Russes. The Russian Army flee. Moscou taken in. The
Czar becomes Tributary to the Tartars. The good Conduct and valor of the
Governor of Resan, who restores the Czar and the Empire to it is former
Freedom. Page 165. CHAP. XI. Departure from Casan. The strange manner of taking
Fish. Cities demolished by Tamerlan. The Ship run fast aground. The Salt-Pans,
and manner of making Salt. Difficult Sailing in the Wolga. A New City built for
defense against Robbers and Pirates. The great abundance of Liquirice about
Astrachan, The Land of the Calmuc-Tartars. Page 173. CHAP. XII. Situation of
Astrachan, he Inhabitants. How Astrachan became subject to the Czaar. Strange
manner of Tents, or Cottages. Provision very cheap and Brandy dear. A Desert
affoarding good Salt; and a strange kind of Fruit. The Form and Nature of the
Nagayan Tartars. Their Habit, manner of Life and Housekeeping. Their Trades
and way of earning money, Horseflesh, Mares-milk and Blood in great esteem by
them. Page 177. CHAP. XIII. Divisions and Limits of the Cosacks. Offspring of
Radzin. The Reason of his Revolting. The first beginning of his Insolency. His
treacherous Cruelty: The Governor of Astrachan makes preparation against him.
He betakes himself to flight and reconciles himself with the Czar. The
Incredible Riches and costly Attire of the Cosacks, The Person of Stenko Radsin
described. The meeting and discourse of the Author with Stenko Radzin. He keeps
a Persian Princess for his Concubine, which he throws with his own hand into
the Wolga. His Punishment for Adultery. Page 183. CHAP. XIV. Stenko returns
back and is followed by many Russes, but opposed by an Order from Psoforoski,
which Stenko disobeys. He returns again with a greater Power. The Waywode of
Astrachan sends out a Fleet against him, which shamefully yields. The Officers
murdered. A great Perplexity at Astrachan. Power and Aw of Stenko. His cruelty
and Pride. His Legates are devoured of Dogs in Persia. Kumuskinka surrendered by
Treachery Page 189. CHAP. XV. The Animosities and Tumults in Astrachan. Stariza
taken in by the Cosacks. A Fleet sent out against them. The Cosacks win
Tzarnojar. The Russian Fleet yields to the Cosaks. The great Insolency and
boldness of the Mobile of Astrachan. The valor of the Waywod or Governor.
Advised to abscond or absent himself, which i^ put in practice. Page 193. CHAP.
XVI. They fall down the Wolga, and miss their Course. They touch a^ Oetzjoege.
The strange manner o^ fishing of the Bieloege. The great plenty of Cavear. They
meet with great difficulty to gain the Caspian Sea which at last they get. A
description of the Island Satyry Boggere, Ta^ Reeds grow all along the Coast. A
dreadful Tempest. The Golden Bay heir meeting with a Tartarian Bark A
description of Terki. The Beginning of the Circas-Tartars; Their Persons and
Complexions described. Their Habit and way of Living. Of their Women, their
Habit, Humors and Inclinations. Their Idolatry. Page 198. CHAP. XVII. The
Author and his Company err in their Course. They meet with a Cosak-Bark. A
great Tempest. The Beginning and Limits of the Dagestan-Tartars; Their Posture
or Frame of Body, Habit and Way of Living. They are great Plagiaries. The
Barrenness of the Dagestan Mountains. Another great Tempest. The Shallop run
astrand and is spied by the Tartars, who plunder them. The strange way of
electing the Dagestan Kings. They are assailed by another Company who ravish
the Woman in presence of her Husband, and convert them all to Slaves. The
Author tortured to detect his Companions, which he manfully endures. They are
brought before the Osmyn, and chained. Page 206. CHAP. XVIII. The Captivs take
their leaves of each other. The great Orchard near Tzurbag. Their Arrival at
Urwan. Situation of Mount Ararat. An accidental meeting with some Carmelite
Friars. The Author insisted upon to undertake a Cure of a Rupture, which with
much persuasion, he promises to do. His ascent up the Mountain Ararat to the
Hermites Cell, who was his Patient, which he performs in 5 days time. He
undertakes and cures the Rupture. The Copy of an Attestation given him by the
said Hermit in barbarous Latin. His return down. Page 212. CHAP. XIX. The
Author put in Chains again: He is insisted upon to renounce the Christian Faith
and become Mohammedan; Diverse means to that end put in practice by way of Trial.
The great gain of warm Baths. The Author taken out of Chains. He is sold to a
Persian. The Situation of the Caspian Sea. Great Whirlpools in the Bay of
Gilan. A discourse about the Silktrade. A further Description of the Caspian
Sea, etc. Page 218. CHAP. XX. A Description of Derbent: it is Walls. The Sultans
Court. Very old Ruins. Diverse Watch-towers. Multiplicity of Sepulchrets without
Derbent. Their Slave-market. The Author sold again. His Patron married with a
Polish Woman and runs into Danger of his Life. The Intention of his Patroness
in running away from her Husband and taking the Author with her. Two of Mr.
Struys's Companions come to Derbent. How they made their escape from the
Tartars. The great Inclination of the Sultan of Derbent to the Hollanders. A
Device put in practice to set one of the Authors Companions at Liberty. The
Prince takes the Wife of Brak for his own. Brak makes his escape. Page 225.
CHAP. XXI. The great difficulty of getting Wood without Derbent. The Author and
his company assailed by Robbers two several times. The kind nature of his
Patron. They travel to Scamachy. The Hill Barmach, The Pit of Naphta. Arrival
at Scamachy. A Description of that City. A great Earthquake at Scamachy.
Abundance of men misfortunatly killed. The Author meets with 2 Franciscan
Friars: A rehearsal of some part of their Discourse: their Zeal to get him out
of the Service of a Mohammedan. Advice given him by his Patron. He comes first
into the Service of the Polish Ambassador. Page 235. CHAP. XXII. The Hatred
and Churlishness of the Ambassador against the Polish Gentry. A Polish
Gentleman murdered in his bed. The pitiful case and condition of the
Polanders, who were in the Retinue of the Legate. The Ambassadors Greediness.
He endeavors to turn Mohammedan, The Authors intention to make his escape.
Captain Butler and others of his old acquaintance come to Scamachi, where they
do what they can for the Captivs. The Ambassadors Brother goes for Ispahan,
where he desires to be admitted as a Mohammedan, but is not received, William
the Masters Mate of the Ship Eagle comes to Scamachi. A great Earthquake.
Consecration of Water among the Armenian Christians. A great concourse of
People, and remarkable Ceremonies. CHAP. XXIII. The Ambassadors Sister goes to
Tafflis, and with her the Polish Surgeon. The Corpse of an Indian burned with
a Christian she-slave. The Woman having taken in a Potion to provoke sleep, is
also cast into the furnace. Two Men murdered at Scamachi, and a tumult
thereupon. Strange Geremonies about the Dead. The Chans son is presented with a
Kolotan, or Robe of Favor, and one of the Kings Wives. A man struck dead with
staves. A fearful Earthquake. The Chan also receives a Robe of Favor, and a
Wife. Pompous Solemnities at the delivery of the same. He receives the
Princess. New Tidings from Russia. The Ambassador commanded by the King of
Persia to return for Poland; but makes his excuse. The miserable Estate of the
Polish Gentry. Theft committed in the Ambassadors Palace. A man tortured that
was innocent. The Polish Surgeon fortunatly married at Tafflis. Another
Corpse of an Indian burned with a living Woman. The great kindness of Hadsy
Biram to the Author. His bad entertainment with the Ambassador. Page 249. CHAP.
XXIV. The manner of Celebrating New years day among the Persians. Advice from
Boynak: from Derbent. Fireballs fall from the Sky. Five Hundred beautiful
Damsels sought up for the Scach, or Sophy of Persia. A quaint mean by which a
Merchant saves his Daughter. The Author writes to Smarna. A Chieftain of the
Cosaks brought into Scamachy; and is compelled to carry 3 of his Companions
Heads in a Bag to Ispahan, where he is upon promise of detecting something of
weight set at Liberty. A Persian murdered by a drunken Georgian. The murderer
executed by the Brother of the murdered Party. A horrible Self-murder
committed by several Persons at a Wedding. A great Feast celebrated in memory
of Hosseyn the 3 d Son of Ali. A terrible Earthquake. The Chans Son dies and
is interred. Page 257. CHAP. XXV. News from Astrachan. A Woman and Adulteress
taken in the Fact. A Young Gentleman caned to death by Order of the Prince and
Complaint of his Father. Another put to the same death. One of the Authors
Companions goes for Ispahan, Hailstones as big as Eggs. The Author and a
Venetian entertained in an Armenian Monastery. A Woman taken in Adultery, for
which she is surrendered up to the Will and Power of her Husband, who fleas her
alive, nails up her Skin upon the Wall, and throws her Carcass out into the
street. The great Jealousy of the Persians. The male Children about the Court
gelded. The great Slave-market at Scamachy. The unnatural custom of the
Georgians, The Ambassador receives a Charge to depart. Page 267. CHAP. XXVI. A
dreadful Tempest. Great Balls of Fire fall upon the Earth. A most fearful
Deluge, whereby Houses, Men and abundance of Cattle are carried away. The Chan
receivs another Robe of Favor. The Offerings of the Banjans, for the Fowl and
Fish. The Religious Exercise of the Persian Women. The Author's Discourse with
the Chan. The Author meets with one of the Tartars who had made him Slave. He
gets out of the service of the Polish Ambassador. The great Bounty and kindness
of his Patron Hadzi Biram, and of Altine his Patroness. One of his Company,
made free. Page 273. CHAP. XXVII. Their departure out of Scamachi. The Country
about Kasily described and the manner of living of the Inhabitants. A
Description of the River Araxex. The Heath of Mokan, whither all the Banditti
and Mutinous Persons have recourse. Abundance of Tortoises near Balharu. The
Poverty, yet contented Life of the People and Inhabitants there about. The
Author set upon by Robbers. The Carravan Assailed and Plundered. A famous stone
Bridge. The sepulcher of Zeyde Tzeybrail. Arrival at Ardebil. The Situation of
that Town. The bitter Cold. Great and raging Whirl-winds. Extraordinary good
Wheat. The great Toll and Duty paid for Sheep. Seven and Fifty Towns within the
Jurisdiction of Ardebil. A Description of the City, of it is Streets, and of the
Street of Strumpets, who are Poetesses and ordained to compose Hymns of Praise
to the name of the Great Aly, Free Places within the City. The Markets and
Shops. Sumptuous Mezids and Chapels. Page 281. CHAP. XXVIII. Hadzi Byram goes
to perform his Religious Duties at the Sepulcher of Zeyde Tzebrail. The Author
begs of his Lord that he may be Spectator of the Ceremonies, which at last
after many entreaties is granted. A Description of that noble Mausoleum. Famous
Baths in Ardebil. The sulphurous Baths whither the Author accompanies his
Patron. The manner of using those Baths. The stupendous and sumptuous
Sepulcher of Scach Sephy described. The great Zeal and Devotion of Hadzi Byram.
The Oratory, or House of Prayer, where (as they say) Schach Sephy prayed and
fasted for 40 Days togeher without Intermission, using only a Cup of Water
every day. Doors covered with Plates of Gold by Schach Abas. The Library, and
Repository of the Utensils for the Kings Table. The Garden or Yard where the
Persian Kings lie interred. The names of the 12 Kings that lie there buried.
The Revenues belonging to this Mesar, or Sepulcher. Some fast Revenues. Ardebil
a famous Mart. Page 290. CHAP. XXIX. The Author taken for a Persian, which gave
him occasion to see all that was worthy of remark. The Caravan leaves Ardebil,
and goes over the famous Mountain Taurus. The Head of the River Kisiloseyn. Bad
and uneasy Traveling by reason of steep Rocks. Peril of Robbers. Arrival at
Sultanie. Keydar Pey-Amber, a wonderful high Mountain it is Situation, and by
whom built. Emarath, the Noble Palace of King Choddabende. The Temple of Schach
Ismael. The present decaying State of Sultany. The Author shorn and habituated
after the Persian Manner. Pleasant Dales and Valleys. Arrival at Caswin. The
Situation of that Place. The Court of Schach Tames. The Place of Convention, or
Exchange of Whores. The Common Place of Sepulture and Metzid of of Scach
Bessade, the Son of Hosseyn, by which the Persians swear. The Offering of a
Camel. Page 298. CHAP. XXX. Departure from Caswin. Arrival at Saba, and an
account of the Condition of that Town. The Earth red and barren by the Curse of
Mahomet. They arrive at Kom, with a Description of that Place. Melons of a very
fragrant and lovely smell. A strange kind of Cucumbers. Khom the Staple for
Weapons. The People addicted to Thievery. The Author's combat with a Greek
Renegado Departure out of Khom. Arrival at Kaschan. Its Situation. The People,
and their way of Living and Negotiation. Noble Carawanseras; or Houses of
Entertainment. Many Gold-and Silk-Cloth Weevers. A sort of great and venomous
Scorpion and a kind of fell Spiders, which are a powerful venom, with the
strange manner of Cure for the same. Their Arrival at Natens. A Faulcon fights
and conquers an Eagle. Page 307. CHAP. XXXI. Arrival at Ispahan. Their
Reception with the Dutch Resident. A Relation of the Stability of Anthony
Munster, who was urged to embrace Mahometanism: his Death and Burial. The
Manner and Situation of the Dutch Lodge. The Situation of Ispahan, it is
Greatness: Rivers running through the same. The Aque-duct, a mighty work of Schach
Abas. The Streets of Ispahan. Maydan and Basar. Fair Arches and Galleries. The
Sumptuous Mestzid of Schach Abas. Dowlet- or Schach-Chane, the Royal Palace.
The Divan-Chane, or Court of Justice. The Hieram Chane, or Palace of the Kings
Concubines. Allycarpi a Sanctuary, or place of Refuge. Carawanseras, Taverns.
Cahwae Chane, Coffee-Houses. Persian Saints and Philosophers. Remal and Falkil,
two sorts of Soothsayers. Their strange and ridiculous way of presaging. The
Kaysery or Gallerie of Shops. Page 313. CHAP. XXXII. Taberik Kale the Treasury
of the Kingdom. The Suburbs of Ispahan. Tziulfa, a place where the Armenian
Christians have their Residence. Tabrisabath. Hassenabath. Kebrabath, so called
from Kebber, Persians that are still Pagans. Tzarbag. The Nature of the
Persians. Property of the Land. Celebration of the Epiphany by the Armenian
Christians. Page 321. CHAP. XXXIII. The great Civility of Hadsi Biram. The
Authors Departure out of Ispahan. Their incommodous Traveling through the Snow.
Wells and Pits of Water abounding with Fish. They are much incommodated in
their Travailing. The Caravan assailed by Robbers. Their Superstitious horror
of Swines Flesh. Sepulcher of Schach Solyman's Mother. The Sepulcher of Noah,
his Wife, Children, and Childrens Children. Tzilminar. The Pompous Relicts and
Ruins of the famous Persepolis, and the noble Fort thereof. The Statue of
Rustan, a Persian Champion. Page 327. CHAP. XXXIV. Arrival at Scyras. They meet
with some Carmelites. The base dealings of those of the Caravan. The Author
meets with the Thief that had pillaged him. Mr. Struys well entertained by a
French Surgeon. A Description of Scyras. Diverse Mestzids, or Sepulchers. The
Palace of the Chan. Excellent Wine about Scyras. Noble Orchards. Departure
from Scyras. The Special Bounty of the Carmelites. and the French Surgeon.
Dates plentiful and cheap. How the Date-trees are propagated. Arrival at
Scharim. They meet a Caravan. Assailed by night of 30 Robbers, who kill 5 Men
of the Company, and at last by a unanimous continuance of the Caravan force
them to yield. The Robbers beg Quarter which is refused. They suffer themselves
to be bound; are diversely tortured and dispatched Great plenty of Partridges.
Page 336. CHAP. XXXV. The incommodous Traveling over Mountains. They com into
an Inn (or Carawansera) where they are well entertained. Arrival at Lar. A
Description of that Town. The Unwholsomness of the Air and wate^ there. The
Inhabitants given to Hospitality and Lovers of all kinds of Discipline and
Science. Mummay Kobas, a precious Balsam. Remarkable Monuments of Robbers
executed Departure from Lar. They meet with another Troop of Robbers* whereof 7
are killed. They are overtaken by Monsr. Kasenbroot, Their Arrival a^ Gamron.
Page 344 CHAP. XXXVI. A Description of Gamron, or Bendar, and the Etamology.
The great Traffic with all Nations. Unwholsomness of the Air, and Heat at
Gamron. Palepunshen, an unwholsom Drink how made. The Earth dry and barren.
Fertility of Kismisch. Of the Inhabitants of Gamron. A wonderfu^ Tree growing
without the City. A^ Indian (reputed) Saint. The best season for strangers to
com and Traffic a^ Gamron. Merchandise brought thithe^ by the English. The
English receiv To with the Schach. The Hollanders trad^ without paying Toll.
The Autho^ falls very sick and in despair of Recovery. The kindness and bounty
of L. van Akersloot to him. He recovers. Set sail from Gamron. Arrival at
Maschate and a Description of that Town. The violent Heat about Maschate which
renders the Air very unwholsom. Their Departure from Maskate. Arrival at
Batavia. The Author hires himself for Sailmaker. Comes with 7 Ships before
Bantham. Arrival at the Cape of Good Hope. Page 349. CHAP. XXXVII. Their
Departure from the Cape of Good Hope. The Ship Europa taken by the English. The
English take the Island of St. Helena, and 2 Dutch Ships more. The Author warns
the rest of the Ships. Three Dutch Ships escape a scouring. Arrival at
Ascension. Abundance of Tortoises on that Island. A Description of the said
Island. It Is Unfruitfullness and want of fresh water. A Debate held among the
English to leav the Dutch upon the Island. Departure from Ascension. Arrival at
Kingsale in Ireland. Their Departure from thence, Arrival at Bristol and
finally at Home. Page 354.
DIRECTIONS For the BOOK BINDER, How to place the PLATES.
The City Judia. Page 27 The Massacring of the Mandorins and great Personages
in Syam. Page 45 Tenedos. Page 91 Pathmos. Page 93 Delos, or Delphos. Page 110
Astrachan. Page 177 Radzin throwing the Persian Lady into the Wolga, Page 187
Sturgeon-taking. Page 199 The Tartars on Horseback. Page 204 Mount Ararat. Page
214 The Card of the Caspian Sea. Page 222 The City Scamachy in Persia. Page 239
The manner of bringing the Kings Concubines in Persia to Court. Page 260 A
Woman flayed alive. Page 270 Ispahan. Page 316 Persepolis. Page 332 Scyras, or
Sieras. Page 338 Gammeron. Page 35^ Moschate. Page 352 The Massacre in
Astrachan. Page 360
THE Perilous and most Unhappy TRAVELS of JOHN STRUYS, Through Italy, Turkey,
Persia, Tartary, East India, Moscovia, etc.
CHAP. I. The first Occasion of the Authors going to Travel. A Sea-Storm.
Arrival at Gibralter, at Genua, with it is Description, at Velez Malaga.
Rescontre with 9 Corsairs of Algiers. Arrival at Boa Vista. A Description of
the Salt Islands, Ilha Mayo, Ilha del Fuogo, St. Jago and Ilha del Brava.
Proper Climat of those Isles. Arrival at Sierra Liones; The great Incivilitie
of the King, allured to come aboard, fettered, and afterward thrown over board,
A Description of Sierra Liones.
WEll worthy of remark is that Observation of a modern Sage, Despair drives a
man either to the Camp, or a Convent: With no less reason may we add, That the
insubid Resolutions and Praecipitance of youth, lead either to illicit Arts, or
Travel: which last was a Misfortune fatal to my self. My Fathers sole Care was
to see me trained up, in some laudable Vocation, or other; whereby I might for
the future be in a capacity to acquire my necessary sustenance, without being
burthensom to my Relations, or the use of any dishonorable Mean, or Practice:
And to that end put me out to a Sail-maker. DEC. 1647.
He now perceiving some hopeful Prospect of Good in my Undertakings, was ever
studious to give me all the Encouragement he could on his part; and to show the
Affection incumbent on a Parent, restrained me, as far as in him lay, from
going abroad, or associating my self with such Company, as might be obnoxious,
or destructive to those good Maxims he had given me: But various are the
Tempers and Dispositions of Youth; and sometimes their frame of spirit so
occult, that the piercing Judgments of riper Years cannot sound it, although
it were with the Eyes of Eagles.

Set sail from Texel.
My Father, whose Rigor was somewhat more than tolerable, was never remiss in
reprehending me for any noted Vice; so that for some bad deportment he once
took occasion to Chastise me, and that with such severity, that I resolved to
take my leave both of him, and my native Land. At that time there were two
Ships fitted out, and bound for Genua: the one was called, The St. John
Baptist, Henry Christansz. of Amsterdam Master, the other, The St. Bernard,
John Benning of VVesep Vice-Commander, and Herman Voogd of Schiedam Master;
Over both these Ships was Mr. John Maas of Dunkirk, as Upper-Commander. The
former was mounted with 28 Guns, the latter carried 26. I hired my self aboard
the St. I. Baptist for Under-Sailmaker, being then about 17 years old, never
troubling my self either whither we were bound, or how long we were to be out.

On the 26 of December 1647. By Gods good Conduct, we set Sail, from the Texel,
but were hardly got without the Gaats, ere we found that our Ships were not
duly poised, and thereupon were fain to Tack about, and put in at the Texel
again, where we unloaded part of the Ships-burthen, and took in a considerable
quantity of Pewter, some Boxes of Quicksilver, and other ponderous Materials,
to Ballast us well at the Keel; which when we had done and all ready, we set
out the second time, that was upon the 4 day of January, January, 1648.
1648, and with a brave Wind, we passed the Spaniards Gat, driven with some
Shoals of Ice (it being then Frosty weather) Seawards.

On the 10 of January we were forced by a contrary wind to put in at the Downs;
where after two days abode, we weighed anchor, having both Wind and Weather
favorable. But soon after by a heavy Storm and rough Sea, FEBR. 1648. Storm at
Sea.
we were forced again to put into some other Harbor; which we did at the Isle
of VVight, and there we stayed till the 25th when the Weather began to grow
more moderate, and the high Winds abated.

Under hopes that this good Weather would continue we fet sail, but were no
sooner out of the Bay, before the Weather changed, and we now the third time
forced to look out for a Harbor.

On the 6 of February we came to Anchor at Portland, where we road three days,
and then set sail directly for the Bay of Gibralter, where we arrived on the
10th of that month. The next day with a brisk gale we entered the Straits, and
with a constant and favorable wind, made Genua in 15 days, where arriving we
dropped Anchor behind the Mold.

On the 32th we got Prattica, Arrival de Genua.
and License to unload both the Ships; which done the Men were paid off, and
dismissed. The Ships, as we said before, were sold to the Duke of Genua, which
he furnished with Provision of Victuals, Powder, Shot and other Ammunition, for
2 years. Aboard each Ship were a Hundred Dutch taken into service, the rest for
the most part Italians, amongst which were a few of the Banditti. Here I hired
my self for Upper-Sailmaker, and had 18 Livers per Month; although neither I,
nor any else that went before the Mast, knew whither, or upon what Design.

Having now regained my liberty, I longed to satisfy my curiosity in taking a
view of the Town, with what else was worthy of remark. Genua is seated on the
Sea side, Description of Genua.
having a very commodious and complete Haven, on the South facing the Co^st of
Africa. The City is built partly on montanous and hilly ground, and partly on
a Level, seated between two velleys; and is computed to be abut 6 Italian Miles
in circumference, being very well and close built, munited with strong Walls,
sufficient enough to resist a small Attacque; but would not secure the Town in
a long and durable Siege; or violent Storms, without the Militia. Their Militia
consists of some Dutch and Corsican Companies, together with a few small Troops
of Horse, which are constantly in motion, either on the Seaside, or through the
City, to prevent, if need require, any silent Attacque, and suppress Mutinies;
as also to secure the Coasts from Turkish and other Pirates, which sometimes
come ashore in their Shalops, to get Slaves and Spoil. They have always four
Galleys ready upon all Occasions, for Defense of the Havens; besides a
considerable number more, which they have in their Arsenal, in good equippage;
these are often employed as Auxiliaries for the Venetians, against the Turks.
On the Seaside stands a Watchtower, on which by night they set a Beacon; and
just at the Entrance of the Haven, stands a huge piece of Ordnance, mounted
upon a Carriage, continually guarded with a Sentinel. The Dukes Person is
guarded with a Body of 500 Soldiers, who with their Colonel have a place
allotted them in the Palace. The City is generally well built with stately
Houses and magnificent Structures, more especially on that side which is seated
near the Sea: having besides the more eminent Hostels and Public Buildings, 30
fair Parish Churches, of which that dedicated to St. Laurence claims the
priority, as Cathedral. In the Church dedicated to the H. Eucharist, Genua.
they showed us a Key made of an Emerald, being of the unusual bigness that ^t's
worth may not be computed. Coming to the Church of St. Bartholomew, we saw a
handkercheif, with which they told us our Savior wiped the sweat from his
face, and (as they say) has done abundance of Miracles. The City is very
populous, their Merchants rich and numerous; and their Manufactury also very
considerable, especially in Velvets, there being according to the relation
given us; above 8000 Looms in the Town so that considering the Magnificency of
Building, the Riches of her Merchants, Commodiousness of Situation, and
Splendour of her Court and Palace, may be reckoned as a Town of the first
Magnitude.

Velez Malaga.
On the 12 of April we set sail, directing our course for Velez Malaga, where on
the 15 we arrived. On the 18 we hoised sail, and made for Malaga, and on the 24
came to cast anchor in the Bay; where almost all the Banditti were set ashore.
Here we took in a hundred Pipes of Wine, with candied Fruits and other
Refreshments for the sick.

On the 29 of May we weighed Anchor, and with a brisk gale of Wind reached the
Straits mouth on the 2 of June. When we were past Gibralter, we steered our
Course toward the Salt Islands, which was designed for another place of
Refreshment, from whence we gathered that, our Voyage must needs be longer than
at first we thought; for till then none aboard the ship (unless the Officers)
knew whither we were bound, JUNE, 164^.
or upon what account we were sent out.

On the fourth of June, we met with 9 Turkish Men of War, about the 3d. Watch
in the night, who Hailed us, asking, from whence our ship, we answered, From
Genua, and asked them, From whence they were: they made answer, From Argiers.
Our Commander hearing that unwelcome Echo, was not a little alarmed, and could
have wished himself at a further distance; however he resolves to exchange a
ball or two with them by break of day; and in order thereto gets all in a
readiness; commands every man to his Post, and gave us all the courage he could
by his own Example. The Corsairs who although better manned and mounted than we,
Arrival at Boa Vista.
had no great stomach to go so early to breakfast, for observing such marks of
Courage in our Officers, and that they were absolutely resolved to fight'um,
made all the sail they could, and left us.

On the 14 we passed the Flemmish Islands, and on the 6 of July, we arrived at
Boa Vista, where we came to Anchor in the Bay. On this Island were several of
the Banditti, who brought us such Provision as they had aboard: we took in also
ten boats of salt. About this Island is such plenty of Fish that at one draught
we got 1500 Corcoads and Salmon-Fry.

Boa Vista is one of those Islands, which are called Cabo Verdo Islands,
Description of the Sale Islands.
having obtained that appellation, from it is delectable prospect from the
Seaward, and lies 7 leagues to the northward of Ilha del Sal: and is reckoned
to be about 20 leagues in circumference, stretched out in length South-east and
North-west. That part which lies near the sea is all sandy and hilly ground,
but within altogether montanous and high land. On the north end is a long Bank
near half a league in length, which repelleth the billows of the sea with great
violence. There are yet besides this several other Foords, which are often the
occasion of Shipwreck. On the South is also another, where the Rocks sometimes
appear above water, The Island Majo.
and points out toward the East, and E. and by North. The best and safest
place to come to Anchor in, is at the Southwest Point, where is a very
commodious Road for Ships of the greatest burden, having at lest 16 or 17
fathom Water, and a fine sandy ground.

In this Road we lay at anchor 6 days, and then set sail for Majo, St. Iago,
JULY 1648.
Fuogo and Brava; which are the nearest Islands to Boa Vista.

The Island Majo.
The Island Majo lies about nine leagues S. S. W. or rather mo^ Westerly, from
Boa Vista, and is the smallest of all the rest, being about 7 leagues round.
Within land are several steep hills, and on the North a Plain, about a league
in breadth from whence reaches out a long Bank toward the North-east, and
another toward the West, which cause impetuous Breaches of the Sea, and
consequently great danger for Ships that sail that way. The Island is almost
round in circumference, having its breadth and length almost equal, and is full
of small Capes or Promontories, which make so many Inlets. The common Road
belonging to this Island, is on the South-west Coast, where you have 15 and 16
fathom Water, and a sandy ground; having the Western point of the Island at N.
and by W. and another Point at E. S. E. and the South end of St. Iago S. W. On
the North side of the Island, behind a little black Cape, lies a small Bay, or
Road for Anchorage, at 5 or 6 fathom water, and upon the lowest point, on the
East, is a Village of 10 or 12 houses. This Island is very rocky, high and dry,
having little grass upon it but what grows in the clefts of the Rocks. It is
also very barren of Fruit, neither Lemmons nor Oranges will like there; nor no
other fruit whatsoever, unles sigs, and those, by reason of the drought of the
Season and Ground, seldom ever come to maturity, or return to profit. There are
in this Island some Cotton-trees, and good plenty of Goats, so that there are
many thousands of those Hides transported yearly from hence. There are also
some wild Horses, Kine and Asses; good plenty of Fowl, as Patridge, Heathhens,
Bustards, Wild-geese, and other Fowl, not known with us in Europe.

There are also many Saltpans on this Island, where the Salt by the Ground
Water, and the Ingress of the Sea, with the help of the Sun, is well concreted,
yet is somewhat too yellow in color. The Inhabitants are a mixed folk, of
Negros, and others, who follow Goat hunting, using Wolves in stead of Dogs.
Some also follow the Fishing trade, and find great plenty of A kind of Seabream.
Cyprins, Dorades, and other Fish.

St. Jago.
St. Iago is the greatest and chief of the Cabo Verdo Islands, being about 12
leagues in length, lying South-East and North-west: The South-east Cape thereof
has the Road of the Island Majo on the West, and W. and by N. about 5 leagues
distant. The high Land of St. Iago lies from the Road of Majo directly West,
but the middle thereof South-west from Boa Vista, or rather more Westerly; and
from the Salt Island S. W. and by S. about 25 Leagues. From the South-west
Angle, the coast stretches it self forth 2 leagues South-west, where there is a
small Hamlet, called Pray, situated in a commodious place, between two Hills,
and environed with 2 Rivers; which running into the Sea, do make two handsome
Bays, one whereof is called Porto de Pray, and has room enough to contain an
hundred Ships, which may safely ride at Anchor, without damnifying each other,
having 14 fathom water, and shot-free from Land, as also the benefit of a small
Island, which breaks off the wind. Sailing past Porto de Pray, before you come
at the Town, is a Cape, or small Promontory, which the Portugeezes call Capo de
Tubarao: On the West whereof is another Bay, called Porto de Ribeirra Corea,
which also is very fitly seated between two Hills, and a River that runs
through the middle, rising from a fountain, about 2 leagues from thence, and
disgorging it self into the Sea, by a mouth about a Bowshot in breadth. In the
North is also another Haven called St. Mary. On the Island St. Iago are yet two
Towns of note, whereof the one is called St. Thomas, very well seated; the
other St. Iago, or St. James, which is built upon a rising Ground: This is the
Metropolis of all the Towns of these Islands, where is also the Residence and
Palace of their Bishop. Toward the West, on an Angle of the Island is a
Fortress, two leagues from Porto de Pray, where Ships come to anchor; and
North-west from this Angle another Haven; known by the name of Porto de Canisos.

This Island is very fertile, and abounds with fruit of several kinds, as on
each side the Rio de Corea grow great plenty of Cocos, Oranges, Citrons, and
other Fruit Trees, as also some Cedars. Besides this, it affoards good store of
Rice, Mais, and other grain, as also Cattle both for work and slaughter.

Ilha del Fuogo, or, The Isle of Fire, probably has that name from one of it is
Mountains, which continually sends forthflames, Ilha del Fuogo.
by some intestin Fire. It lies in 14 degr. 20 min. Northerly Latitude, and 12
leagues from the South-west point of St. Iago. North-west, on the West Side,
JULY, 1670.
is a Bay, and a small castle seated at the foot of a hill: but the violent
course of the stream, renders the haven unapt to receive any Shipping. Those
that would enter the Bay must steer their course to the North of this Island,
and so about.

About 4 leagues South-west of Ilha del Fuogo, lies Ilha del Brava, that is,
VVild, or Desert Island, with two or three small Islands, on the North thereof.
On the West Side is a Creek, very convenient for such as have occasion to take
in water: but the best haven is on the South-east side where it is 15 fathom
deep, and a Ship of the greatest burden may come to anchor close to the Kay.
Above this Harbor is a Hermitage, and a Village very well peopled. This Island
is also fruitful enough, having good store of figs, Mulberrys, Water-Melons,
and Indian wheat, but far inferior to Mayo and St Iago for cattle.

The Air of these Islands is generally unwholsom, so that the inhabitants are
very subject to Fevers, Aches and Fluxes. These Islands lying between the
Equator and the Tropic of Cancer, affoard the People two Summers every year,
the Sun passing twice directly over their heads. When the sun enters into
Cancer, which is in the end of June, the season is very intemperate, with
Storms, Winds, Thunder and Lightning, continuing so till the middle of October;
the^ the Portugueezes call the Rain months. They have certain tokens, whereby
they know when this Season approaches, as, high Southe^ly Winds which blow
along the Coast, and the Salt, which begin to dissolve, with the Billows
rolling out of the Sea.

On the 14 we left the Salt Islands, and set sail, for Sierra Liones and made
land, on the 2d of August, hearing at a great distance the Wind roaring from
the Mountains, which by the reason of their Concavity, do make a great buzzing
when it blows hard, that perhaps has given them the name of Sierra Liones, or
Lioness Mountai^ A little before the evening we came with our Boat close to the
shore where we heard a most terrible Noise, occasioned by an impetuou^ and
continual beating of the billows through the cleft of a Rock which was so loud
that we could hardly hear one another spea^ Sierra Liones takes it is beginning
from Cabo de Virgin, and stretches^ self so far out as Cabo Tagrin, or Led,
which is also by some call^ Cabo de Sierra Liones, JULY 1648.
lying in 8 Degr. and 13 Min. Northerly Latitude; and by reason of it is height,
is easily distinguished from that Continent, which lies to the Northward of
this Promontory; the more because it reaches further Seaward. The South, and
South and by E. part of this Land lies toward the Sea, and is high and hilly,
but the land of the Cape toward the North, for the most part level and marshy.
There are 13 Rivulets which coming from the Land, run through these Mountains,
and so empty themselves in the Ocean, and have on their banks plenty of
Fruit Trees, as Oranges, Pome-Citrons, and the like.

On the 3 of August we arrived in the Bay of Sierra Liones. Immediately upon
our arriving there, the Commander sent the Shallop ashore, and such persons as
he did think fit, with Presents for the King, which were 5 Bars of Iron, a
Barrel of Brandy, and another of Spanish Wine.

Those men that were nominated to deliver the Presents, were courteously
received by the King and his Court. We could not perceive any Mark of
Superiority, or Grandour in the Prince, which might distinguish him from his
Subjects, no more than in Mr. Mayor of Stratford, from his Worshipful
Brethren, the Aldermen. Yet found him much to vary from some other Sovereign
Potentates who enrich themselves at the Cost and Penury of their Vassals. The
King and his Folk were equally insatiable and covetous; for so soon as the King
had received the Present, he desired as much more, which the Commander was
content to send him, that he might have the freedom to take in Water, and Wood
for Fuel, as also to provide our selves with Oranges, Lemmons, and other
Refreshments. The Inhabitants, which are called Caffers, showed us no small
Friendship; for, so long as our Penny lasted, they never faild of a Pater
noster, bringing us every day good store of Fruit. When the King had received
the double Present, he insisted upon twice as much more, before he would admit
of our coming ashore. This great incivility so enraged the Commander, that he
resolved to be revenged upon him; and pursuant thereto sent the Longboat
ashore to entreat him to come aboard, where he should receive what his King
ship desired. The credulous Barbarian, made no long pause in the matter; JUNE,
1648.
but presently, with a certain number of his Gentry, stepped into the Boat, and
so were brought aboard. But his Retinue being too numerous, the Commander
having regard to our safety, would not permit above 5 or 6 to come aboard. The
King was no sooner got aboard, but he ran in all have to the Great Cabin, in
hopes of some ample Gift; but much mistaken, The King of Sierra Liones
fettered, and threatened to be hanged.
for the Commander gave order that he should be fettered, which was accordingly
done, and 4 men appointed to attend him. The King was hereat mainly altered,
but afterward much more, when he saw the Commander intended to hang him at the
Yards arm, which had certainly been had not the Master of the Ship undertaken
the Office of a Mediator upon him, and made intercession for his Life. The
Commanders wrath thus pacified, he gave order to throw him over board, which
was immediately obeyed and executed, by 4 of the Ships Company, who threw him
out at the Fore-castle Port; But he was so well disciplined in swimming, that
he presently got ashore. His Retinue seeing that, with all the have they could,
betook themselves immediately to their Canoes, The houses of the Caffers
pillaged; and their Orchards Spoiled.
and made as if they would do some prodigious Feat, or other; or at lest
obstruct our coming ashore, to take in what was necessary. The Commander, whose
temper was too courageous, to be daunted for a swarm of Flies, sent two Boats
ashore to fetch Water and Wood, both well Manned and Armed, and in spite of all
their Force, hewed as much Wood, and brought as much Water, as they thought
might serve our turn, The Commander notwithstanding all this, was not yet
content, but remanded the men and Shallops to pillage their Houses and
Orchards, and set the Kings Neger-house on fire; all which they did in a
moment. The King seeing this, thought it high time to put himself in a posture
of Defense; and in order to that, musters up all the Forces he could on a
sudden, the whole Country being Alarmed, and appeared with a number of a
Thousand Canoes, or more, half of each being laden with Faggots, whether to
set our Ships on fire, or to use them for Shields, we could not determine:
however having obtained our ends, we held it best to weigh Anchor, and proceed
on our Voyage, rather than to incurr a needless and unprofitable Engagement,
with a Company of such contemptible Schoundrels. In which Resolution we set
sail, directing our Course for Madagascar.

Before we were got out of sight of Sierra Liones, we met with a small Flyboat
which Traded along that Coast, whereof one John Backer of Durgerdam was Master.
The Master came and proffered his Ship and service to our Commander and
Vice Admiral, to conduct us over the Foords and shallow Places of the Red sea,
and to make use of his Vessel as an advice Yacht. But our Ship-master dissuaded
them to accept of his Tender, whereupon he declared that he was unwilling, and
so declined his Favor. This Master had the like Rescontre with that Kings
Majesty, and for his Churlishness gave him a toss (as he told us) out of the
Cabin-port so that it seemed a Paradox to us, that he would be so void of
Prudence as to hazard himself a second time, being once before in jeopardy of
his Life.

Sierra Liones both in regard of its' Copiousness of Fruit, Description of
Sierra Liones.
and Plenty of Good Water is a very proper place to put in at, for Refreshment.
It abounds with A kind of plant, called also Milium, and Hyrsi bearing a
multitude of small grains, from whence it has that name.
Millets, Oranges, Lemmons, Banans, Cocos, Wild Grapes, and abundance of many
other sorts of Fruits; as also Sugar canes and a kind of Long pepper. It
affoards, besides Fruit Trees, good Timber, and Ingredients very useful in
Dying; but by reason of our short abode, and want of opportunity to make
inspection into the Country, we could not inform our selves what Product the
Land affoarded, as peculiar to it self; nor to make any advantage of our
Landing there, except our Refreshment. There is good store of Fish, and
Oysters, which ly very thick in the clefts of the Rocks, and are extraordinary
large and good. It Is true if any be necessitated to put in there for fresh
Water, they need not be at a loss, for there are all along the Coast many
choice Rivers, which are pure Rainwater, that comes from the Mountains, but in
the Month of May, (the beginning of the Rain season) it is very unwholsom and
unapt for use, as our Masters Mate told me who was well acquainted with those
Parts, and is frequently the Occasion of Fevers, Fluxes, and other perrillous
distempers; and not only so, but is so venomous, that where it falls upon the
skin of one, who is not used to that Climat, will cause Tumors and Ulcers, and
breeds a kind of worm or moth in clothes which may serve for a Caveat to such
as shall be forced to make use of it, SEPT. 164^.
about that time of the year, although it be approved good, when it is some
days old, as if the venomous property were vanished with keeping. The
Inhabitants are not altogether black, but tawny; and their bodies cauterized in
many places with hot Irons. The tips of their Ears, and their noses, are bored
through, and hung with Jewels, which they hold for passing rare Ornaments. Both
Men and Women go naked, and use no manner of Vesture save only a furcingle, or
towel; made of the barks of Trees, which (it seems) for modesty sake, they wear
about their Middle. Those that inhabit those parts which lie further within
Land, are Cannibals (or Men-eaters) but such as dwell near the Sea, more
civilized, and flexible to commerce with Europeans, and other Strangers. The
King with whom we were concerned, was an old, ill visaged and homely Man, in a
Garb tolerably handsome, after the Moorish fashion; having also a kind of a hat
of a grayish color; but neither he, nor any of his Retinue, had either shoes
or stockings, but such as they came into the World with.

CHAP. II. Arrival at Madagascar. The remarkable Chance of the Commander,
meeting with the King. The Death of the Vice Commander Benning; and the
disorders thence arising. Both the Ships put in a Fighting Posture, and ready
to give each other Battle. Voogt yields, and is fettered. The description of
Madagascar; it is Fertility, Store of Cattle; Goodness of their Sheep; Many
kinds of Monkeys. Nature of the Inhabitants, Form, Habit, Housekeeping,
Marriages and Funerals. Their impious cruelty over their Children. Their
Religion, Policy and Wars.
Arrival at Madagascar (or sas it is by some called) S. Laurence
ON the 13 of October we arrived at Madagascar, and came to Anchor in the Bay of
Anton Gill. So soon as we had cast Anchor we sent forth our Boat, and put out a
white Flag in token of Friendship; which they observing, did the like. But we
were greatly dismayed, when we saw a great number of men running down the Hills
toward us, with Bows, Arrows and Darts: so that we not daring to trust our
selves to them, concluded our safest way was to return, and row back again to
our Ships; but they perceiving that, one of them cried out, Be not afraid, but
come boldly to land; we will do you no harm, we give you liberty to come
ashore. OCTO^ 1648.
Capt. Maas told us that he had been there in that Island before, and that a
Slave of his, whom he had taught to read and write, had run away from him
there, having taken his opportunity when the Ship was ready to set Sail; and
that he had heard how the Slave was come to great Advancement, and by the
Natives elected King.

So soon as we were got to land, we were introducted by the King himself, and
his Attendants into his Palace, which was in the midst of a Sconce, reasonably
strong, and environed with Palizados. The House was hung with neat Mat-work,
and the Floors covered with the same. The King presently began to inquire, What
for People that we were? and, to what place our Ship belonged? for he could see
by her Colors that we did not come out of Holland. The Commander made answer
that we were Hollanders; but were then in the service of the Duke of Genua, to
whom the Ships belonged. After they had exchanged a few Words together, the
Commander assumed the liberty to ask him, Where he had learned to speak Dutch?
I have been, quoth he, formerly in East India, and was at that time a Slave to
one John Maas, a Mariner, and intending for Holland, we were surpised with a
dismal Hurricano, which disabled us of our Masts, and made us in such a
Condition, that we were forced to put in here to Calk, and fit us out again;
but I having no great appetite ^ proceed on our Voyage, deserted my Master,
when I saw the Ship was ready to sail. Well (quoth the Captain) was not your
name Diembro. Yes, replies the King, do you know me? Why, said the Captain, do
you not know John Maas? The King was hereupon in a great stupor, but viewing
him thoroughly began to remember his Countenance, and with that embraced and
kissed him. While they stood mute a while and staring one another earnestly on
the face, both stupifyed at this strange meeting, the King began thankfully to
acknowledge, how good a Master our Commander had been to him, and presented him
all necessary Provision gratis: but the Commander courteously declined it,
saying, He esteemed it a sufficient Favor to exchange Wares for Wares. The King
(according to the custom of that Country) presented our men the use of his
Wives and Concubines; who coming forth made choice of such as they would have,
and went aside with them. This kind Tender was as freel^ accepted as offered,
by the greatest part of our Ships-folk, wh^ were not very shy to enter into
Conjunctions with that tawny Brood but what monstrous Complexions they
afterward brought into the world, The Death of Mr. John Benning, Captain of the
St. Bernard.
I only guess, since our abode there could not be long. I may not ommit the
fatal Difference, and Misunderstanding of our Offi^cers among themselves,
occasioned upon the Decease of Capt. Joh^ Benning, who commanded the S.
Bernard. The Chief Commande^ Maas, together with the rest of the Officers
thought fit to p^ Henry Christians, Master of the St John Baptist in his place,
and Ho^man Voogt in the placc of H. Christians; Tumults thereupon.
but Voogt did not approve^ this Transposition, and let the Chief Commander
know that ^ would not abandon his Board and Right, unless he would fet^ him
away by force; thereupon he brought up all the Guns out ^ the Hold, and put
himself in a Posture of defense. The next mo^ning by break of Day, Both the
Ships rea-ady to sight.
our Commander, with some of the O^cers descrying that the Red Flag was put
out, aboard the St. B^nard, were not a little alarmed: immediately gave order
that we sho^ also (with all possible expedition) put our selves in a Fightin^
posture, which was don in a moment. Our Commander unde^standing that Vooght had
sent off a boat (with intent to fetch wate^ sent out the Shallop, as full of
men as could well stand, all w^ armed, who rowed as hard as they could till
they overtook the oth^ boat, which they brought back. The men being come
aboard, t^ Commander gave order to put them in Fetters, till he could ha^
better information about their intention: with that the Comman^ made as if he
would lay the St. Bernard aboard, closing up w^ her Bow. Harman Voogt seeing
himself in a great Strait, and for w^ of men hardly in a capacity to maintain
his Pretenses, was mu^ disheartened, and after he had advised the matter more
fully w^ himself, Voogt yields and goes aboard, is clapped into Fetters.
thought good to let out the Shallop, and go aboard ^ Commander, the men
incessantly crying out, Let our Captain and M^ return without any molestation,
or, by Heaven and Earth, we will either sink be sunk: we are resolved either to
loose our own lives in his Vindication, or, yours an Expiation, without either
giving or taking Quarter. Yet notwithstandi^ all this, their Schipper was no
sooner come aboard but the Comman^ gave order to bring him upon the Quarter
Deck where he was made ^ hand and foot; and after him the first and second
Mate, together with the rest of the Officers were brought up, and immediately
clapped into shakles. The foremast men seeing themselves outwitted by the
Commanders Polity, began to loose their Courage, and after a mature
deliberation among themselves, concluded it the safest way to surrender
themselves and Ship to the Commander. This done, a Council of War was held, and
the Captive Officers ( Voogt himself only excluded) were brought into the great
Cabin, where the Council, for the time being, was assembled, and asked which
they would rather choose, To burn with their Ship? or, To serve the Commander
faithfully without murmuring? They conceiving that there was no hopes of
avoiding some severe Penalty, or other, which the Council, perhaps, had
designed in case of their continuing refractory, chused the latter: and with
one humbly begged pardon for their misdemeanors, promising for the future not
to be factious in any Uproar, or the Occasion of Tumult. Upon these
Supplications the Council sat again, and came to this Result, Result of the
Council of War concerning the Officers, and Ships-folk.
That their former misbehaviour should be connived at; but, Voogt the Master to
continue in Irons, till we came again to Genua, where he should be banished
upon the Galleys, during the term of life, as a condign Punishment for his
obstinate Rebellion. However to prevent any mutinous consultations which might
otherwise find opportunity, and detard our Voyage, the Ships companies were
mixed and counterchanged; some of our men sent aboard the St. Bernard, and
others from the St. Bernard in lieu of them, brought over to us. In the mean
while we recreated our selves with the Divertisements of Hunting, Fishing and
Fowling; as also ranging the woods, which we found stored with many sorts of
Fruit.

Madagascar is distant from the Coast of Cefale about 110 Leagues, and 44 from
Mosambique. It lies in length Northeast and Southwest; reaching from about 12
degr. to 26, Southerly Latitude; being about 220 Dutch leagues in length and 70
in breadth, and consequently reputed the largest Island in the whole World. It
is also divided into several Provinces and Dominions, which are mostly bounded
and severed from each other, by Rivers.

This Island is very fertile, and affoards great plenty of Grain, as Wheat (or
Mais) and Barley, as also Pulse, as Lentils Pease and Beans of several kinds.
They have also abundance of Water Melons, Ananas, Bananas, and other unknown
Plants and Roots. The Trees are laden with Oranges, Lemons, Pome-Citrons, and
two kinds o^ Pomegranates, to wit, a sweet and a sour, as also delicate Pears,
Figs Almonds, etc. Besides these Fruits, they have several strange Roots that
may be used for Diet, which they call Ouviharen, Schambri, Ca^bares,
Ouvifoutty, Offehe, Mavondre, Damborn, and others, which cannot call to mind,
at present. It affoards also very rich Honey, variety of Gums, Medicinal
Balsams, Oils, Roots and Herbs, nor man we ommit the commemoration of its' rich
Mines, and variety o^ Metals, though the best it affoards beyond other Places,
is Steel. The Gold which is dug here, is much baser than that of Peru, the
Oun^ not valuing above ten Crowns. Neither is this Island without Prec^ous
stones, as Topaz, Amethyst, Emerald, Sapphire, Jacynth, Jaspar, Agath, with
Blood Stones and others. It abound with Beasts, as Kine, tame and wild, Goats
which have young times a year; the Sheep are very fat, their tails weighing
some ^ pound a piece; Swine they have also, both tame and wild, who^ flesh
whether hung, or pickled, is far better then that which ^ have in Europe. There
is also a kind of wild Swine that the Inhabitants call Perhaps Porcupines,
which are of late grown common in Europe.
Tendrak, which they hold for a great del^cacy: The same beast sleeps six
months in the year, in which time she casts her Prickles, as Hedge-hogs do,
which are also the in great abundance. The Dogs of this Island are for the most
pa^ little, shore-snouted and stump-ear'd. Apes and Monkeys run ^ great troops,
some times 50, 60 or 100 together, of which the^ are several kinds. Those that
are white are the most cruel, an^ hardest to catch, or tame. Another sort there
are which are gray, an^ not so big as the white which are more tame and
flexible; these the often take by wiles, and teach them several practical and
artific^ exercises. Why an Apt Commit a Rape.
There are besides these another kind of white Ape^ that go almost right over
end, and are so lecherous that even the Women in that place, cannot be secure
for them, which they ravi^ if they find an opportunity, one holding her, till
another has pe^form'd his Task; whom, when they have had their will, the
sometimes rend in pieces. But there is a kind of Gray Apes, which are held in
most esteem; having eyes like fire, and are very wi^ and unapt to be tamed, and
some so savage that they will rather starve than be fed out of hand. There are
also many Squirrels Wesels and Civet Cats. They are likewise annoyed with many
sorts of venomous Creatures and Vermin, as Scorpions, Spiders, Wasps and
Millepedes, which are here so horribly fell, that the party stung falls
immediately into a swound.

This Island is inhabited both by Whites and Negros, The Inhabitants, their
Nature, Garb, and Posture.
the former having long and lank hair, the latter a little curled, and handsome
bodied. There are also a sort of tawny People that are not so well civilized as
the rest, letting their hair and beards grow, which the other for the most part
shave.

They are in general a treacherous and fraudulent people, prone to Thievery,
and greedy of Revenge, which they esteem a laudable virtue, and deem him a man
of merit, who knows how to quit himself handsomely in vindication of a Quarrel;
but on the contrary he that puts up an affront or injury done him, is held in
great contempt, and stigmatized for a Coward. They are by nature very sluggish,
and inclined to Sloth, much given to Dancing and Singging. These that are
willing to take upon them any hard Employment or laborious exercise, are such
as follow Husbandry, Smiths, Carpenters, Fullers, Spinners, Weevers, Fishers
and Fowlers. Their Smiths have a good way to temper Iron and Steel, and are
very active in making Knives, Javelins, Pile-heads and Plyers to pull up hair
by the roots. They have also Silversmiths, but such as hardly deserve the
naming.

Their Houses are but little wooden Tabernacles, Their Houses
of one story high and a firm Cieling; yet at the Inauguration of those
Cottages they make sumptuous Banquets: So soon as the House is completed the
Owner invites all his Relations and Allies, with other acquaintance to the said
House, where they are entertained in splendid manner: Yet this Treat is not at
all chargeable to him, but rather an advantageous mean; for there is not any of
these Guests who dare make his appearance without some Present, which he is to
bring with him (as if it were at a Westmerland wedding) Some bring Gold,
Silver, or Steel; some great Bowls with Corn, or perhaps Movables and
Furniture for the House; others Oxen, Sheep or other Belly-timber. So that in
brief, none ever comes empty-handed; by which means the Builder has not only
the Expenses of his Feast reimburs'd, but sometimes more than what he has laid
out in such a stupendous Fabric. These Encaenia, or Feasts Dedicatory, do
usually hold for some days together, during which time they live an Epicuraean
life, in Luxury and Riot, Dancing, Singing and Playing. Most of their House
furniture is what properly belongs to the Kitchen: but as for Table, Stools,
Benches, Table-cloth, Napkins, Beds and Cushions they never use any, and when
they eat sit down humbly upon a Mat.

Their Habit and Attire
The Common People go almost naked, but these of the best rank are aparreled in
different vestures, to distinguish the sexes; the men wearing Breaches which
reach from the middle to the Calf of the leg, and from the middle upward a Cotton
cloth, (almost like a Scotch Plad) thrown carelessly about their shoulders,
girded about the middle with a Surcingle. The Women wear a Garb, with, and
without, sleeves, demitted to the knees, having also a kind of Drawers with a
Girdle about the body, and sometimes a little mantle thrown about their
Shoulders. Their Cloths are mostly of Cotton, Bombast, and Silk of various
Colors, garnished with loops of Silk, which is of another color than the
Garment it self. Both men and women go bare-headed, and barefoot, except one
sort, whereof the Man wears a Cap, something resembling that of a Jesuit, and
the Woman a Hood made after the form of a Pyramid, which comes down to the
shoulders.

Their Marriages.
Their Marriages are generally performed without many Ceremonies; and Polygamy
allowed, every man taking to himself so many Wives as he thinks fit, or is
capable to maintain. They are also easily divorced, Their men will not stick to
delight themselves with the Wives of others, and the Women as inclinable to
that way, as any in the World, and are careful to make use of every
Opportunity they meet with: This they esteem no sin, but account it (if they
can do it cunningly without being caught in the Fact) but a kind of Filching
or clandestin Theft, which may be expiated, with some inconsiderable Present,
or Gift. Their Young women are also great Trade^ that Way; and without
shamefastness will render themselves prostitute, to any that will but give good
wages, and those generall^ most opplauded, which come off with most Gain: and
if they inten^ to marry will not give their Consent to their Party, till they
have mad^ proof of his Manhood. The Parents are delighted to see their Children
active in imitation, and yet notwithstanding this licentious sensuality be
tolerated in the Action, yet they will be offended at their Daughters, if they
utter any word without the limits of modesty.

When any Person comes to die, the nearest Friends and Allies, Their Funerals
do bath the Corpse; and then adorned with Bracelets and Earrings, and wrapped in
fine clothes, is carried in a Mat to the place of burial. But the Funeral Rites
of Persons of the highest rank are performed with greater pomp; for when one of
such Quality dies, he is also bathed after that manner as we have already said;
which done they shave him, and if it be a Woman put a hood upon her head, and
adorn her with precious ornaments. Then come in the nearest Kindred, as Father,
Mother and others of the Consanguinity, with Women, Children and Slaves, to
bewail the Dead, making a lamentable howling and yelling, the tears trickling
down the Cheeks. Others begin by way of Elogy to recite the Praises of the
deceased Party, and others to beat Drums, the rest fall a dancing. These
Ceremonies ended, one of them addresses himself to the Corpse, as if it were
alive, Asking these, or the like Questions. Oh my dear Friend! how came thou
to die? Or, did thou want for any thing? Had not thou Cattle, Gold, Silver,
Steel, and other Goods enough? etc. When they have deplored the Departure of
their Friend, and danced the whole day, they kill a Fatling or two, which is
distributed among his Relations in the Evening. So long as the Corpse is above
ground they burn light by it; and when they are ready to interr him, they close
him in a Coffin made of the Trunk of a Tree which is fitly shut up, and carried
to a little Cottage made on purpose, in the middle whereof is a Grave about 6
foot deep, here they lay him, and set by his side a Basket of Rice, a
Tobacco-box, an Earthen Pan, a Chaffin-dish; a suit of Apparel, a Girdle, with
what other things they conceive he shall have occasion for, in such a long and
tedious Journey. So soon as they have done that, they roll a great stone to the
door of his sepulcher, and sacrifice some beast or other to the Devil, that
they may not annoy or molest him on his way to Paradise. Impious cruelty over
their Children.


Of all the Idolatrous Customs that I could observe among them, there is some
Nation or other that has parity with them; But one Barbarous and inhuman
Practice they have, as peculiar and proper to themselves, that is, making away
of their own Children. True it is that in most places in India and Tartary,
they make merchandise of their Children, and that by reason of their not being
in a capacity of bringing them up, but never (like those of Madagascar) take
away their lives. This they are induced to by an implicit Faith, being
persuaded by their Priests, that they are born upon unhappy days, and shall be
subject to great misery and afflictions so long as they live; or that the
Planet under which the Child is born, has some bad influence upon it; and
having viewed the Palms of his hands, and his Face, make conclusion that he
will be either Thief, or Parricide, etc. Upon these and the like Occasions,
they deliver the Child over to a Slave, which he is to carry out of the way,
and throw it into a Ditch or under a Thorn-hedge, where the poor Infant must
either die of hunger, or be devoured up of Dogs, or other Beasts of Prey.
Others there are among those Women, who when they are with Child if they find
themselves never so little out of order, immediamediately ascribe the cause to
the ill Nature of the unborn Babe, and either kill it before it come into the
World, or so soon as it is born bury it alive, and sometimes throw it into the
Water. If a Woman slave chance to prove with Child by her Patron, and be turned
away; so that she be not able to bring it up, she either strangles, or
dispatches it before it come into the World: and sometimes a white Woman having
a Child by a Negro, if she see it resemble the Father, or have curled hair: as
also their Young-women, who make themselves prostitute for Gain, follow the
like Course, but commonly murder the Infant before it be born, deeming it but
a burden to them, and a hindrance of their Profession. But besides all these
inhuman Customs they have another no whit inferior to those already said, that
when the woman dies in Childbed, the Child is thrown alive with the Mother
into the Grave, saying. Better it is that the Child dies, than to be brought up
by strangers. And because so many days are by them held unfortunate, almost
half of the Children are dispatched, which with other occasions already
mentioned, is undoubtedly the reason that this great, happy and most fruitful
Island is not very populous, where not only Polygamy is allowed, but also such
freedom given to the unmarried to satisfy their lust, and libidinous ends. Yet
certain it is that there is a Stock of people among them, who are more
compassionate with their Young, and when they presume that the Child is so
possessed, do only cause a Slave to carry it away and hide it a while, and soon
after fetch it home again: as soon as they have got it home again, they
Sacrifice some beast, or Fowl, or perhaps shut it up in a Henroost, thinking
thereby to assuage and moderate the ill temper of the child's spirit, which
otherwise would lead him to some unhappy end.

The Religion of the Madagascars, is hardly worth recounting, Their Religion
they being wholly Strangers both to Houses of Worship, and also to Prayer.
They believe that there is a God who has made both Heaven and Earth, but
neither adore nor serve him, yet growing old or sick, they make a kind of
Confession to him. They also believe that there is a Devil, who is the Occasion
of all evil, having the power of Life and Death in his hand, and that they must
conserve a perpetual Peace with him, by Worship and Sacrifice. Besides their
Opinion that there is a God and an evil Spirit, they have a third Power, which
they call Dian Manans, or Lord of Wealth, at whose disposing will, they think
that they are made rich and prosper in their affairs. They seem also to have
some light of invisible Angels, and of the first peopling of the World, after
the Creation by Adam and Eve, and the repeopling thereof, after the great
Deluge by Noah; as also some glance of a Savior, who was made a Piaculum, for
some great offense committed by all mankind in general. They have also their
Fasts and Holy Days.

Circumcision is also a rite in use with them, Their Circumcision.
which they do at one certain time of the year, with great solemnity. The day
before all the Friends and Acquaintance meet together, and drink Metheglin till
they grow raging mad: and then draw up upon the beating of a Drum, exercising
with their Darts and An Assagay, as themselves call it, is a kind of dart, about
5 or 6 foot long.
Assagays; the Youngmen and Women all the time dancing in Masquerado, and in
the Evening conclude with a luxurious Banquet, and open table for all that
please to come. At night the mother takes the child to bed with her, in a
little House made for that purpose, about a month before the day of
Circumcision, by the Father and Uncles of the Child. The next morning by break
of day, the Woman rises, and baths her self, afterward her child: which done
she dresses it with Corral and Precious stones, and thereupon they fall a
drumming again, after which a great silence is made, and all the Guests which
are there, must withdraw, as also all such as have any thing about their body
that is red; thinking that if such were present, the blood would not stench.
As Soon as all are withdrawn, except these that are nominated to assist, the
Priest takes his knife, and ties a white towel about his left leg; that done
the Father and Uncles of the Child, take each of them a Child under the Arm,
enter in at the West-door, and out again at the East; and so sitting down, the
Priest performs the work. If it be the Son of a Slave or Bondwoman, the Prepuce
is thrown away, but if otherwise, it is preserved by the Uncle of the child,
who lays it up in the Yelk of an Egg, for some Enchantment, or other; these
people being reputed very active Exorcists, and much inclined to Necromancy:
and lastly the^ apply a mixture of Cocks-blood and the juice of some Herbs, t^
the wound; which done they march home, with great Exultatio^ and joy, and so
ends the Ceremony.

Their Government and Policy.
This Island is divided into many Kingdoms and Dominions, which are the Occasion
of perpetual discord and wars among the^ Their Arms are Bows and Arrows,
Javelins, and Targets, which they can use expertly well. They are for matter of
courage an^ valor second to none; but fight without any Discipline or Order
breaking in with the main Battalion upon the Enemy, till the^ grow so confused,
that they cannot distinguish their own, from the contrary Party. During the
time of War. They run out ^ small Companies to plunder and pillage the Towns
and Cottage of their Enemies, and afterward set them on fire. When the Man is
in Battle or under March, the Wife continually dances an^ sings, and will not
sleep, or eat in her own House, nor admit of the Use of any other Man, unless
she be desirous to be rid o^ her own; for they entertain this Opinion among
them, That if they suffer themselves to be overcome with an intestin War at
home* their Husbands must suffer for it, being engaged in a foreign
Expedition; but on the contrary, if they behave themselves chastely, and dance
lustily, that then their Husbands by some certain Sympathetical operation, will
be able to vanquish all their Concombatants.

During the time of our abode there, we saw the King Diembr^ several times
engaged with his Enemy, who had a more powerful^ Army than he, his own not
exceeding 7000 men. So soon as the Enemy gave battle, Diembro with his
Battalion ran upon him (after they had done with the Javelins) in a promiscuous
order, every one pitching upon his man, and after a short Engagement gave over,
with the loss of some of the best on each side; although Diembro, considering
the great imparity of men, had the better Success, and honor of the Camp. When
the Battle was done, our party returned, with great Joy for the Day, and every
one that could bring the Heads of the Champions, with whom they were
particularly engaged, laid them at the feet of the King, who either gave them a
noble recompense, or honored them with some Dignity.

They have a very quaint manner of making Peace. The manner of their Treating
about Peace.
The Parties inclined to adjoust their Quarrels, send first a Herald, with
Presents, who desire to have communication with the Hostility, which when it is
granted them, they nominate Time and Place where they may have conference, in
order to bring their Discord to some amicable composure. The Messenger having
performed his charge, returns to the King his Master, who gives the General
order to put himself in a Posture of marching; the General in obedience thereto
musters up all his Forces and sits down before some River, where the Enemy
faces him on the Bank, on the other side. When both parties have made their
appearance, they kill each of them a Bullock, take out the Liver, and roast it,
and send each other a piece, which is interchangeably received and eaten in
presence of the Heralds or Legates which are sent on purpose to see that the
Ceremony be effectually performed, binding themselves with a solemn Oath, and
under a Curse, never to break the Truce which is agreed upon, between them: and
at the same time repeat some mutual Articles, as, Not to kill one another Men.
Not to steal one another Cattle.
Not to burn Villages.
Not to poison one another Rivers and Fountains. etc.
And afterward utter many bitter Execrations, as, That the Liver they eat, may
be their poison if they do not faithfully hold all the Articles specified both
sacred and inviolable.

CHAP. III. The Author's departure from Madagascar, Arrival at Sumatra. Four
Prizes belonging to Atchin taken. The beastly Sensuality of some of the
Ships-company, upon a Woman. The Ship whereon the Author was, taken as Prize,
and brought up to Batavia. The men plundered and their Chests broken up. The
Author admitts himself into the Service of the East India Company, his Voyage
to Siam. An accurate description of that Kingdom.
MAR. 1649.
HAving stayed fully 5 months at Madagascar, we set sail for Sumatra on the 16
of March 1649, where we arrived on the 12 of June then following. We came to
anchor in the Bay of Sillaba where we exchanged some Commodities for Pepper and
other Spices. On this Coast we took two Iunks belonging to Atchin, but all the
people jumped over board, and saved themselves, except one Woman, whom the
Italians, ravished, the Officers not able to restrain them. The Woman after she
had been thus treated by these sensual bruits (that rather than to deny their
beastly appetite, made a Bawdy house of our Ship) was after much entreaties put
ashore, and delivered to her Husband, who inhumanly mangled he^ till she died.

On the 28 we weighed anchor, and set sail for Indraepoura, taking by the way,
two Iunks more, laden with Pepper, Camphi^ and other Druggs and Spices. On the
29 we arrived at Indrapoura where we took in some necessary Provision and
Refreshments, thinking by the way to meet with more small Prizes, but had no^
our expectation.

On the 2 of July, we left Indrapoura, and so set sail for the Straits of
Sunda. When we had got the height of Toppers hook, w^ met 14 Sail of Ships,
belonging to the Dutch East India company which were sent out by express order
of the General, and the Council, to bring us up, whether willing, or unwilling.
So soo^ as our commander had received the Message, he returned answer That he
was not under the command of the General, and tha^ if they should assail him,
he was resolved, to fight in his ow^ defense. The Dutch commander was hereat in
a doubt, and sent ^ Batavia for new Instructions. It was not long before he got
an Orde^ from the General, JAN. 1650.
with a Ship of War to assist him in case of Opposition: and thereupon
imperiously commanded him to strike, threatening to fire a whole tear of Guns in
case of refusal. Capt. Maas, who seeing himself now in a great Strait, and the
uneasiness of his Ships-folk, called together all the Officers, to consult the
matter, when after mature deliberation they concluded it more safe to surrender
themselves, and give their Masters a true account of the business, seeing they
were not able to defend themselves against such a number of Ships. This
Resolution was very acceptable to the Ships-company, who since that division
and uproar at Madagascar, were still at odds, The Ships surrendered to the Dutch.
continually jarring among themselves, and longed for this, or the like
opportunity. The Company now made Masters of our Ships, brought them up to
Batavia, where we arrived the 12 of July. Our Ships outsail'd the rest by far,
we arriving at the Haven 6 or 8 hours before them; so that if we had been
willing, might have left them, and made our escape by night.

On the 15 came Captain vander Meulen aboard, with an Order from the Here
vander Liin, then General, to take possession of the Ship. As Soon as he was
aboard, went into the great Cabin, where he examined us one by one. All the
Dutch were brought abaft; and afterward committed to the Javans Corpse du
Guard. The Italians and other Strangers remained aboard, and in the mean while
pillaged our Chests, and took all the money they could come at. They being now
at liberty and dismissed, went every man where he best liked, the Italians
mostly to Goa, or Banthem, but the Hamburgers and others imbarqu'd themselves
for Europe. Shortly after the Commander died, and by several tokens he had on
his body, was supposed to be poisoned; and as some conjecture was done by those
which were left aboard the Ship, when we were carried ashore. After we had now
lain about 14 days in prison, we delivered a Petition, desiring Enlargement;
which was not only granted, but by Order of the General, all our Arrearages
paid us to the utmost penny, and a Choice preferred us, Whether we would
return home, or, List our selves in the Companies service: some rather chused
to go home, but I, with the most part of the men, accepted of the latter. I
hired myself as Sailmaker, for the Term of three years, at 18 Gild. per month.

Arrival at Siam. The Kingdom of Siam described.
On the 15 January, I was put aboard the Black Bear, bound for Siam, where we
safely arrived, and cast anchor in the Bay.

The Kingdom of Siam lies in the most Easterly part of East India, from 7 to 8
degr. Northerly Latitude. There are many Cities, and Towns of note in it, and
those very populous, among which India is the chief, being the Metropolis of
India extra Gangem, and the city where the King has his Court and Residence.
The land is very fertile, affoarding all that may serve for the delight and
sustenance of human Bodies, the Fields stored with many sorts of Cattle, the
Rivers with Fish, and the Towns with Magazines of rich Merchandises. The
Inhabitants are of a tawny and yellowish complexion, and superstitious Pagans
in Religion, as appears by their great Zeal, in adorning of their Temples, and
strict Reverence for their Priests which are here too great and numerous for
the Laity. Their Government is Monarchical, and the King for many ages has been
absolute Sovereign, over this and the neighboring Territories and Dominions,
and that with as much Power, Grandour, and Reverence from the Subject, as any
Potentate or King, under the canopy of Heaven. In short, Siam in regard of it is
Fertility, Wealth, Number of Inhabitants, and subordinat Principalities, may
parallel any other Empire i^ the Universe.

Judia.
Iudia, which (as we have already said) is the Imperial Tow^ of Siam, lies
about 16 degrees Northerly Latitude from the Aequ^tor, and is seated on one of
the fairest Rivers (without doubt) in all the Eastern World, where a Ship of
the greatest burden may come up close to the Kay, to load or unload, without
fear o^ sustaining damage.

The River, and delightsome Country there about.
In going from the mouth of the River upwards about 30 Leagues, we found several
Inlets and swift Currents, which disgorg^ themselves into this great and noble
River, with abundance o^ fair Orchards, pleasant and delectable Groves, an
infinite number of Villages, Religious Houses, Hamlets, and other amiable
Prospects; the Fields all the while casting a fragrant smell from her spicy
Flowers; and the Groves affoarded a most ravishing melody of Birds warbling
their wanton strains, and chanting in the shades and thickets whither they
retired to shelter themselves from the too power^ull rays of the scorching
Sun, and those answered again by the ^oft whispering gales of the gentle Wind,
and the base murmurings of the great Cataracts and Water-falls at a distance,
raised and de^ress'd with the unconstant turnings of the Wind: all which seemed
^o have such Harmony, that it ravished us as much, as ever the re^owned
Thessalian Tempe could the men of old.

The Land is for the most part level, of a clay and sandy earth; ^ew Hills
appear, or any thing else seems to surmount the Horizon, ^ve the high Towers
and Pyramids, whereof we found an incre^ible number.

About 8 leagues up the River is a small City, of a triangular Plat^orm, and
environed with a wall, called Bankok. In the same City (...) the Kings first
Toll-or Custom House, Custome-Houses.
which they call the Canon ^ankok, and every Ship and Junk to whomsoever they
belong are ^bliged to come to anchor there, and give in their information, upon
that account they come, and from whence; as also what Men and ^oods they have
aboard. Having performed that Duty, they pay ^eir Toll, and receive their
Billet, with Letters of Conduct, to ^o so far up as they list, till they come
within a League of Iudia, ^here the second Toll-house is, called, the Canon
Bantenau; and ^ere they are a second time bound to anchor, and exhibit their
Coc^ets, which having shown, they have their liberty to go further. This ^cond
Canon, is erected only to see that the Prince have his due, and to examine
whether that the Stranger be not defrauded by the commissioners of the first;
and to give Licenses to enter the Town, and traffic. It is also to be
understood, that when any Ship is ^utward bound, they are to pay their Toll at
the Canon Bantenau. which at coming up was the second, now the first
Custom House; and are to pass an Examen at the Canon Bankok, as they did
before at the other, without paying any thing, if they can manifest (...) their
Cocket, that they have already paid: and this every Vessel ^w mean soever it
be, is bound to do, or in case of refusal to ^rfeit Ship and Carga.

Siam although it have abundance of Towns, yet there are but 5 ^at are walled,
in all the Kingdom, whereof Iudia is the strong^, being about 3 Fifteen making
a degree, it follows that 3 Dutch miles must, be 12 English land miles. or four
Leagues at Sea.
Dutch miles in circuit: The walls are considerably strong, with round Bulwarks
after the old way, but ^ter its manner very Stately and magnificent. Within the
To^ are some Thousands of Temples, Cloisters; and gilded Turre^ which together
do make a pompous show. The streets of t^ City are very long and spacious, the
Town it self surrounded w^ a River about 2 Musket Shot in breadth, and divides
it self into streams, at that place where the King has his Court and R^dence.
The Royal Palace is very magnificent and Costly, stron^ walled about, and
fortified, within also are very stately and no^ Appartments, a Fabric which for
Workmanship and Riches s^ passes all that ever I have seen in India, and
certainly, for ^ Power and Grandour of the Prince, Splendor of the Pala^
immense Wealth of the Inhabitants, Fertility of the Countr^ and Temperateness
of the Climate, it is second to no place in ^dia, if China may be excluded.

Soil and Fertility of Siam.
The Soil is very good, and the Land fertile, producing yea^ a vast increase of
Rice and other Corn; It is also rich of Ca^ as Kine, Hoggs, Buffels, Elks,
Hares and Coneys, incredi^ Flocks of Deer, which are more hunted for their
Hides than O^ cases, they reckoning That one of the Staple commodities, ^
export many Thousands yearly to Iapon, and other places of T^fic, so that the
main Trading of the Company there to Ia^ consists in that Merchandise.
Wild-beasts are also here in g^ abundance, as, Elephants, Rhinocerots,
Leopards, Tygres, the like; as also all kinds of Fowl, both great and small,
the have seen in Europe, Swans and Nightingales only excepted, wh^ I dare not
be positive whether there be any or not. Nor are Rivers, Fish.
as also the Sea without good store of Fish, and that many kinds: The Seashore
lies thick with Oisters, and Lobs^ which are as delicate as they are
plentiful. They use the Fish Trade also as in other places, and make great
profit, especially a kind of Scate, that they take chiefly for the Skin, which
the of Iapon hold in great esteem, The great value of Scate Skins.
paying sometimes at the rate 50, or 60 Ducats for one Skin, if it be choice
and good; yet suc^ the difference, that I have seen a hundred Pieces of Eight
paid ^ single Skin, whilst it has been known, that a whole hundred wo^ not
yield 4. Rix-dollars. These Skins they first dry, and ^ ^eat care pack them up,
and so export them. There are also in ^^is River many Crocodiles, which the
Siamers call Cayman, and ^e them for Physic. Crocodiles used for Medicine.
There are also many venomous Creatures as ^erpents, Adders, Scorpions and
Snakes. It exuberates, besides ^e several Products already mentioned, in Sugar,
Oil, Kitchin^d Medicinal herbs, and various kinds of Fruit: and in a word ^am
is so well provided by nature of it self that the Inhabitants may ^pply
themselves with what is necessary for human Life, and Re^eation, without the
means of exotic Commerce, and importa^on of foreign Commodities.

CHAP. IV. ^he Nature and Way of living of the Siamers. Their several Trades
and Profession. Travail of their Merchants. Government and Polity. The great
State of the Emperor, and Magnificency of his Throne: his Cavalcade, and
manner of showing himself to his People. The Riches of his Vessels, the
Elephants served in Gold and Silver. The Wars about the white Elephant, against
Ava and Pegu.
SIam, as I said before, is very populous, and the Inhabitants generally of a
good and free disposition. They Negotiate ^trongly in every kind of
Merchandise, whereof they can make a pro^t, and that more especially within
Land.

They are great incouragers of Art and Artists, especially the Me^hanicks, and
such as they cannot well want, as House-and Ship-Carpenters, Masons, Smiths,
Braziers, Founders; Turners, Plummers, Pewterers, Painters, Carvers,
Goldsmiths, Fullers, ^awiers, Joyners, Weevers, and an infinite number of
Jewellers and Lapidaries; Nor are they without their Physicians, Chirur^eons,
and Lawiers, after their own manner. Here are also Ped^rs by Thousands, that
travail from Town to Town, like such ^s follow the Fairs in Europe; these have
no fast dwelling, but ^re in motion the whole year round, and sleep always in
the booths which they erect wheresoever they come. Fishing and Husbandry ^re
well promoted, for every man, be he never so mean, if he have a fast Residence,
has his Lands, either less or more, which are cultivated with all imaginable
diligence, as appears by the yearly Product of Grain, which not only supplies
themselves, but is also exported into other Countries, as well on the main
Continent, as the adjacent Islands. And so cheap is all manner of necessary
Provision and sustenance, that Laborers and common Slaves wi^ work any servile
work for 3d a Day.

Every City has a Praetor, or Deputy, who derives his power from the King, and
with a Council of Assistance is to determin^ of all Matters and Affairs, as
well Civil as Criminal. The same Praetor, or Viceroy has also charge over the
Imperial Revenues Tolls, and Customs, to see that they be paid without
defrauding of the King, and that the Sub-commissioners of the said Dutie^ do
not exact upon Foreigners, that are not acquainted with the Rates imposed upon
their Goods. This Officer, as also ever^ Officer of State, is only to continue
three years in one place, an^ at the expiration of that term, is either removed
to a place of gre^ter Trust and Eminency, or has his Discharge sent him. The
Suits at Law are presently brought to an end, and Sentence pass^ according to
equity, without regard to the Degree and Quality the Parties; the Client first
going to a Notary, and has his ca^ fairly stated, which then is brought to an
Advocate, who is ^ discuss and comment it before the Praetor, as in most places
^ Europe: with this difference only, that the Advocate or Attorne^ has the
power to continue or give over the Suit, as he thinks f^ which is ordained to
prevent taedious Appeals, and perpetua^ clamours at Court. Criminal Affairs are
punished severely enough especially, Malefactors severely punished.
Treason and Murder, nor do they dispense with an^ places of Refuge, or
Sanctuary, for the Perpetratours of suc^ enormous Crimes.

There is no Potentate in the East may parallel this Emperor for Magnificence
and Pomp. He never sets his foot upon the Earth, bu^ is carried on a Throne of
Gold, from place to place; and usuall^ appears once a day before his Peers and
Grandees, which alway^ attend the Court: these show him all imaginable
Reverence, an^ ascribe him such honor as accrews to no Mortal. When any desire
to speak with him, so soon as he gets admission, presents himself upon his
knees, his hands folded, and his countenance cast to the Ground; then bowing of
his body and kissing the Earth, he begins his Harangue, which is always done
with a submissive voice, and at the end of every Sentence, rehearses his Title,
JAOUA TJAUW PERRE BOEDE TJAUW JAOUA, which by an Idiotism of our own, is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Stately Throne of the King.
His supreme Throne is of massive Gold, made after the form of a Pyramid, and
so contrived that none can see him ascend. On each side of the Throne stand
several Statues, and Creatures of monstrous shapes; as is recorded of the
Judgment Seat of Solomon, which was guarded with Lions. His Person is secured
with a very noble Guard, and well armed; several Elephants always ready in the
inner court of the Palace also, for his Pleasure and Service upon occasion;
these are mounted with Trappings of rich Silk, fimbriated and imbossed with
Gold, and precious Stones.

When he goes abroad to visit his Pagods and Religious Houses, or to take his
Divertisement (which is ordinarily twice or thrice every year) he is attended
with an infinite Retinue of Grandees, and Officers at Court, as also all his
Wives and Concubines, which are very numerous, all mounted upon Elephants. When
this Setting forth is not performed with a Cavalcade, but by Water; there are a
certain number of Praws, brought up close to the Palace. These are almost like
a Barge, but far greater, having 20 or 30 Oars a piece, with 5 men to an Oar;
without they are richly gilded and charged with Festons and Foliages on a
diapered ground. Others there are less noble and rich, which serve only to
transport the Soldatesque, and aboard every Praw are several that play upon
Wind Instruments and Drums, which make a confused noise; Upon the hearing of
this, every one, whether Citizen or Peasant, Freeman or Slave, Young or Old, is
enjoined to come forth and fall prostrate, with all imaginable Reverence, upon
very severe Penalties, according to the Quality and Discretion of the Party.
This Injunction is observed very strictly, and certain Officers ordained ^o
take notice of the Delinquents, whose Rule is Arbitrary, and Mesures sudden;
they are so correct in punishing such that few escape; I my self having seen,
while I was there, some two or three beheaded with a Scimitar, only for being
too remiss, in doing Worship; although in such as want Discretion, or otherwise
unable to perform the Ceremony, through invalidity of Body or Mind, the Offense
is either dispensed with, or expiated with some inconsiderable Forfeiture. This
Solemn Appearance happening so rarely and that with such Majesty, creates
great Loyalty and veneratio^ in the heart of the Subjects for their Prince: and
surely the conclusion and effect of every Maxim in Politic Affairs is the
securest Index; o^ Distinction from a Contrary, which almost all the Kingdoms
an^ Dominions of the East affoard an Example of, and more notedly the Sophy of
Persia, who when with a huge Retinue he makes a Cav^cade (which might seem to
be for no other end than to be seen) no^ dare presume to appear in the street,
upon pain of Death; of whi^ more hereafter.

Great plenty of Gold.
Gold is here in such plenty that not only Plates, Chargers, Go^lets, Bowls,
Basins, Lavers, and whatsoever else is useful (...) the Kings Table, is all of
solid Gold, but also greater vessels in t^ Kitchen; which had I not seen them
my self, should have held incredible, The Elephants served in Gold and Silver.
if the weight and greatness had truly been report^ But what is yet more, the
white Elephant, with the rest (wh^ are about 6 or 8 in Number) kept within the
Palace, are served Gold and Silver. The Gallantry of the Court, and the gorge^
attire of the Courtiers, is unspeakeably rich. And to be brief I should repeat
the Majesty of that Prince in Power and Comm^ The profuse Emulation of the
Courtiers in Embroydery, Je^ and other costly Ornaments, and the Magnificent
Structure of Palace and other stately Fabrics; I should either prove too weak
the performance of such a Province, or, hazard my reputation giving a Narrative
of the Pomp which I have in reality beheld, such as have not seen it, who would
in all probability be too t^rous to take things of that nature upon Credit.
This I shall o^ add, that rather than to be undeservedly taxed with hyperbeliz^
Froth, I Will content my self with a recommendation thereon other modest
Gentlemen that have been there, and published t^ Journals for the public
perusal of the Curious in general.

Of their Wars.
The present King of Siam, has lived in great peace and ^^quillity, ever since
he first swayed the Scepter: But in the tim^ the late King, that nation has
been deeply engaged in fom^ troubles: Specially with Pegu, Ava and Langjander,
partly out of the ambitious minds of those Princes, and partly out of a sordid
covetousness; as of the king of Pegu, who endeavored to make himself Master of
the white Elephant, which he of Siam had: Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur
Achivi.
but after the depopulation of the countries, and loss of many thousand Souls,
they made Peace upon strict Articles.

In the year 1648, the King of Ava with the assistance of a neighboring
Potentate, invaded part of Siam, and took in some open Villages, and Towns of
smaller note; but the king of Siam coming to have notice of this sudden
Expedition, levies an Army of 200000 men, or upwards, marching himself at the
head in Person; and encamped about 2 English Miles from the Enemy, where
without either Battle or Skirmish they lay for 3 Months, when the Enemy not
finding himself able to continue longer in camp, for want of Provision, and
Recruits of men, was fain to break up; and march homewards. Those of Patany had
sent Ten Thousand men, all well disciplined and armed, for Auxiliaries in the
Service of the king of Siam; but those arrived too late, the King being just
upon his March for Iudia; where about 20 days after, he was Solemnly fetched in
by his Nobles with great Triumph and Joy, as if he had obtained some notable
Victory: and certainly it was the most prudent course he could have taken, to
spare his own people, by shunning the Bloodshed of so many innocent souls,
vanquishing the Hostility by the restraint of his Arms; and in making himself
formidable with the greatness of his Battalions. There was also a Navy of
Twenty Thousand Praws, pressed for the behoof of the Army, to transport the
Baggage and Provision; and besides the standing Militia and Voluntairs, 52000
Citizens pressed for this Expedition, whom the King allowed Rice for
Victualling, the rest they were to take care for themselves. The Mandate was no
sooner out, but this Body was completed, which gave occasion of wonder, to
some, when they observed the readiness and obedience of those Pagans to their
lawful Sovereign. The weapons used then for that Dispatch, were mostly
firearms, and about 20 Pieces of Ordnance, which were committed to the charge
of 2 expert Gunners; besides 5 Thousand Elephants, and 2 Thousand Horse; those
that were mounted on Elephants were armed with Bows, Arrows and Darts, and the
Cavalry with Firelocks, Scimatars and Bucklers, which Armory is always ready
for use in the Kings Repository. As for Powder they are never at a loss through
want of it, having such plenty of Saltpeter, which is the main Ingredient
thereof: so that it is most certain, the Siammers are never destitute of any
necessary Ammunition for War, either upon offensiv or defensiv Occasions. Nor
yet second to any for true valor and courage, which is checked by a prudent
Conduct, and politic Direction of their Power; and thereby the Prince, and the
leading Officers of the Army, become dreadful to the Neighboring Potentates
abroad, and awful to the Subject at home.

CHAP. V. The Revenues and Treasury of the King of Siam. The Religious zeal of
those Kings in building of Temples, and Houses for pious uses. Soldiers without
pay. The great Slavery and Charges of the Citizens and Plebeians, their
Obedience, and Liberality in devotion. Ample Revenues of the Spiritual. Habit
and Function of their Priests. The Multitude and monstrous bigness of some of
their Idols. Their Ceremonies in Worship; wherein congruous to those of the
Romis^ Religion.
Revenues of the King of Siam.
THE Revenues of the King of Siam, as we have elsewhere said consist mostly in
Customs, Tolls and Excise, for all expo^ted Wares and Commodities, besides the
Fishing, and Growth^ the Land, as Corn, Fruit, Trees, etc. There are also in
the Country several subterrannean and fossible things, Mines of Gold an^
Silver, Lead-and-Pewter, besides great store of Sappan-wood, (...) good as that
of Brasilia, which is reputed a very rich Commodity and sent abroad both to
Coromandel, Dabul, China, Iapon, and oth^ Islands in the East. The devour zeal
of the Kings of Siam in erecting of Pagods, Religious Houses-and Temples.
When Any that is employed in the Kings servi^ dies, 2 Thirds of his Estate
fall to the King, and the residue to the Wife and Children of the deceased; or
else in lieu thereof such Salary as they are contented with. The like when any
Merchan^ Stranger comes to die within the Kingdom, two Thirds of h^ Estate are
brought into the Chamber of Finances.

The King having that special mean of making the Army suppo^ it is self, is at
very little Charges else, save what his zeal moves hi^ to, in Building of
Temples, Religious Houses and Towers, to the Honor of his Gods, which indeed
are infinitely numerous and costly in this Country; the enobling of his court,
with some unnecessary things tending to his own Honor, about which much money
is consumed; and lastly providing of Annunition and Shipping upon occasion of
War: but as we have already mentioned, Soldiers without Pay, and used as Slaves.
the Soldatesque have no Pay from the King, except a certain allowance of Rice,
and what Spoil they can take from the Enemy; and these, although they go under
the Denomination of Soldiers, yet are but Slaves at best, being employed in all
servile uses, as Laborers, when, and where, the King commands.

The Citizens (which may be called Freemen or Proprietaries) are but half a
remove from Soldiers, The Condition of the Citizens.
they being obliged to maintain and repair all the Fortifications at their own
cost, and defend them in time of need. Yet notwithstanding those heavy burdens
imposed on the Commonalty, in the performance whereof they are not found
remiss, or tardy, they bring up above twenty Dutch Tuns, without dispute.
Tun of Gold yearly, for Offerings to their Pagods, and the behoof of the
Spiritual; insomuch that the Priests, with the large Offerings of the King, and
Liberality of the People, grow rich and in great esteem, notwithstanding their
being so numerous in this Kingdom.

The King and People embrace no other Religion than barely Gentilism, which, as
appears by the ruins of Monasteries and Cells every where, has been anciently
professed among them. Their Ceremonies they seem to have borrowed from the
Roman, or Greek Church, which they ape, as near as may be, with reservation of
Paganism. They are incessantly building, repairing and adorning the Temples of
their Pagods, founding Cloisters, and erecting of Pyramids; wherein they spare
not for money: for though they spend their whole Estates, about them, they must
be gilded without, and richly hung within. Their Bonzi, or Priests, are
distinguished from the Laity by a yellow Vesture, and those again differing
among themselves by certain Badges, or tokens, denoting their degrees: Their
Beards, Head and Eiebrows are always shaven. According to their Order, they may
not handle Money, Marry, nor make use of Women, upon severe Penalties; for if
any be taken, in company with a Female, he is burned alive, or at best banished
the Kingdom during the Term of Life; and certainly if their Codpiece were not
fastened with such a heavy Padlock; the Laymens Wives and Daughters could never
be secure, from that pestiferous rout? It Is true by their Rule they are not to
handle money, yet like the Jesuits, have accumulated to themselves vast
Treasures, which are accompanied with a great reverence and honor from the
Commonalty, who whether they have sustenance for their Family and Children at
home, will not see the Bonzi destitute of what he has a mind to, whether it be
in Victuals or Apparel. Their Function is to exhort and teach the People, for
which end they have certain Lectures, four times every moon, and at tha^ time
set open the Temples, where all the people resort, and meet in due order. So
soon as they have buzzed over a few formal words, they begin a kind of
Admonition, insisting upon several good works and moral virtues, but especially
to be liberal to the Bonzi, or Priests, and the Pagods: How far this prevails
upon them appears truly in their free will offerings, which are indeed very
considerable, in Gold, Silver, Garments and Meat, which the Bonzi then receive
at the Offertory, promising to make some new Gods therewith, or adorn the Old.

At morning and at night they go to prayers, which they rehearse with a loud
voice, that any stranger thereto induced b^ curiosity, may be permitted to see
and hear. They go also t^ visit the Sick, and pray for the Deceased, with great
sobbings, and tokens of sorrow. When they have done Prayer they sing all
together in a Chorus, in the Which are their Ghostly Languages, as Arabic in
the Al^oran, and Latin at Mass.
Pegu or Borneo Tongue, and that with a tolerable good Harmony; that done, they
walk leisurely toward the head of the Temple, and kiss the Pagods. The Pagods
are images of diverse sorts of Metalls, as some of Gold, Silver and Brass others
of Woodor Stone. In the Cathedral of India are twelve Pagods of a vast Bigness,
sitting all cross legged, like Tailors upon a Table: the chief whereof was 13
fathom high, as he sat, being of a due Symmetry and Analogy, through all his
members. This is usually called by the Dutch, Den grooten Afgodt van SOES, that
is, The great Idol of SOES. The rest were somewhat less than this and were
placed directly one before another. The Ceremonie^ which we have already said
to have affinity with the Church of Rome, are, Burning of Lamps, Consecrated,
or Holy Water, Auricular Confession, Indulgences, and Pilgrimages, under taken
for themselves and others, whereby they are of opinion that they merit much,
One of them would (if I had given my Consent) have gone on a long and tedious
Pilgrimage for me. They have some special kindness for the Hollanders, in that
they allow Liberty of Conscience, and revile not their For that were not
consistent with Money catching in those Countries, where they could never yet
finger it by Violence and Tyranny.
Gods, as do the Mahumetans, for which reason the Opinion of that grand
Impostor, could never get footing in this Kingdom.

CHAP. VI. Good materials for building in Siam. Their manner of Housekeeping,
and entertainment of Friends. Neatness and cleanliness in their Houses and
Bodies. Their way of dressing themselves, both men and Women. Strange Contracts
of matrimony. Early marriage. Education of their Children. Learning and learned
men had in great veneration. Rites about their deceased. Vrbanity in their
Conversation. The great Affection of the Emperor toward Strangers etc.
SIam has of it self whatsoever is requisite in building either for Houses or
Shipping: they neither want Lime, Stone, Lead, Iron, Good Materials for
building in Siam.
nor Wood, or whatsoever else is necessary. Yet notwithstanding Stone be here
in plenty enough, yet they build their Dwelling-houses mostly of Wood, and
reserve Stone for the use of their Pagods, Temples, Pyramids, Fortifications
and other Public Edifices. Their Houses they cover with Tiles, and within have
several Appartments, Housekeeping and entertainment of Friends.
as we have in Europe. They use not many movables in their Houses neither use
they Benches, Stools, or Tables. Their Floors are all spread with Matts which
they use for cleanliness, and upon these they sit down. But if a person of
Eminency comes to visit them they honor him with another Matt, or else an
Arabian Carpet, which is of excellently well wrought Tapestry. When he is set,
they give him Fair-water in Gold or Silver Goblets, and a As Coffee in the
Lev^nt, or Chocolate in Spain.
Siery Pinang, which is the chief thing wherewith they caress their Friends.
They are very nice and curious about their Vessels in the Kitchen and Dishes,
which for the most part are of brass, and of a neat fashion, but generally cha^
They are also very cleanly in their Chamber, and surpass any oth^ people that I
have seen, Cleanly in their Chambers and about their Bodies.
either before or since. They keep their b^dies cleaner than the Turks
themselves, and bath themselves of^ than they eat, which is not only their
Head, Hands and Feet, ^ was the Custom of the Talmudists, and those under the
Levit^ Law, but all over: which being done, they anoint themselves w^ perfumed
Confectures, made of fragrant Spices, and Herbs. Some them I have known use an
Ointment made of Xylaloes, or, wood Aloes, Sandal, Musk, and Ambergreece,
tempered with R^ water, which besides the delectable odor it renders, is a g^
Preservative against epidemical and pestilential Airs.

Men how attired when a broad.
Whenever their Devotion moves them to go and visit t^ Friends, or the Pagods,
which they frequently adore, they b^ and anoint themselves after this wise, and
afterward, attire th^selves in a Garb peculiar to such Solemnities: the Men
have all t^ fingers laden with gold Rings, as many as they can well pu^
without hindering the due use of their Joints, and a long Co^ Robe, or Cassock,
of diverse colors either so woven, or ^ted; which appears very gorgeously: this
is their Habit from middle downward; under that they wear a Shirt of very fine
Lin^ or Cotton, of red, white, or other colors: above the middle a kin^
Surplice, with wide sleeves (like the Gown of a Batchlour of in our
Universities) Head, Hands and Feet are all bare.

Women how attired.
The Women have their hair tied up in a round ball, on the c^ of the head,
fastened with a golden Bodkin, 5 or 6 inches long their Ears they hang Pendants
of Gold about a finger long, w^ are fastened to the Tips of their Ears, by great
wide holes, b^ when they are Young, the head where they fasten the Penda^ set
with Precious stones, as Ruby, Diamond, Amethist, Emeral^ Pearls. Besides the
Rings, which are also set with Diamonds other Stones, and sometimes plain, they
wear others about t^ arms, which are massy and ponderous. They wear also a
long Ve^ of 7 or 8 foot long, and 6 or 7 broad, painted of diverse colo^ being
fastened with a Surcingle about 16 foot long, wound ro^ their body, which is
neatly embroidered with Gold; From middle upward they have nothing but a
Cotton-cloth, or a Sca^ colored Silk which they throw about their shoulders to
cover their breasts. To be brief the Habit of Men and Women, as well as
Children, is as costly as gaudy, and their Persons of a very handsome stature,
but rather with the shortest; so that with the stateliness of attire, and
comeliness of body, they present better than those of China or Iapon. When
they walk the streets, they are attended with a retinue of Slaves conformable
to their Rank and Ability, which are also in gentile habit.

The Siammers, although Pagans, have a sacred veneration for Matrimony, and are
generally very chaste; Marriages the Siammers.
Yet they do not esteem it a dishonor or shame to be Adulterers. Whoredom is
in some regard dispensed with (or at least connived at) nevertheless they are
not much inclined to Venery, but content themselves with such as they are
engaged to by Wedlock: and in their honest demeanor toward their lawful
Consorts (of whether sex it be meant) may convince most of us, that profess the
Faith of Christ: The conjugal Love of Man and Wife is so mutually observed on
both sides, and the ^ilial Duty of Children toward their Parents, so
reciprocally ^d, that some who pretend to a more than natural Light, need not
to reckon those too mean a praecedent for Morality. The parents are very
careful to educate their children, when they are young, and the children
diligent in nourishing and providing for their parents, when they are grown
aged, and unable to help themselves.

A Batchlour desirous to marry, and consequently having settled his thoughts
upon a Maid, must address himself (or send some friend) to the Father of the
party, or having none, to her Guardian, and not the Maid her self, with whom
they may not converse; and these are to treat together upon the matter. But it
is more usual, that the Parents of both the parties make the Overture, among
themselves. They have no respect to Consanguinity or Affinity, but marry
sometimes with the nearest relations they have, Brother and Sister only
excluded, unless they have different Mothers. But to strangers they rarely
marry, although it were to a Family of a better rank or Fortune. They look much
after Wealth and Beauty, but not so much after virtuous Inclinations, as we do;
neither are they prone to be led aside with affability, or flattery, as
sometimes happens among us, which tends frequently to a future discontent and
irrevocable calamity. Now as the Parents always make up the Marriage, s^ the
young couple may not of themselves dissolve it; and the better to avoid any
dissatisfaction, which may arise from the dislik^ that the one may have of the
other, they are generally marrie^ before they come to maturity, when they are
not capable of judging, as at 10 years of age. I have seen a Couple married,
the man at 12 and the Woman not fully 9. Another couple I have known, who had 2
Children, and both their ages could not mak^ up 25 years. Polygamy.
Polygamy is here allowed, for every man may marr^ so many Wives, as he lists,
unless he be under some particus^ obligation to the contrary. They are
sometimes divorced for sleder reasons, but always when they cannot procreate
Children and being separate they may severally marry again. Their M^riages are
not confirmed by the Spiritual, but Temporal Magistra^ yet always the Priest,
must be present to do Sacrifice on beha^ both the Parties, They are very
punctual in observing all the A^ticles specified in the Covenant of Matrimony,
without the c^stringency of the Law. They regulate themselves in Hous-ke^ing,
Education of their Children and the like, mostly after Law of Nature, without
restraint or compulsion. Their Child^ are very flexible and obedient, without
beating or other sev^ chastisement. When they are young their Parents commit
the to the Bonzi, who instruct them in all Sciences and good manne^ as also
mechanical Professions and Trades, whereby they afte^wards get their living:
Learning and Learned men in great esteem.
Although most of them desire rather^ stick to their studies, and so embrace
the Function of Priest-hoo^ such being among them esteemed honorable, that have
any tinct^ of Learning.

The dead burned to Ashes.
Their Dead they bury not, but, after the manner of the o^ Romans, burn them;
which is celebrated with great pomp, and e^pences, proportionable to the merits
or ability of the Party. T^ Ashes they conserve in an Urn, which they enclose
in a Pyram^ erected to the Memory of the Deceased: others out of Zeal ca^
Churches and Monasteries to be built; or bequeath large Re^nues to the Pagods
and Bonzi: nay, there is hardly a Slave amo^ them but gives something for
Religious uses, or perhaps all t^ he was master of; and upon these occasions
they are burned at (...) charges of the Convent. Those that die of any disease
which they repute unclean as Smallpox, Fevers, etc. are not burned, but
either thrown into a River with a stone about their neck, or given to the
Beasts of prey. The same they do with Children, if they come to die before a
certain age, for that they say, That for want of discretion they could not
rightly Worship their Deity, and consequently do not deserve an Urn.

They are of a very liberal nature, and civil to converse withal, Urbanty in
their conversation.
but especially to Strangers. English, Portugueezes, Hollanders, and Moors,
without respect to their Profession, have liberal access to enter, inhabit and
traffic in the Land, by order of the King; and enjoy as much Liberty, and
benefit of the Law, as his own natural subjects; which draws abundance of
Foreigners, from all Countries, who come thither, either upon the account of
Commerce, or to seek Protection. This concurrency of so many several sorts of
People does not only daily teach new Polity, but renders the Prince formidable
to his neigbouring Potentates, who know his Kingdom to be so populous and the
people so deeply engaged to their Sovereign.

The Crown is successiv, The Crown hereditary.
yet during the minority of the Heir (which is at 15 years) the Uncle, or some
Guardian nominated by the King, takes place as Administrator: By this
Praecedent also are all the Officers in the Kingdom regulated, that are
successiv.

CHAP. VIII. The Sieur van Muyden invited to the Exequies of the Princess. A
stately Scaffold erected for the Solemnity of the day. A magnificent and
sumptuous Altar Ornaments of the Corpse. The Train attending the Ceremony: Order
of the same. Money thrown among the People. Stages erected for the Almosners.
Artificial Fireworks. The vast Charges of this Preparation.
ON the 23 of February, the Sieur van Muyden, Consul for the Company, was sent
for, by two Interpreters, February 1650.
to wait upon the King; who invited him to attend the Ceremony of burning the
Corpse of his sole legitimat Daughter. I went my self also to see the Exequies
performed, FEBR. 1650.
but by the remissness of the Messengers, came too late to see the Train; for
the Corpse was brought to the place, before we got thither; but yet came in time
enough to get to the stage, which was erected for us. On the middle of the
Parade before the palace, were erected 5 Towers; upon each Tower a poll, that
which stood in the midst was 30 fathom high, the other 4 that stood in a
quadrangular form, each 20 fathom. The Fabric of those Towers was very
artificial: Round about under the Architraves, they were neatly painted with
Foliage, raised with Gold, and depressed with Umber and burned Ivory. On the
Stylobat were carved Heads of Leopards, Tygres and Panthers. Under the
Projecture, Supporters in antic-work, and emblematical to that occasion; the
Scima, or Cornish with close Leaves suitable to the Phris^ and Architrave, but
could not at the distance I was at, perceive whether it was carved or painted.
Within the great Tower which stood in the middle, was a very costly Altar,
covered with Gold, and set with Sapphirs and other stones, being about 6 foot
high from the Ground. Upon this Altar was the Corpse of the Young Lady laid,
after it had lay imbalmed about 6 Months within the Palace The Body was
attired in a Royal Garb, with Gold chains, Bracelet and Collars of Gold, and
fastened with Diamonds. She was set in a Co^fin of solid Gold, in which she sat
upright, with her Hands co^joyned, and her face looking upwards: upon her head
was a Crow^ of Gold, very richly set with stones. Then came all the Mandori^
or, Grandees of the Nation, with their Ladies, attired in White, without any
ornament, for White is their Mourning color; they feigne^ themselves
sorrowful for the Dead, and passing by strow'd the Corpse, with Flowers and
odorous Waters. When these Ceremonies were done, the Corpse was brought out of
the Tower, and set upon a Chariot of Triumph, richly gilded, and shown to the
Grandees^ the Empire, whereupon all the Ladies began to weep aloud, which was
not altogether real, but feigned; every one aemulating to sho^ a greater
appearance of Sorrow than the rest; which was with suc^ earnestness, that it
might have been heard all through the Tow^ After the Chariot had stood there
about 2 short hours, it was r^moved to another place, where the Body was to be
burned; and w^ followed by the Mandorins, and their Ladies, who went softly
afte^ In the first rank went the Kings eldest son, aged about twenty Years, who
was only brother to the Deceased, and was mounted upon a Young Elephant all in
White: next him were two brethren of his, by another Queen, mounted also upon
Elephants, on each side one: each of these had a long silk Scarf fastened to the
Hearse, in their hand. On each side the Hearse were 14 of the Kings Sons, with
green twigs of palm in their Hands, who all the time went in a heavy posture,
their eyes dejected to the Ground, framing a sad Countenance, and uttering many
sighs and expressions of Sorrow. On each side of the way, by which the Hearse
must pass (that was about 6 foot broad) were erected several stages, for the
Mandorins of a meaner rank. These at the passing by of the Hearse, threw Oranges
among the common people; in some of which were Which is a piece of Money
Valuing about 2s 8d Sterling.
Ficols, and Which is half a Ficol.
Mases. this occasioned such a throng of People, that several lay under foot,
and 7 Persons trodden to death. When they were come to the Altar, the Corpse was
taken down by the Mandorins, with Waits and Wind-Music, which made a
melancholic noise; and was carried with great Solemnity to the Altar; where it
was set down, and laid round with aromatic Woods, and Drugs, amongst which was
poured many sorts of perfumes and odorous balsams. When this was done the
Princes of the blood, and the Mandorins returned to the Kings Palace; but the
Ladies were enjoined by the Emperor to remain at the Altar and bewail the
Dead, for two days longer; at which time the Body was to be burned: and
accordingly they stayed there till the time was expired, striving, who could
manifest the most sorrow; hoping so to obtain the greater favor from the
Emperor. But the greatest folly I could observe among them was, that when any
of them could not dissemble, or let down tears, they were whipped with thongs,
by some persons, thereto appointed, till they wept indeed; and this was duly
executed without having regard to their Persons. Near those Towers, was erected
a stage, Presenic sent the Bonzi, for their good Service in praying for the
Soul of the deceased.
covered with thick gilded paper, whereupon sat the Chief of the Bonzi, and a
little lower sat the Priests of a lower degree and rank, of which there was a
great number; these (like those under the Hierarchy of Rome) were employed to
pour forth prayers for the Soul of the Deceased. Which when they had done by
order of the King, there were several Gifts sent them which for the most part,
consisted in Apparel, House-furniture and mechanical Implements, of every
sort. At the going down of the Sun there were several Fireworks played off,
which issued out of Twenty Turrets, covered with gilded paper. All these
preparations, besides what was that day given to the Bonzi, and distributed
among the poor, according to the relation given to the Here van Muyden, by the
Kings Agent, amounted to 5000 Catti of Siam Silver, which is about 66000 pound
Sterling. besides the Images that were bestowed on the chief Temple, whereof two
were of Gold, about 4 foot high, which also amounted to a great sum: for what
Gold, Jewels, or other Gifts were in her life time presented her, by the King,
or Mandorins, were expended upon these exequial Rites.

CHAP. IX. The Body of the Princess burnt. A remarkable token, whereby, it was
concluded that she was poisoned. The Kings fury against all the Domestics of
the Princess, who are committed to custody. The cruel Punishment of the
suspected Parties. A strange wa^ to find out the guilty. Elephants used as
Executioners. Fifty men and Women executed in one day, some by Elephants,
others buried in the Earth, to the Head, where they are suffered to starve. A
Young Lady with her Brother taken and dispatched. Their Candor, and free
resolvedness to die.
TWo days after the Corpse were brought forth, the King went himself in person,
and gave fire to the wood with a Torch, which was done with great Solemnity,
and Music of all sorts, that all the time played very doleful Airs. The Chest
of Gold, together with all the Costly Ornaments, wherewith she was attired,
when she lay in state, were burned with the Corpse, and reduced to dust.

An odd Passage.
We may not ommit to relate a very remarkable passage which happened about these
Exequies; for when the King went to gather up the Ashes, which were to be put
in a golden Urn, he found a piece of Flesh, about the bulk of a Young child's
head, fresh and unconsumed. This seeing, he was mainly altered, and turning
about to one of the Magi who stood at his left hand, Asked him; What his
opinion was? and, What might be the reason that this gobbet of flesh remained
unburn'd. The Sage judging it to be done by some Enchantment, durst not declare
his opinion about it; but to satisfy the King, replied, That his Majesty could
not but be sensible of the Cause, since nothing could ly occult from his
searching Wisdom: the more in regard it was a thing so palpable and open. The
King by the Saying of this Parasite, concluded with himself that she had been
poisoned, cries out with great raging, At length I have discovered the
certainty of what I ever had in suspicion: My Daughter is without doubt
poisoned. Upon that in great discontent he went into his Mourning appartment
whence he issued an Order for the sudden Apprehension of all the Ladies, that
attended the Princess in her Life time, who were in obedience to his Royal Will
immediately secured.

On the day following diverse others of the greatest rank were siezed and
committed to Custody, who were wont to converse with the Princess, although
they had not been in her presence for the space of a whole year.

Shortly after it was my fortune to be Spectator to such a cruel Tragedy as
ever I have seen elsewhere. The King being now possessed wthi Jealousy, and
suspecting several to be factious in the matter, yet could not find out any
certainty in the thing; he therefore to sift it out, who those should be that
were concerned in the deed, practiced this cruel Stratagem and impious way of
Trial. The king sent a Messenger to ^ummon up some of the chief Nobility in the
land to Court, where being come to give attendance, were shut up in Prison,
till the Prison would not hold any more, so that he was fain to find a new
place, where to committ those unhappy Gentlemen. When the principal Officers
and Courtiers were taken into Security. The king not contented so, ^ent also
for their Wives, and several Young Ladies, who were known ^o be familiar with
the Princess some time before her death: these were part, that they might not
have the benefit of Communication. ^lso secured in a place When the Emperor
had as many Persons in Custody, as he, or others that advised him suspected, he
gave order to ^ake several Pitts in the ground about 20 foot square, one near
another; which the Soldiers were commanded to fill with Charcoal, kindle and
^low it up with long Fans, such as the Slaves in Siam do fan their Lords and
Ladies with. When all was performed according to the Com^andment of the king,
they brought forth some of those Personages that were impeached with their
hands tied behind their backs b^ all the time guarded with a Body of Soldiers:
and being come to^ place, they stripped them naked and put their feet in warm
Water, make them tender; after that, the Soldiers paired of the skin v^razours.
Afterward they were brought before certain Officers, ^minated by the King as
Examinators for that day, and were assist^ by the chief of the Bonzi, who
insisted upon them to confess the Fa^ but upon their steadfast denial, had the
Which is a kind of Curse like that in the Levitical Law, when the Womanis to
drink the water of Jealousy
Rigoloza pronounced again them, and so transmitted to the Tormenters, who were
forced ^ run over the hot coals without their natural Shoes. So soon as the
were come through the fire their feet were visited; and if they v^ blistered,
it was concluded by the Bonzi, that they were guilty, (...) so led away to the
place appointed for them to be kept in, till all (...) supposed Criminals were
turned through the Furnace: but when t^ Officers had don their visits as they
were enjoined, they found ^ but what were blistered, and consequently condemned
as g^ some there were on whom this impious Test was imposed, t^ indeed with a
strong resolution ran through, without receiving m^ damage: yet many there were
who fell down flat in the middle of ^ Fire, where they expired their last, for
(as we were afterward^ formed) there was a strict charge given, as well to the
Spectator^ Officers, not to reach forth their hand to pull any person out, up^
pain of Death. A Scaene (I must confess) so sad as I have never see^ yet, and
hope I never shall. That Perillus was thrown into the bra^ Bull, which he had
presented to the Tyrant Phalaris, to punish s^ as he was offended with, had
good color of Justice; but tha^ many in innocence should be massacred upon
bare supicion, (...) that with such unheard of Cruelty, is in no wise
justifiable. It^ spectacle dismal enough, none can deny, to see a Ship rent up^
the Rocks; and the distressed mariners Swimming upon masts^ planks, to save
their lives; but yet harder to see so many rare P^nages burnt alive, and fried
in their own blood: for that is from Divine hand, to which we ow our very Lives
and Being: but t^ the effects of a wretched Tyranny from our fellow creatures,
w^ Justice it self had nothing to demand.

Every person who had past this horrid Purgatory, and by the af^ said rule
convicted, was led aside, and by the Soldiers made 't Verbranden en ombrengen
van v^^ voornaame Edelen in SLAM.
^o a pale: which done the Elephants were brought forth. Now the Reader must
understand that at Syam they have no other Execu^ioners, on the score of Death,
than Elephants. Elephants the Executioners in Siam.
When the great Elephant was brought, and viewed the Condemned party, went
twice or thrice round about him and at last took him up with his Trunk, pale
and all, and tossed him aloft into the Air, and caught him at coming down upon
his teeth, which struck quite through his body, afterward throwing him off,
trampled him under his feet till his Gutts burst out, and trod his body flat
to the ground. When the Elephant had dispatched, the Soldiers draggd the
Car^ases to the River, which made the way slippery with blood. On this manner
were the greatest part executed; but others were ^rought to the path, which
leads to the City, and there put in ^oles, dug in the Earth on purpose,
where they were closed ^p, to the neck, and every one that passed by, was to
fulfill ^he Emperors pleasure. ( forsooth) commanded to spit upon them; ^o
which order I was fain to submit my self, being to pass by that ^ay, so that I
could not avoid it. These were to remain there ^o till they died, and none
daring to give them any thing to eat (...) drink. It was lamentable to hear
them cry out to every one that ^assed by to dispatch 'em; but the Officers kept
so strict an eye ^at none durst move his hand. Four months long dured this
^orrible Massacre, and every day a great number put to death: on ^ne day I have
seen 50, and the like number on a forenoon. The general number of all that died
was by some reckoned to be ^oo Souls, by others almost 300 more; and certainly
few had ^caped if they had not absented themselves from Court during the
^placable fury of the King.

This may seem to be a mean reason, for so great a piece of Ty^nny, but it was
well known afterward that the King had for^erly a design to cut of the chief
of the Mandarins, of whom he ^mself began to stand in aw, and therefore took an
opportunity ^o do it under this specious pretense: and the better to effect it
without mutiny or rebellion, he had newly levied an Army of 250000 ^en, and
made as if he would denounce war against China.

On the 28 of Febr. were 300 of the Domestics of the late Prin^ess brought to
the place of Execution, who were also led through the fire; but having passed
through, were (I know not for wh^ reason) set at liberty. Shortly after was the
Youngest daughter o^ the late King with all her Household, committed to Custody:
and the king as it appeared had a great suspicion of her, the more when ^ was
informed that whilst other Ladies at Court, were be wailin^ the Dead, she
could hardly all the time restrain her self from laughing: but what made the
Matter have a better hue, was, her co^plaining to the king how that her
daughter (who was also the king Child) was had in contempt; and his eldest
Daughter, in her^ time promoted to great honor.

MAR. 1650
On the first of March, was the said Princess brought for and a great number of
Ladies; who were all led through the F^ but (according to common fame) none but
the Princess ^ blistered on the feet. Hereupon she was secured with Silver Fe^
and brought into a Dungeon, where none was permitted to ^ Communication with
her.

The next day the said Princess was brought forth again into Palace, where the
Mandorins were assembled in the Auditory soon as they began to make
inquisition, upon threatening to pu^ to torment, if she would not make an ample
discovery of the Tr^ she, whether out of Fear, or Glory, is uncertain, uttered
these Wo^ or to the same effect, If the King will promise upon his Royal word;
^ so soon as I have exhibited the Cause of his Daughters death, he will sp^
execute me, without making, me a mocking-stock to the World, I w^ promise upon
the Honor of a dying Princess, to manifest the whole without further trouble.
Upon that liberal saying, several of the Mandarins then present, who had a
great honor for her R^ Father, were moved to pity; and 'twas thought, that
they w^ have interceded to the King for pardon for her, if the present of the
King had not kept them in stricter aw. However after fairest manner they could
made report to the King; who promis^ grant her request, and sent the Mandorins
back, to take her into fu^ examination. Being returned, they brought her the
result o^ Petition, and willed her to confess the Cause and Circumstan^
whereupon she declared in presence of them all, That she with Help of her Nurse
were both guilty of the Fact, and that they had used ce^ exorcisms therein,
which was the reason, that that flesh was not combus^ as the rest. She added
further, That her ignominious death did not concern her so much, as that her
just Design should have no better issue; whereby the small remainder of her
Stock should be reduced to their pristin state, and freed from the Slavery of
so fierce a Tyrant. When she was further examined in some circumstantial
things, She protested that it was not provided for the innocent Princess, but
for the King himself. So soon as Report was made to the King how she had made a
liberal Confession, and what it was, he commanded instantly that an Executioner
should be sent for; who being come, he gave him order to cut a gobbet of flesh
out of her Body, and force her to eat it. When the Executioner went to fulfill
the Kings command; the Lady suffered the flesh to be tore out with wonderful
patience; but when he tendered it her to eat, she refused, crying out, O
wretched Tyrant, thou may be my Executioner, but thou can not conquer my
noble mind. Know, that I defy thy Cruelty; and that the end of thy Sham- poison
will speedily come, when the remaining Virtue of my Royal Race shall avenge
themselves of thee, and thy Tygre-brood. With these and the like words she
reviled the King, till by a second Charge sent to the Executioner from the
Palace, she was hackt in pieces, and thrown into the River.

The same day her only brother, aged 20 years, was brought to the place of
Execution, who during all these showers of Cruelty, had feigned himself
distraught, by which means, they told us he was excused.

But whether he was guilty or not, it appeared so soon as he was mounted the
stage, that he had his Wits about him: for he behaved himself with such
candor and modesty, that some of the Mandarins could not forbear tears; and
with a bitter Harangue so reviled the ^ing, and vindicated himself for what he
suffered, that the Plebeians were almost moved to an Insurrection; declaring
himself more sorrowful for the fruitless attempt of his sister, than his own
Death. So soon as he saw the Executioner come to him, he cried out, Innocent
indeed I am, as was my Sister, but now Thou inhuman Tyrant, it is thy will it
should be so, I scorn, although I were sure of enjoyment, to desire thy pardon;
that thou should not hope for the lest pity from the Hands of them that shall
revenge my Blood in after times. With these and the like words he seemed to
declare his Innocence, yet uttered some expressions which contradicted those
Protestations, that probably were to only in spite of the King. MAR. 1650
Thus was the last of the former Kings race extirpated, except one Daughter,
which was not capable of doing any thing against the Interest of the present
King.

CHAP. X. The proud, and blasphemous Titles of the King of Siam. The great
Preparations used to assuage the Waters of the Ganges.
YOu have heard by what we have related in the former Chapter, with how much
power and aw, the king of Siam rules. It will further appear how well he knows
it, by the proud, swelling Title he assumes to himself; two of which were
presented me by a Mandar^n and I hope will not seem impertinent to insert here;
although the Reader may be pleased to take notice, that the Idiom of their
Tongue is so barbarous, that it will hardly bear sense, when rendered; howeve^
we shall give it Word for Word.

THE Alliance written with letters of fine Gold being full of God-like glory.
The most Excellent, containi^ all wise Sciences. The most happy, which is not
in the VVo^ among men. The Best and most Certain that is in Heaven Earth and
Hell. The greatest Sweet, and friendly Ro^ word. Whose powerfull-sounding
Properties, and glorio^ Fame range through the World, as if the Dead we^^
raised by a God-like power, and wonderfully purged from Ghostly and Corporal
Corruption. At this both Spiritu^^ and Secular men admire with a special Joy,
whereas ^ Dignity may be herewith Compared. Proceeding from friendly,
illustrious, inconquerable, most mighty and m^ high Lord; and a Royal Crown of
Gold, adorned with nine sorts of Precious Stones. The Greatest, Clearest and
most God-like Lord of unblameable Souls, The most Holy, seeing every where, and
Protecting Sovereign of the City Judia, whose many Streets, and open Gates are
thronged by Troops of Men. Which is the chief Metropolis of the whole World.
The Royal Throne of the Earth that is adorned with nine sorts of Stones, and
most pleasant Valleys. He who Guides the Rains of the World, and has a house
more than the Gods, of fine Gold and of Precious Stones; they the Godlike Lords
of Thrones of fine Gold, the White, Red and Round-tayl'd Elephant; which
Excellent Creatures are the Chiefest of the nine sorts of Gods. To none has
the Divine Lord given, in whose hand is the victorious sword; who is like the
fiery-Armed God of Battails, to the most Illustrious. The second is as as
blasphemous as the first, though hardly swells so far out of Sense.

THE highest Paducco Syry Sultan, Nelmonam, welgaca, Nelmochadin Magiviitha,
Jouken der eauten lillaula fylan, King of the whole world, who makes the Water
rise and flow. A King that is like a God, and shines like the Sun at noon day.
A King that gives a glance like the Moon when it is at full. Elected of God to
be worthy as the North-star; being of the Race and offspring of the great
Alexander; with a great Understanding, as a round Orb, that tumbles hither and
thither, able to guess at the Depth of the great Sea. A King that has amended
all the Funerals of the departed Saints, and is as righteous as God, and of
such power that all the World may come and shelter under his VVings. A King
that does right in all things, as the Kings of old have don. A King more
liberal the all Kings. A King that has many Mines of Gold that God has lent
him; who has built Temples half Gold and half Brass, sitting upon a Throne of
pure Gold, and of all sorts o^ Precious stones. A King of the white Elephant,
which Elephant is the king of all Elephants, efore whom many Thousands of other
Elephants must bow, and fall upon the^ knees. Lucifer
He whose eyes shine like the Morning Star A kin^ that has Elephants with four
Teeth; Red, Purple and Pi^ Elephants, ay, and a Buytenaques Elephant; for which
God has given him many and diverse sorts of Appar^ wrought with most fine Gold,
Trappings
enobled with many Precio^ stones: and besides these, so many Elephants used in
Battle, h^ving Harnesses of Iron, their teeth tipped with teel and the Harnesses
laid ore with shining Brass. A King that has man Hundred Horses, whose
Trappings are wrought with fi^ Gold, and adorned with Precious stones of every
sort, that a^ found in the Universal World, where the Sun shines, an^ those
shod with fine Gold. Besides so many Hundred Horses that are used in War, of
every kind. Has the man got any Scotch Pownys?
A King who has all Emperors, Kings, Princes and Sovereigns in the whole
World from the Rising to the Going down of the Sun, under Subjection; and such
as can obtain his Favor are by him promoted to great Honor, but on the
Contrary, such as revolt, he burns with fire. A King who can show the Power of
God, and what ever God has made. And so by this time I hope you have heard
enough of a King of Elephants and Horses (though not a Word of his Asses) in
this Instrument called a Title: and thereby perceive the Pride and Folly of
this unpolished Potentate, where we shall leave him and take a walk toward the
Ganges,

The River of Siam is a branch of the famous Ganges, The Ceremony used to
aswage the River Ganges.
and ebbs and ^ws at the same time with that noble River. When it is at highest
and ^ady to fall of it self, according to it is natural Recourse at a certain
time of the Year, as does also the Nile, the King imbarks himself in a Galley
which is within and without so richly Gilded, that it seems to be all of massy
Gold. Within the same is a Throne of solid Gold, upon which the King sits,
having a Canopy richly set with Pearls, ^monds and other Precious Stones. About
him sit the greatest of (...) Mandorins, on Chairs suitable to their Quality;
and on his left hand ^he Chief of the Bonzi, in his Hierarchical Garb. On the
Galleries of this Galley, sit several Musicians; which are answered by the
inferior Mandorins and Plebeians, who are placed all along the Banks with
Musical Instruments, and Flags of an infinite number. The Imperial Galley is
followed with a Retinue of some Thousands of smaller Shipping and Yachts. When
the King is come to the place where the Ceremony is usually performed, he steps
out into a Prawe, where the High Priest delivers him a golden sword upon his
knees. After the repetition of some formal words, he beats the Water three
times, and commands it with a God-like Authority to fall down, and so returns
into the Galley: upon which all they that are on the Banks fa^ down flat upon
the ground and shout. And thus the blind People who have not the Benefit of
Chronicle or Antiquity, and ignorant (...) the course of Nature, the handmaid
of God; do really take it for miracle, effected by their Pagan Sovereign.

CHAP. XI. Departure from Siam. They take a Junk. The Cambodiers put in a Ship
with rudder or sails. Arrival at Formosa. The Junk and all the men cast awa^*
Description of Formosa, with an account of its Products, and the Nature of ^
Inhabitants, as also their Houses, Habit and Customs.
OUr Ship having now taken in her whole Carga, we had all o^ to come aboard.
Our Loading was most Bucks-hides, San^wood, and Amrack, which is a kind of
Color, used by the Iapone^ in their Cabinet-work for Vernishing: and on the 12
of April we set S^ directing our Course for Tojovan or Formosa.

APRIL. 1650
About the Pracel banks we descried a Iunk, making toward us full Sail, having
Dutch Colors aloft, which made us suspect to be a Pyrat: and thereupon our
master resolved to throw s^ Goods overboard, and put himself in a
Fighting-Posture. But ^ we came nearer to the said Junk we saw that it was a
Merchant-^ and not so well manned and mounted as we. A Junk taken, and made
Prize.
Coming to hail him Commander bad him come aboard and show his Pass; but he
(...) answer that his Champan was in pieces and unfit to put out: whereu^ the
Commander put forth the Shallop well manned and armed, to aboard him and demand
his Pass, but found that he had none, b^ a Cambodier, and laden with
contrabanded Goods, we there took him as Prize. His Loading did also mostly
consist in H^ Hides, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
Sanders and Amrak, as ours did: The men aboard her ^ mostly Cambodiers and
Chineeses, which Capt. Fayer (for that was Commanders name) put all into the
Champan, that notwithstand^ their evasion was not leaky, allowing them neither
Sail nor R^der; so that without all controversy they were lost, it being then
leagues from any coast; nor could we ever hear what became of the^

On the 10th. of May we arrived safely at the Island of Formosa, MAY 1650
and anchored before the Fort Zelandia, where Peter over't Water was then
Governor. As we sailed in at the Bay, we were surprised with a great Wind;
insomuch that the Prize we had taken ran upon a seat of Rocks, which almost
conjoyn, or as it were, embrace the Bay, like that at Rhodes, in the Levant,
made by Art, on which was erected the Image of Apollo: so that these are with a
gale of Wind, somewhat stiffer than ordinary almost unavoidable. The Junk broke
all in pieces, and the men were all lost, save 3 Hollanders, who saved
themselves upon Planks; amongst those that were lost were 7 Hollanders, the
rest Chineezes, being about 20 in number.

The Island Formosa lies almost directly under the Tropic of Cancer; ^its
nombril or Center being exactly 23 degr. Northern latitude, ^eaching in a
stretch from it is southern Cape, which is in 21 degr. to the ^weel or Northen
Promontory, in 25; and is computed to be about 130 Dutch Leagues in
circumference, facing the coast of Fokien and ^ana Round about this Island are
taken abundance of Fish, especially Harders, which are somewhat bigger than a
Haddock. This ^ish they salt like Cod, and send it for China, where it is had
in great ^eem. The Row of this fish is also held for a great delicacy among ^
Chineezes when pickled, being red, and lies close and round in thin skin, which
naturally grows about it. The Chineezes used here^ofore to give the Tenth Fish
to the Company, for their Liberty to ^sh on the Coasts of this Island.

Formosa is a very fruitful Island, but lies untilled; Fruitfulness of Formosa
the Inhabitants ^ng for the most part a lazy People, not much unlike the
Spaniards, ^er willing to starve than work. The most fruitful part is at
present ^der the Jurisdiction of the King of Midag. It abounds with Rice,
^heat, Barley, Kaylang, Masquinades, as also Ginger and Sugar. ^ere are many
sorts of Trees, and Fruit in great abundance, as, O^anges, Lemmons, Citrons,
Pomegranates, Guigavas, Perang, and ^ther Fruits, not known in Europe; and some
only Proper to this Isle, which I could never see either in Europe, Asia, or
Africa, as Moupellos and Crambrods. Melons, or Musk-millions, are here so
plentiful and delicious; that I have been cloyed barely with looking at them
when they were cut up; besides Water-milions and Pompions which are also of a
very good taste and Juycy. They have besides many kinds of Plants and Herbs, as
CABBAGE, Hartichoaks, etc. Sever^ rich and medicinal Roots and Seeds, as
Ananasses, China-Rock Potatos (not much unlike ours) Ubes, Kadiang and
Fakkafocas. Kadj^ is a little green seed almost like that of Coriander, which
they boil an^ pickle for a Sauce for fresh Fish; and gives it an admirable good
reli^ Fokkafokas has the Shape of a Pear, or Quince, but 3 times as big, an^
grows near the ground like a Pompion: above it is smooth like gl^ and below of
a purple and whitish color: this they boil with Be^ and Pork, as we do Turnips
in Holland. There are some sheep in ^ Island, Great store of Cattle.
but not very many. Hearts and Roes there are abundance sometimes 2 or 3
Thousand in a Flock together, Wild-goats ^ Swine which are very terrible and
noxious to Travelers that go a^ or unarmed, some they have also tame. Beasts
of Prey do much an^ the Inhabitants that they dare not adventure themselves far
with Land, as, Tygres, Leopards, Bears, etc. Apes and Monkeys t^ have, which
are generally little. There is a certain Creature on ^ Island which the
Hollanders call, Den Duyvel van TAJO^ that is, The Devil of Formosa. Being
about 2 foot long, and 5 in broad upon the back, with scales all over the body;
it has four with sharp claws, a sharp long head, and a tail thick at the r^ and
smaller toward the end, like a Crocodil. This little beast feeds ^ upon
Pismires, which he catches by laying his Tongue upon a ^ where they come to
feed upon a slimy matter, that runs out o^ mouth, and that holds them so fast
that they cannot get off ag^ When he thinks that he has enough, he draws in his
tongue and vours them. It cannot do any harm unless to the Ants, which a^
natural food, but if he see a man come toward him, either runs the Earth, or
rolls himself in, like a Hedghog: so that to call Devil seems a great
improperty. This Great Description of a ^ Creature, we thought not altogether
impertinent, because it Creature proper only to this Island. Formosa affoards
all kinds of F^ which other Islands in the East have, Venomous Creatures a
great annoyance.
except Parrots. And were it^ for the great annoyance of Serpents, Scorpions,
Millipedes, Lizza^ and other vermin, it were a very delightsom Land, being in a
t^rable good Climat, and blessed with a most wholesome Air.

As to the Frame and Stature of the Natives, we cannot give any general
Description, since those vary according to the pl^ they inhabit. Their men are
mostly well bodied and lusty, especially those in the Valleys, and Champane
Country; but those that keep themselves in the Hilly part of the Island, not
so big of stature. Their Women are but short in Comparison of the Men, yet are
staring beauties; having a Full face, great Eyes, a flat Nose, Formosa Beauties.
long Ears with breasts hanging down like a flitch of Bacon, and would have
handsome beards too, if they did not pull up the hair by the roots. The ^ps of
their ears they bore through, and screw them flat with a horn, made for the
purpose, which they think stands wondrous neat. Finally, I hold it uncertain
whether this Island has had the name Formosa, seriously from the Land it is
self, or Ironically from the monstrous People that Inhabit it.

During the time that I was at Formosa, I heard often of Men with Tails: to
which I never gave much heed, looking upon it as fabulous. Yet I will assure
the Reader by all lawful asseverations, that I found ^ truth. For it happened
that a Formosan of the South-Countrey was apprehended for an inhuman Murder,
committed upon a Clergy ^an. After the matter was examined and the Party
pronounced guilty, he received Sentence to be burned. The day of Execution
being ^ome; the Murderer was brought forth, and tied to a pale; As soon as his
clothes were stripped off, we saw his Tail, which was about a foot long, and all
grown over with Hair; some of my acquaintance out of their curiosity, went to
see him, before he was executed, having heard that he had a Tail, and learned
from him, that all, or most, of the South Inhabitants had Tails. But as to the
certainty of that, I can not say much, for that, not understanding his Dialect,
^ey might be mistaken; only of this I solemnly aver that I am an ^e-wittness to
it, and would be loath, to impose it upon any man's belief if it were not truly
so.

Upon Festival days when the Formosans go to present themselves before their
Idols they hang great round boards almost like Trenchers to their ears, which
are artificially painted: others hang Shells full of Small holes, which loll
over their breasts: but upon other days they let their ears be naked, and
without any ornament at all.

Their Hair is jet-black and long: some of them wear it as we do in Europe;
others tie it up above the crown of the head, after the old China fashion, or
plated. Their complexion is of a Swarthy yellow, or between a yellow and black;
but those of Kabelang look more white and pale. The Women of Midag, Soeten
Now, and Lamea are of ^ brown-yellow complexion. They are generally of a
subtle and acute wit, endued with a good memory, and tractable enough to
learn any Science; but beyond all other Indians flexible to Christianity.

The Habit of the Formosans.
In the Summertime they are attired only with a cotton cloth, wide about the
shoulders like a sheet, and tied by two Corners athwart the breast: It is also
girded about the middle, and so hangs down to the calf of the leg. Their shoes,
which are rarely worn among them, are made of Goat Skins, fastened above the
foot with thongs. But in the Winter, they wear Garments of Furrs, as Skinns of
Tyg^e^ Leopards, Bears and Apes. Those of Soulang were formerly apparelled as
Europeans; but all the rest as Chineezes. Before the first coming of the
Spaniards into that Island, the Natives were all naked like as now, those that
inhabit the Hill-countrey, which wear only cloth about their middle.

The Habit of the Women does not vary much from that of the Men, only with this
distinction, that their Robes are wrapped about their legs and made fast; and
sometimes an upper coat which come only to the knees: About their head they
wear a black Towel knott^ before, which looks like two Horns. Every woman has a
Pig which follows her like a dog.

The Men have sometimes their back, breast, and arms painted with a kind of
color which never goes out so long as they live. About their necks they wear
Glass-beads, and Bracelets about their arm^ Others have great iron hoops, which
reach from the wrest of t^ hand to the elbow, having such small crevises where
they open that it seems a wonder how they get them put upon their arm^ About
their legs they wear a string of white shells, neatly hung a^ set in order,
that at a small distance it would be taken for Lace.

The Men of Tokkadekol wear a long Reed, which is made fast ^ their Girdle
behind, and comes bending over their head; to which they hang a Silk Pendent
(or streamer) about 2 palms broad, an^ 20 long. Upon Festival days they adorn
their Heads with the feather of a Cock, and hang Bears-tails at their Legs and
arms.

They have no Trades nor Mechanics among them, but ever^ man among them makes
what he has occasion for himself. When they he down to sleep, they only take
two Hearts hides, the one serving for a Bed, and the other for a Coverlet. They
are excellent at swimming, and use the Bow well. But above all other faculties
surpass any that ever I have seen at running; no horse being able to hold with
them for a stretch of 6 or 8 leagues together: and when they run, have in each
hand a tinkling instrument, with which they ever now and then hit the iron hoop
about their arm, to encourage them forward.

They are wholly unskilled in Navigation, having no other Shipping than a sort
of Canoo, that is made out of a hollow tree, with which they go a fishing. This
with Hunting is all the employ they follow to sustain themselves. But
Agriculture, as I said before, is but little exercised, partly out of their
slothful inclinations, and partly out of fear of the Enemy, they being
continually at Wars amongst themselves, and hate nothing worse than Peace.

CHAP. XII. The Author departs from Formosa. His arrival at Japon. The
Description of Nanguesaque. The Condition of the Town. A dreadful fire at
Nanguesaque. The Stature, Nature, Habits, and Customs of the Japoneezes.
Departure from Japon. Arrival at Formosa the second time. Their return to Siam,
where they take in Elephants. The Author beat with a ropes end at the
Mainmast, and why. His return for Holland, and End of the first Voyage.
WHen we had taken in our loading at Formosa, I left the Black-Bear, and was
put aboard a Flyboat called, The Lady, which was bound for Iapon, and set sail
on the 15 of July following.

On the 10th. of August we arrived at Iapon, where according to the manner, we
signified our Arrival. Immediately upon notice given came several Officers
aboard, who took away our Rudder, Sails and Ammonition. That done they unloaded
our Ship themselves, not suffering us to put to our hand to help them.

The name of the Haven was Nanguesaque, Nanguesaque (or Nanguesaky as some call
it) described.
a Town which the Portugueezes had built out of the Water, but upon their being
rooted out of this Island was granted to the Dutch, who till their coming
hither, had their Residence and Magazine at Firando. The Dutch Lodge is upon a
small Island, severed from the City by a wate^ about 40 foot broad, having a
Drawbridge, which only is let dow^ from Sun to Sun. The Island is fortified
with Pallizados, and that ^ strong, that they think themselves secure enough
from any unwarrantable violence. The Magazine of the Company is just within the
Gates, and about the middle stands the house of the President which is a very
large and sumptuous Building. Besides that there are several other Houses and
Shops which make so many Streets and Courts. On that side next to the Sea
stands another Gate, which goe^ down with great and broad steps, built for the
receiving in of Goo^ which come by water. This is a very famous Place for
Merchandise of all kinds, but the chief Commodities they deal in here, are Am^
Steel Buck and Kaymans Hides, Silk both raw and wrought, Velvet, Damask,
Sattins, Cotton, Mercury, Quicksilver, Verdi-gree^ Camphir, Wax, Allome,
Pepper, Ivory, and Furrs.

After we had been three days at Nanguesaque, and all our Carg^ unloaded by the
Iaponeezes: they shut our Hold up, and sealed ^ with the Emperors Signet.
Which done the Officers went a shoa^ and sent us 6 Balis of Sakky, a Drink they
make of Rice, which is ve^ pleasant, yet heady and strong. After our Ships-folk
had got a little i^ their heads, they put out our Colors; but while they were
in the height of their mirth, An Orcane.
there rose a blustering wind, after which followed a mighty Hurricano. Upon
that our Courage was sufficien^ly allayed, for both our Cables broke, and the
Ship was tossed mountains high, we looking for no other all the time than
death. The Shi^ De Vreede was like a little Boat upon the top of every surge,
and ^ last thrown upon the Strand where she lay dry: but all her Bow w^
bilg'd, her Head broke, and her Hold full of Sand and Water. Our u^ perworks
were sadly battered, and the masts brought by the board. The Black Bear and
another great Ship lying both with out the head, we^ so shattered, that they
were brought up by the Iaponeezes as Wrack^ Besides this great loss which the
Company sustained in the Shipping were also most of the Wares in the Magazine
damnified by the Sea which beat over the Walls. The Town also suffered much by
the high wind, they not expecting such a Tempest, at that time of the year.
When it had continued about half an hour or more, the Heaven ^ began to clear,
and we to get courage, but durst not fall to ^ king again, for fear of another
bout.

Nanguesaque lies in 33 degr. 15 min. northerly latitude in a very pleasant
Land-ship and is both very great and populous; Situation of Nanguesaq.
but like most of the Towns of Iapon lies without walls. It is seated upon a
very commodious Bay, or Road, fit to receive Ships of the greatest burden. It
has a very magnificent prospect from Seaward, having an ^n infinite number of
Towers, Temples and Spacious Palaces. ^ Their Houses.
The Houses are mostly built of Wood, for the Ground is weak and frequently
subject to Earthquakes, so that they cannot use ^ one. But the poorer sort have
little Cottages made of Twigs and plastered over with Clay, as in Brabant,
Germany and other Countries. They are Covered with Planks which shoot far out
over the walls like Pent-house, to shelter them from Sun and Rain. They have
upon ^uch house several Tubs with water, which is kept in case of fire, to
which such buildings are liable. And certainly were it not for the great ^fit
of the water running through the Town in Ditches, as it does almost Towns in
Holland: it would be suddenly reduced to ashes and ^r this reason have they
built several Houses of Stone where to secure ^eir Goods upon such occasions.
The Houses of this City are uni^m, and the streets regular, there being 88
Streets, each 400 foot ^g, which are are all fenced off with Palizados at the
end, and Lant^orns set up. Here they have also their watch-houses, and none are
^uffered to pass by night; no not to fetch either Doctor or Midwife, without a
Pass from the Governor. This Watch is set all ways at 10 a ^ck, after which
hour few people are seen upon the streets. This ^ good means to prevent Mutiny
and Theft, but is a great incon^ence if Fire do happen to break out; for no
street or Ward can ^ave the Assistance of another in such case: besides the
great danger that the People themselves are in, being sometimes so narrowly
penned ^p. An Instance of this happened in the year 1646, when a dread^ull fire
happened in a house where several Dutch had their lodging, which on a sudden
had consumed a great part of the Street and seve^al Houses on both sides, burnt
down to the Ground. The Dutch then ^eing themselves in such peril, chused
rather to hazard the effects ^f the Governors displeasure for that time, than
to be roasted alive, ^roke up the Fence and saved themselves.

The Iaponeezes are reasonable fair of complexion, but a little me^ swarthy than
the Europeans. The Form Nature, Habit and customs of the Japoneezes.
The ordinary Habit of the Man is ^ much distinguishad from that of the Woman.
They go all w^ long Robes thrown carelessly about their body, and tied round t^
middle with a Surcingle. The Ladies of the best Quality, wear garment of cloth
of Gold and Silver, and that very richly embr^dered: Their Hair is neatly
adorned with gems and preci^ stones. The men are robust and very personable;
their Heads so^thing bigger than is duly analogical with their Bodies. T^ Women
are but slender, yet let their Body grow as it will, wearing always a loose
Garment, only their feet they screw ^ pinch as much as they can to make them
little, which they the handsome: So that when they are come to their full growth,
have like Children of 5 or 6 years old. The Iaponeezes are in gener^ very hardy
people, and can endure any extremity of Heat or ^ Hunger or Thirst to a
miracle. This they seem to come to a hardy usage when they are young; for they
always bath ^ Infants in cold weather in Rivers, and sometimes plunge ^ over
head and ears in Snow. They are excellent Warrious, are well acquainted with
Firearms; as also with the Long-bow^ Javelin. They are grown famous in all the
East, for expert A^rers, and temper Steel better than the Chineezes, which far
excee^ Europeans. Their Swords are so well tempered that I have struck one
through an Iron pin, of half an inch thick, without the lest ^ of damage to the
edge. They follow Hunting much, which ^ principal Trade and Pastime there in
use, and prefer Ve^ before any other dainty whatever. In their entertainments,
are very open and liberal, Jannuary 1651
and use Tea for a Caress, whi^ far better than that which is exported abroad,
and prepared a different manner: but they refuse to impart it to Christians, w^
I held somewhat strange, in regard, that the more it is use other Countries the
greater is their advantage, seeing that have better in this Island than any
where else in the World.

When we had done our Negotiation at Iapon, we set Sail for Ba^ directing our
Course first for Formosa, and set Sail the 30th. of Dece^ with a hard Wind, and
a Northerly That is, a Wind which blows from one point for certain months
together, called also Monson.
Mousson; so that we (...) Formosa in 10 days Sailing; and on the 9th. of
January following a^ ^at night cast anchor before the Fort Zeelandia. Upon our
arrival ^e I was put aboard the Post horse, which was bound for Siam, where
^rrived on the 22th. of January, and there took in the Sieur Van der ^yden,
Consul for the Company at India; who was to go for Batavia. Here we took in 8
young Elephants, with Provender, which was ^mit and Sugar-cane, as also a
certain quantity of Rice. Here I may (...) ommit a certain passage, which
(though unadvisedly done) (...) almost cost me my neck. About noon when the
dinner was ^dy, I went to the Cook for a bowl of hot broth, which having ^t I
came to bring it to 2 of my Comrades, and passing by the Hold, ^e of the
Elephants wound me about the legs with his Trunk (or ^nout) that I came
tumbling down, Plater and all, which being ^lding hot, fell upon the Elephants
back, and made him to roar out ^d stamp, that the Ship tumbled and shaked
again, this so amazed (...) Commander that he came running out of his Cabin to
know what (...) the matter. Here I was in a great strait fearing to cry out,
being ^sible that he was a choleric man, and yet durst not stay below for ^
Elephant, who if he could have come at me would have trod^ me as flat as a
Flounder: but considering with my self that the ^^tain would assuredly come to
hear of it, one time or another, and (...) staid long I was sure this beast of
vengeance would send me to ^ Grandsir. I cried out and the Commander in all
have sent one ^o pull me up. So soon as they had got me upon the Deck, he gave
^der to tie me to the mast, and commanded a fellow to lick me ^ily with a ropes
end.

On the 15 of February we set Sail for Batavia, February 1651 The Author
dismissed. His return for Holland.
where I was discharged ^y Service, and permitted to go for Holland: and in
order thereto ^nt aboard the Ship Zelandia, which was then almost ready to set
^. On the 26 we set out, having a good Wind, and a fine serene ^t. Within a few
days we sailed through the Straits of Sunda; and ^ence set our course for S.
Helena.

On the 21 of April we got sight of Saint Helena, where we came safe ^to the
Harbor, being 7 Sail in all. As soon as we were arrived, Arrival at St. Helena.
^e went up into the Island to Hunt, fish and range the Woods for ^ranges,
Lemons and other Fruits.

Having now refreshed our selves sufficiently, May.
and all things in a readiness we set sail in order to the pursuit of our
Voyage, The end of the first Voyage.
and man Land on the 10th. of August, where we bartered with such Goods ^ we
had aboard, for Oxen, Sheep, and other necessarys: and ^ forwards for Holland,
where by God's gracious Conduct we arrived o^ the first of September 1651, and
put in at Goeree.

THE SECOND VOYAGE of JOHN STRUYS.
CHAP. I. An account of the Authors undertaking his Second Voyage. A great Sea
Storm. His arrival at Yarmouth, and at Leghorn, with a Description of that
Town; as also of Pica and Florence, and lastly of Bologne.
BEing now safely arrived in my Country, after a long and tedious Voyage,
which nevertheless by the Goodness of Almighty GOD, was not without some
satisfaction for what was past; yet finding my self in a State little better
than before, and at a loss for Employment, I was brought into a melancholic
passion. After I had spent some time at Amsterdam, in waiting for an
opportunity to make another Voyage, and not hearing of any, suitable to my mind
and capacity, I resolved to go for Durgerdam, to see what entertainment I
should find at home; and pursuant to that my intention went to the Boat, where
I casually met with one Capt. Ketel of Durgerdam, a person with whom I was
formerly acquainted. After he had congratulated my happy return, asked me, What
course I was bound to take? I told him, that I had a desire to undertake a new
Voyage, but I could not meet with an opportunity to Ship my self upon any
considerable Terms. Well (said he) upon what Terms would you go? I replied, For
Sailmaker. That occurs very well, quoth he, for I have been inquiring for one,
and we had already determined to go this Voyage without one: And if you like to
go with us, DEC. 1655
I will be as civil to you as I may. This answer of his was no small matter of
comfort to me, being then, as I have already said, destitute of Service. The
Captain brought me ashore, and in a Victualling-House agreed with me, when he
had almost made me tipsy with Strongwaters, and so got me aboard the
Passage-boat, where I lay and slept that whole night and the next day, till we
arrived at the Texel, where the Ship lay at anchor. When I awaked I began to
look about me, not knowing where I was, at first I thought I was in my Lodging
at Amsterdam, but perceiving the Vessel tumble and toss too and again, I
concluded that I was still aboard the East India man. Whilst I was in this
quandary the Captain comes down to me which unriddl'd the doubt. When I
bethought my self what I had done, I grew very uneasy and displeased at my
self, for my inconsiderat and unadvised Actions: however the Captain gave me
fair words, and assopiated the Quarrel between Me and My self.

On the 20 of December 1655 I Shipped my self aboard the Fly-boat, called Het
Huys te Gennip, which was bound first for Yarmouth, where she was to take in
Red-herring.

On the 14 of December. we left the Texel, and on the 20th. got Yarmouth Roads,
where we met with a contrary Wind, which blew so hard that we could carry no
Sail, but were fain to let all drive, and trust to the mercy of GOD. This dured
for the space of 12 Watches, at which time we made the Texel; and to our great
happiness had a Pilot aboard, that was intended for. Yarmouth who brought us
safe in at the Spaniards gat: for it was impossible for us to keep off at Sea,
the Ship being so full of Sand, that we could not stir the Pump: and before we
made land, found that we had 7 foot Water in the Hold, so that had we not
luckily put in there then, the Ship had not held out one Watch longer. When by
the Grace of God, and Diligence of the Pilot we had got in there, we unloaded
the Ship, stopped the leaks, and supplied the defects of our equippage. and,

January 1656
On the 28 of December. we set Sail, having a brave Wind, and clear weather; and
on New Years day arrived safe at Yarmouth.

On the 15 of January we weighed anchor, and left Yarmouth, having taken in our
intended Loading, and directed our course for the Straits of Gibralter.

On the 2 of February we entered the Straits, FEB. 1656.
and on the 10th. got Leghorn. When we lay at anchor here, there happened a
misunderstanding between Mr. Ketel and my self, about a trifling business,
which brought us both without the bounds of Moderation; for proceeding from
Words to Blows, we were at last so deeply engaged that we both tumbled over
board. Our Master was so kind as to let me climb up but when I came upon Deck
put me in Irons, that seeing our courage was not yet cooled in the Sea, he had
that one mean to keep us asunder. In the mean while some had taken opportunity
to pillage my chest, and borrow 116 Ducatoons: but I could never be so happy as
to learn who was my Creditor: so that I had but a small portion left me, with
which I purposed to go by land to Venice.

Leghorn is so well known of all Gentlemen and Mariners that have seen Italy,
that it may seem needless to describe it. Nevertheless since it is a part of my
Province, to take notice of such Towns as are in any regard eminent and famous,
I shall not ommit to say something briefly of it.

This City which is one of the chief Havens in renowned Italy, was by Francis
and Ferdinand, great Dukes of Tuscany upon consideration of it is commodious
site raised from a mean village to a great Emporium. The said Dukes fortified
it with a stone wall, since which time it was gradually advanced by the
encouragement of Trade; and is at present strengthened with 5 Bulwarks and 2
Cittadels, or Forts the one whereof commands the Haven, and the other secures
the Town on the Land side, toward Pisa, which is furnished with 60 great Guns.
About 6 English miles from the City is a Beacon for direction of Mariners by
night, there being many Rocks toward the South that are often the occasion of
Shipwreck, and is therefore called Malhora. These Rocks do cause impetuous
breakings of the Sea, which yet render the entrance of the Haven more free and
secure. So that Ships and Galleys may ride safely at anchor in this Road. The
City on the outside appears more magnificent than it is indeed inwardly: The
Frontispieces, as well of Private as Public Buildings being plaistered, upon
which are painted Sea Fights, Histories and Landschap. In the middle of the Town
is a stately Market place and an Exchange, where (as at other Places) Merchants
meet and negotiate their Affairs. Corn, Flesh, Fish and other necessaries are
here very good and cheap, which occasions almost all that are bound farther up
to put in there for Refreshment. On a Corner Stand four statues in brass,
representing the Father and 3 Sons, who attempted to row away a Galley,
belonging to the Duke of Tuscany; and plied so strongly that the rest of the
Galleys, had enough to do to overtake them, and were ready to yield it for
lost. These 4 men were Moors, and for that notable Essay, are recorded with
their Images in metal which are set one against another, with their Hands
behind their back.

Leaving Leghorn I set forward for Pisa: but before I was got half way, was
assailed with 4 Highway men, who were well mounted and armed: two whereof
allighted, and clapped their Pistols to my breast, bidding me deliver my money.
In the mean while they fell a searching of my pockets and breeches, but not
finding my money, which I had stitched up in the lining of my Coat, they gave
me 2 bunches of Grapes, and rode away.

Arrival at Pisa.
On the 22 of February I came into Pisa, where I took up my lodging for that
night, and the next day went to take a view of the Town. It is seated at the
foot of a great Hill, about 8 leagues from the Sea, between two Rivers Ausere
and Arno: and seems to be of Pisa, vel ut apud Ptolomae um Pissa, test
Strabone lib. 5. Tusciae oppidum, inter Arnum and Auserem amnes, a Pisaeis,
conditum, Elidis populis, qui Nestorem ad Ilium seculi in reditu tempestate
disjecti, alii quidem Metap ontum, alii littus Tyrrhenum ^enuerunt, ubi a
nomine relictae patriae Pisas condiderunt.
ancient Standing. It was made an University (as some write) about the year
1339 but began to grow out of Esteem till restored by Cosmo di Medicis Duke of
Florence, and afterward by Laurence his Nephew; to wh^m Vollaterran and
Machiavel ascribe the Founding. There are here several fair Churches; that
dedicate to Saint John is a very stately building, and renowned beyond any
other Church in Italy, for it is costly Tower which is of admirable rare
Workmanship. The Churchyard, otherwise called Campo Sancto, is visited by many
strangers, which was made at that time, when Frederic Barbarossa went to Wars
against the Infidels in the Holy Land: to which Expedition those of Pisa
assisted him with 50 Galleys. But the said Frederic Barbarossa being casually
drowned, the Galleys returned back again, all freighted with Earth, of which
they say the Churchyard is made.

On the 23 toward night I left Pisa, and went to Florence; Between which two
Towns is the most delectable Fields and Valleys, that ever I have seen, either
before or since, insomuch that I thought my Journey neither long nor irksom,
though on foot.

On the 26 I entered Florence, which is seated in a pleasant Valley' and divided
by the River Arno into two parts, which is the same River that runs by Pisa. On
the West it has the Champane land which is admirably delightful: on the East
the Country is Hilly, and stored with abundance of Fruit Trees, and on some
part it is fortified with the Appenin Hills. This City is reckoned about 7
miles in compass, and enjoys a subtle and wholesome Air, which renders the
Natives and Inhabitants more acute and of a sharper Genius than those that
Inhabit, or are born in places of a grosser: The City which is divided by the
River, is again united by four stately Bridges. which so beautify the Town that
perhaps gave Charles the Archduke occasion to say, that this was a City only
to be seen on Holy Days. The fertile Hills and rich Valleys wherewith it is
environed, affoard the Inhabitants plenty of all necessaries. Here is the Court
and Residence of the Duke: The Palace being one of the most magnificent in all
Italy, yet far more spacious and splendid within than without: but to recount
the spacious Halls, Pompous Antichambre, Marble Statues and Pictures in the
Galleries, with all it is Appendencies, were an endless labor. Right over
against the Palace is a Lifeguard, consisting of a hundred Germans. Before the
Palace is also a very stately Fountain, adorned with huge Statues both of
Marble and Brass, out of which springs Water, being all in emblematical
representations. Upon the Mercato Novo is a very sumptuous Building in which
the Citizens, meet and treat about the affairs of Merchandise. The Palace of
the Medici is a stupendous Fabric, and for artificial carved works, as well in
Wood as Stone, and Pictures of the most eminent Italian Masters, seems to
aemulate the famous Vatican. Besides these are many other inferior Palaces,
Bublic Puildings, Churches, Chapels and very spacious Cloisters, all which
would take up some months to make an exact survey of. In many streets are
Galleries or Piazzas, (as in Covent Garden,) where one may walk to avoid either
Sun or Rain. Here are also many Houses built for Charitable uses, where the
Sick are relieved with what they stand in need of; and every one of those
Houses kept very neat and clean, especially the Hospital adjoining to the
Church Alla Nunciata. Yet above the many famous Structures which grace
Florence, the House of Prattelino outbraves them all, which was built by
Francis de Medicis. The first you come at is the Palace, which is raised upon a
square Fund, or Platform, which entering, you have at first view four Chambers
that are opposite to one another, and stand also in quadrangular form, so that
the 4 quarters are again subdivided each into 4 less, which make 16
Appartments. In one of these stand 2 costly Beds, one for the Duke, and the
other for the Duchess. The rest of the Chambers are hanged with Tapestry, and
some with Cloth of Gold, unspeakably rich; and illustrated with artificial and
costly Statues, which are set in convenient Places thereto ordained. In like
manner when we went up another story, we found 16 Chambers more, parallel with
the Platform of the former. In every one of these was a stately bed, the
meanest whereof is computed to have cost more than a Thousand Crowns. Comeing
out of the Palace you come alla Grotta, which is a fair Arch having therein a
Fountain, that seems rather to be Natural than performed by Art. Round about
the Fountain are Snakes, Adders, Lizzards and other Serpents, so artificially
made in Brass that they might be taken for Living. On each Pillar stand Organs,
which are moved by the force of Water, in such manner, that they make a most
lovely and sweet Harmony. The Walls are in several places so thick set with
Gems, Coral and other things of value, that they cannot be perceived. The rest
is set with Marble. About the middle stand fair Alabaster Tables, to which if
you draw near, the Water rises from under your feet, and flies all over your
head and body, but indeavoring to shun it, you are again saluted after the
same manner from another place. On the other side is another called Grotta
Sibylla, which is also very costly, and set out with many fair Statues of
Marble and Alabastre, richly adorned with Coral, where are also curious
Waterworks, none ever coming there but is wet with those subterranean Showers.
On your right hand is the Bath of the Prince, which is under full of holes,
through which the warmth can come to cause Sweat. Besides these there is a
third Arch, which is for the Heat in Summer, whither the Duke and his Household
retire to refrigerate themselves. In this Arch, is a fair large Table of
Alabaster, and at each end several Holes, in which they set their wine to cool.
There is belonging to this House a pleasant Garden, wherein are many Springs
and Ponds: and every rare and choice Tree that will like in that Clime. Behind
this Garden is a Park, full of strange Birds and Beasts, and therein a stately
and delightsom Arbor where the Duke frequently dines in the Summer season, and
from whence he can view both his Palaces, the one within the City and the other
without. Right over this aforesaid Garden is yet another, in the middle whereof
is a Chapel, where the Duke for the most part goes to Mass, and Vespers. This
Chapel is built round, after the manner of the Heathenish Temples of old,
planted round with Cypress trees, and has all its inner works of that Wood.
Near to that stands an Image of 24 foot high, which will represent Neptune, or
Thetis, made of White marble, from whence all the Waters in the Fountains have
their Rise: upon which if a man stands he hears a wonderful murmuring and
buzzing of Water from below.

This City is a place of great Traffic and Commerce, especially in Silks and
Velvets, of which I saw many rich shops upon the Ponte Pecchio, or Old Bridge.
The Florentines themselves are very able and skillfull in the Affairs of
Merchandise, and very little Traffic don in Italy wherein they have not an
interest; so that Pope Clement VI called them the fifth Element. Besides their
domestic and exotic Trade, they have given encouragement to, and bred up many,
ingenious and famous Masters in Architecture, Painting, Carving and other
Practical Sciences and Arts, and have for a perpetual memory and Gratitude so
many stately Palaces, Churches, Pictures and Statues left them to Posterity.
This City is also very Courtly in respect of it is Situation, through which all
Ambassadors and Ministers of State from foreign Potentates must pass,
intending for the Court of Rome, or Seignory of Venice. It is much frequented,
visited and likewise inhabited by many Private Gentlemen, who spend their
Estates here, and is a choice place to live in as well for Artificial as
natural Delights, for such as have an Estate to bear it out with. However, I
had little reason to complain of bad measure during the few days I staid there.
For meeting accidentally with a Monk, A Christian Monk.
who seeing me to be a Hollander, did not only caress me all the time in such
manner that I needed not pay any thing either for Lodging or Diet, but also
showed me all what was remarkable about the City. This Monk understanding that
I was short of Moneys, and intended for Venice, procured me 4 Rix-dollars,
which was as much as I had occasion for, to bear my Charges thither. Departure
from Florence


On the 1st. of March I left Florence, and took my leave of the Monk, IAN. 1656.
whom I thanked for his great Favor and Civility, which he had so signally
manifested to me a stranger, on such an extreme and emergent occasion: and
tending toward Bologne, I was fain to climb over a high steep Mountain, and in
the valley found the City.

Bologne lies about 44 degr. being a Town of small circumference, yet wealthy
and full of Inhabitants. The form of the City seems to resemble a Ship whereof
the Tower d' Asinelli is the Mast. It has ever been a Maxim among them not to
suffer either Citadel or Fort to be built, under the specious name of
Fortification, being jealous that under such a color they might check the
Citizens at their pleasure; So that the Bologneezes have nothing to rely upon,
than only the Walls, and valor of their men. The City is founded on the Banks
of the famous Savona, which River incorporates with the Rhem a little above
Ferrara, by which way all Goods are conveyed. The Air is here for the most
part moist, which renders the circumjacient Country very fertile, there being
the best Meadows and Arable ground in all Italy. There is also very good Wine,
Olives and Oil: although Fish they have none except what is brought from a far;
but Venison in great abundance. In this place are made such Sausages, as are
sent abroad for great rarities, which some would persuade us at home are made
of Asses flesh: but my curiosity induced me to make such examination of that
matter, that I found it otherwise; for they are made of Yet nothing is more
covered and eaten by the Jews.
Pork and Mutton. Besides the Traffic in the natural Products of the Land, they
are great Encouragers of Manufactories, and especially in Silks. The Streets
are very fair and spacious, and at each corner is erected a Conduit, or
Fountain. The Houses on the outside seem as if they were quite gone to decay,
yet within are very sumptuous and costly, quite contrary to those in most
places in Spain, that I have seen, where every House by the Frontispiece seems
rather a Palace than a private Dwelling, yet within nasty, full of
spiders-webs, and void of Utensils, pure Emblemes of Hypocrisy. During my abode
there I found not any thing extraordinary, as worthy of Remark, unless the
Tower of Garisenda, which is built crooked on purpose, for a proof of Art:
although some hold the Churches of this City (if taken in general) to surpass
all others in any particular Town in Italy, more especially in regard of the
many and rich Images, both of Gold and Silver, but their ground for such an
opinion is so deep, MAR. 1656.
that I have not line enough to sound it.

CHAP. II. The Author departs from Bologne, and arrives at Ferrara. Assailed by
a Robber: His Arrival at Venice, where he lists himself in the Armade. He
arrives at Sante. A great storm between Milo and Argenter. The Ship called The
Golden Cock split upon Rocks. A sad Shipwreck. A woman wonderfully saved. The
Authors arrival at Candia: Departs with a Tartan to the Venetian Armade. Their
Appearance before Mytilene, where they obtain much Spoil and Provision; at last
assaulted by 200 of the Turkish Chevalrie. Their Encounter, and return aboard
the Fleet.
AFter I had staid 2 days at Bologne, I set forward for Ferrara, where being
arrived I found it a dead Town, having nothing of Trade; but on the contrary
many places void and unbuilt, a sure and evident token of the declining
condition of that City. Notwithstanding all that, there are many curious
Structures in Ferrara, especially on the River Po, which runs that way, and
expatiates it self in Trenches or Ditches through the Town. It is strengthened
with many strong Bulwarks and Ramparts, and has many spacious and airy streets,
with Piazzas on each side along the Houses. Besides this, I could not find any
thing worthy of remark, and certainly it was no time for me to consume my small
Estate upon such unprofitable Pleasures.

On the 6 ditto I left Ferrara, tending my journey for Chioggio, but by the way
met a Foot-padder, who pillaged me, The Author rifled.
and took away 2 Rixdollars, which were given me by the Monk at Florenza, and
left me about 20d to help me to Venice.

On the 8th. I arrived at Chioggio, which is a small City on the Seaside,
Arrival at Chioggio.
from whence I could view the long-wish'd-for Venice, being but 3 miles
distant. Here is a very convenient Haven, most haunted by Fishers, yet has
little other Trading to depend upon, except Gardening, and that only to supply
Venice with Plants and Herbs. The prime thing I saw here, was an Image of the
Virgin, with a weeping Child in her arm, held by them in great Veneration. As
for Churches and Cloisters I had neither leisure nor money to gaze at'em, MAY.
1656.
for my Noble was brought to Ninepence, and only as much left me as would pay
my Passage to Venice: where being arrived, and paid my naulum, I had not a
Farthing left. Nevertheless I knew that I could list my self when I would, and
receive advance-money: and after a little Inquiry, met with Monsr. Theodore de
Haan, Commander of the Golden Cock, who took me on as Sail-maker. It was not
long before the Ship was in her due equippage, and set forth in order to join
with the Armade of Venice, which was upon an Expedition against the Turks in
the Dardanelli. But de Haan having received letters from Holland, about some
urgent affairs of his own, resigned the Command to his Son, and went home by
Land.

On the 10th of April we set Sail from Venice, in company with the Grand St.
George, which was then commanded by the Sieur Court Adelaar afterward Admiral
of Denmark, and lately deceased.

On the 20 ditto we arrived at Xante, where we supplied our selves with fresh
Water, and took in some Pipes of Wine, which is here exceeding good, and
tolerably cheap: for the Barillo, a measure of about 5 Gallon, or rather more,
costs but a Scudo, that I suppose is equivalent with 5^ 8d Sterling. which again
is vended in the Armade for 6 Crowns.

On the 22 we departed from Xante directing our course for Milo; and on the
5th. of May got the height of that Island, but did not touch there, steering
directly between Milo and Argentero; and here we came to anchor, but too near
the coast of Argentero, for we were annoyed with mud. Upon this arose a great
Storm of Wind, which rocked us to and again, and at last broke our Cables. We
endeavored all we could to get Sea room, but the Wind being toward the Land,
drove us flat against the Coast, where the Sieur Adelaar seeing us in such
danger, sent off his Long Boat with 5 or 6 men to fetch a Person of Quality
from aboard us, who was a Superintendant of some eminent Place, under the
Jurisdiction of the Commonwealth: but all the rest of the Gentry, with about
an Hundred Soldiers and Mariners stayed aboard. Soon after, the Ship was cast
upon a Rock with the violence of the Sea, where she split all in pieces: in
such manner as no tongue can express, nor pen decipher, that a Ship of such
Burden, like a Plank was thrown so high above Water, and in the twinkling of
an eye dashed into a Thousand shivers. Lamentable it was to hear the pitiful
moan of so many that were Parents for their Children, Men for their Wives,
Wives for their Husbands, Children for their Parents, and every particular for
their Friends and Alliance, The Master of the Ship and my self got a Mast,
which, what by the boystrous Wind, and what by the violence of the Floods, did
so tumble and roll, that we could not keep it in a due balance, so that we
thought best to look out for something else, and by Heavenly Providence met
with the great Hatch, which came driving with such force against the Mast, that
it had almost sent us both to sound the Deep. However endeavoring to save our
Lives, we got fast hold of the Hatch, and won the Shore. All the rest were
drowned to 19 Men, and 2 Women; the one whereof was a Venetian Lady, A
Gentlewoman wonderfully preserved.
whose Husband was a Captain in that Expedition. This Gentlewoman, after a long
and wearisom beating through the Surges, and Foamings of the Sea, was thrown
mother-naked upon Land, but most miserably torn and rent with Nails and
Splinters; having according to the report made by the Surgeon, above Fifty
Wounds and Holes in her Body: yet notwithstanding all this, was more grieved to
hear of the loss of her Husband, than sensible of her own calamity: However
considering the extreme cold season, and her weak condition, we covered her
Warm with clothes and Bedding. The other Woman that was saved, was the wife of
a Private Soldier, who was great with child, had driven Six and Thirty Hours
upon a piece of the Hulk, and to our great admiration was taken up alive. It
was certain that she could not have endured any longer being already stiff and
benumbed, and us pale as a Corpse. So soon as she was brought aboard the Saint
George and warmed, was delivered of an Abortiv Child: but her self revived,
being cherished by the help of other Women aboard that Ship. Shortly after the
Shipwreck came all the Movables and Goods ashore. Being now come aboard the
Saint George, and a little refreshed, we steered away for Candy, where we
arrived in safety; but what by our unhappy lingering at Argentero, and increase
of Folk, the Victualling grew very low; upon which we desired the Governor to
supply us with what we had occasion for, but Answer was returned us, That
Candia was of it self but very meanly provided, and that they were not in a
capacity to assist us. We then desired, that we might have a Tartan to
transport us to the Armade, in order to admit our selves again into the service
of the Commonwealth. To this the Governor gave his assent, and with a Ship and
15 men, and some Ammonition dispatched us for the Armade.

On the 3 of May we set Sail from Candy, but were put to our allowance at the
rate of 2 lib. of Bread each man a day, upon a Calculation of 10 days, and so
consequently 20 lib. the Voyage.

On the 8 ditto, we came close under Mytilene, and found that our Provision was
already spent, so that it was resolved by the major part of the Company, that
we should go ashore and see out for something to supply our Wants, although we
knew that the Island was under the Jurisdiction of the Turkish Emperor.
However seeing there was as much Danger on the other hand, we chused rather to
adventure our selves on land, than to starv aboard: and accordingly 12
Hollanders and 15 Greeks stepped ashore, and seeing a drove of Cattle we took 6
fat Kine, which we led to the Boat and so got them hoys'd aboard, one by one.
This fair beginning encouraged us to go further within land and about a mile
from the Creek where the Tartan lay, found a small village of about 10 or 12
Houses, but ^ot any appearance of either man, woman or child, who we concluded
had hid themselves for fear. In the mean while finding no scarcity of Bread,
Meal, Butter, Cheese, Honey, Wine and Oil, we picked and chus'd each what he
had a mind to, and having packed up more than we could carry, we thought it a
sin to leave any thing behind us: we therefore went a little out of the Village,
where we found about 20 Asses, these we took and loaded with our Spoil, and in
our return to the Shallop espied a Castle which before we had not seen, and
thither we supposed that the Peasantry of that Hamlet were fled to secure
themselves. But in coming forwards, we found that there was but one high way to
the Boat from the Village, and that close by the Castle; for every man had
fenced in his Ground with a high Flint-wall: nevertheless coming past the
Castle we met with no obstruction or annoyance in the World, till being got
about halfway I looked about, and spied 200 Troopers following us as hard as
they could drive, whereupon I cried out, Gentlemen, Here comes a Command of
Horse, see what you have to do, and resolve without much loss of time, for if
you do not behave your selves courageously we are all dead men. Be valorous and
keep together, let us be faithful, and if, we must submit to death at this
time, MAY 1655
let it be in a honorable manner* The Turks in the mean while drew nearer and
nearer: and we loath to part with our Plunder, made a faint-hearted fellow
(that was good for nothing else) drive the Asses before, whilst we drew up
into a Body and put our selves into a Posture of defense. Our men unanimously
gave me (for the time being) the honor of a Chieftain, in lieu of a better. As
for the Greeks, they were greater Strangers to martial Discipline than we, and
ran confusedly up and down without any order. When the Turks were just come
upon us, I gave charge that they should not fire all at once, but by 5 at a
time, and that not till they had taken good aim, and the Enemy within shot.
With that the Turkish Commander (being a Moor) advanced upon a stately Horse,
was bound to level his Carbine, but to anticipate him I gave the Word to the
first Rank, who brought him down to the Ground and three more besides him. This
falling out luckily the second Rank gave fire, and so following the third, till
we saw above 20 of the Enemies Party dead, that gave us no small encouragement;
but on the contrary so disheartened the Enemy that they began to retreat; for
besides the great advantage we had of the High walls of Flint, which served us
for a Rampart; our Arms were large Muskets, and theirs but small Carbines,
which at that distance could not do much Execution. When they were gone a good
way back, we climbed over the Wall, marched along the high way with four in a
Rank, and kept our selves together. The Turks seeing that faced about on a
sudden, clapped spurrs to their Horses, and came driving upon us with a most
horrid shouting; thinking so to bring us out of our Ranks, and to put us into a
disorder: which if they could have effected, had served their turn. But our men
the second time faced about and levelled their Muskets, till we had them at a
due distance and so we fired for a good while together, without either gaining
or loosing ground; till at last the Enemy seeing themselves considerably
weakened by the loss of their Leaders, were forced to retreat again till they
were out of shot: but so soon as we began again to march, they followed us, but
in a very easy pace, intending (as we had color to believe) to surprise us at
taking our ^es aboard, but they seeing us too near the Boat were content to let
us alone for that time: for had they come we had four small brass Pieces in the
Shallop which would have done more service than the Muskets. MAY. 1656.
So after this small Bickering, we got our Spoil aboard, with the loss of 2
dead, and 3 wounded in the Conflict.

CHAP. III. The Authors Arrival at Sante Monte; and at Troy. The Galleys of Bay
come with the Turkish Armade. An English Ship engaged with the Turks; defends
her self manfully, and at last burned. The Author made Slave, and put in a
Galley, with an old Russ: Consult to escape: Betake themselves to Water, and
are discovered. The Russ shot with an arrow. They come both to the Venetian
Armade.
ON the 9th. dito we left Mytilene, and with a brave Wind got Monte Sante, or
Holy Mount in 2 days: This being the Hill (as the devout Romanists believe)
whereon our Savior was tempted by Satan, and from whence he showed him all
the Riches of the Earth.

On the 12 dito we Sailed into the River of Constantinople, where we found the
Sea-Armade of Venice at Troy, which is the place and remnant of the famous
Troy, so much read of in the Poets of old, although it is hard to judge where
the Town has verily stood. All that is to be seen, is a Gate which is built of
white Marble, and seems to be exceeding ancient, and a small Village with the
Foundations of a wall, that encompasse the Town 7 times, not in circular form,
but as it were involved like a Snake, or the spring of a Watch. Toward the Sea
are some Trenches and a Redout of Earth, which have been lately made by the
Turks to check the Passage of the Propontis, or Channel of Constantinople.

On the 14 we were taken into service, and I put aboard the Little Princess.

On the 15 we saw the Galleys of Bey, who seeing that we had stopped the Channel,
rowed away toward the Greek shore, where they stayed together, being 22 in
number.

On the 16 came an English Ship from Sante called the Midleton to bring Bread,
Oars, and Ammonition for the Armade, w^ch the Turkish Galleys assailed, when
she came near the Dardanelli. We hearing that, did all we could to sail off and
assist them; but it was so calm, that our Sails cling'd about the mast. MAY.
1656.
The Turks in the mean while lay battering the English Ship, and the English on
the other hand defended themselves courageously. After they had fought some
hours, the Turks boarded her abaft and got the Poop, which the English seeing
blew up the Decks, and so set the Ship on Fire, which nevertheless when they
saw her on Fire to the Main Mast, ceased not to fire valourously out at the
Prow till she began to sink, which they marking betook themselves to swimming,
rather willing to burn or sink than surrender themselves or Ship upon
dishonorable Terms. However the Turks took up as many as they could, and made
slaves of them. Aboard this Ship was an English Woman who kept a House of
Entertainment at Venice, notedly known by the name of Mrs. Penters, and one
that was very kind to the English and Dutch when in any strait or trouble, and
many of our Nation were sorry when they heard of her Death. The Ship Midleton
was mounted with 36 Guns, and 60 Men, whereof about 40 were drowned and burned,
as we found by the Bodies we took up an hour and a half after the Battle. And
afterward understood by the Slaves we took in the Engagement at the Dardanelli,
that the Galleys were so disabled that they repented the Assault, besides more
than 500 Men outright killed, and a far greater number wounded.

While we lay at Anchor at the entrance of the Channel, and loating to and
again before the Dardanelli, the most part of our men were quelled with a
Scorbutic distemper, for want of fresh Water. For all the Water we could have,
we must fetch out of the River of Troy, which we could not do without great
perril, and jeopardy of our lives; the Turks having several hidden Trenches, in
which they lay sculking till they saw opportunity, and then surprised us. To my
great misfortune, I was sent out with 7 more to fetch Water with a Boat; and
coming to Troy, we saw very rich Vineyards, at a distance, and mightily longing
for some such refreshments, we cast lots who should make the attempt to go and
fetch some Grapes, and the ^ot fell upon me: wherefore without much loss of
time I betook my self thither, viewing warily if the coast were clear, but
seeing no stir or appearance of men; I went up undauntedly, where I made both
Hands and Chaps move. But whilst I was thus busy, heard a great ^oise, and
turning me about, descried several Turks that had lay in ambush running toward
me, from several places between me and the River. Our men were newly come
ashore and filling their Casks with Water, who made all the have they could,
gained the Boat, loosed off from the shore, and eying the Enemy too earnestly
ran the Shallop upon a Sand, where they were set fast; but having some
Firearms aboard, they kept the Turks off, till they got the Boat adrift, and
so made their escape. In the mean while I sat biting my nails, and scratching
my head in the Vineyard. Seeing my way forelaid, and no hopes of coming to the
Seaside. I began to consult with my self what shift to make, and concluded it
the greatest folly in the world to oppose my self against so many men, for
which (being once in their clutches) I might expect severer usage. It was not
long before they came to see what kind of a Fool, they had got in their Gin,
where they found Peel-garlick ready to yield up the Ghost for fear. They
brought me first to the Hamlet, where Troy was said to stand in times of yore,
and afterward to those Castles which are built opposite to each other, The
Author made a Slave.
and command the entrance of the Dardanelli. Here they put me in a Galley,
stripped off my Robes, shaved my head, and set me to an Oar, which was work
enough for six of us to tug at, allowing me only a pair of linen Breeches to
cover my nakedness. I was chained to a Russian, who had been 24 years in the
Galleys: for all strangers that they take in the Venetian Sea-Armade, are to
stay in the Galleys during life, without the benefit of Redemption. Which when
I came to understand, began in all have to repent my temerity, and
foolhardiness, and had thought my self more happy if I had been pilling of
Turnips or Cucumbers at Durgerdam, than plucking of such sour Grapes, in a
Trojan Vineyard.

How inhuman and barbarous our Usage was, no Tongue can duly utter nor Pen
decipher. For the Guardian of that Galley was reputed the most severe of any
other in the Fleet, and although we plied never so sedulously, were sure to be
thresh'd on the naked ribs with a Buls-pizle, when the fit took him; and one
man's hide must unjustly be made a piaculum, for another's Remisness, or Sloth,
nor was the Tygre ever well, but when he heard some a roaring, or yelling out
The Russ was ever now and then counselling to betake our selves to flight, which
I had a great mind to essay (for the Venetian Armade lay but two leagues from
us) but could never see an opportunity, meeting perpetually with one
obstruction or other; and the Coast narrowly watched by the Turks. The Russ had
several times attempted to run away, but was ever taken, and had neither Nose
nor Ears left him. This woeful Praecedent daunted me so, that I had no great
stomach to try, but one day above the rest he gave me good encouragement,
saying, Prithee Brother, Which is best, To live in perpetual Slavery, or, Do
what you can, to make your Escape? Put the case it should be fruitless and we
should be taken, I shall be sure to have the hardest measure, but you, only a
hundred strokes on the foot, at worst. It Is true, they have threatened to burn
me, if ever I run away again, and am caught; but I will rather die so, than to
live all my days under the lash of those unreasonable Hell Hounds, and to be
tormented with a Thousand Plagues, after the manner you see. Come, come,
resolve. Faint heart never won fair Lady, and Nothing venture, nothing have;
What is there in the World, that may be praeferred before a Golden Freedom? By
these and many other reasons he moved me to hazard to matter. The Moscovian or
Russ, who was a subtle Impostor, and had an excellent hand at any kind of
Roguery, had been some time before at Constantinople, where he had bought a
File; this he had stitched up in his Coat, and carried always a little
Tinder-box and a Watch-light about him, to use in time of occasion.

Having now for the space of 6 Weeks endured this woeful state, The Author
makes his Escape.
we found an Opportunity to rid our selves of that miserable Slavery: for being
now left to our Liberty to fetch Water for our selves, my Camrade and I that
were chained together went farther within Land than we needed, and so returned
honestly back to the Galley, and that for 2 or 3 times together, the better to
prevent suspicion, till at last, we ran so far out of sight that we thought our
Enterprise half won. The night coming on, it began to rain, and we to shelter
our selves, crept into a cave, where my Mate struck fire and lighted his
Wax-candle, that we might see to file: and after a little labor got our selves
loose. The night in regard it was dark favored us mainly, so that we came to
the strand an hour before break of Day, which we saw full of Tents. But being a
very rainy night and stormy weather, the Sentinels did not attend their Posts,
so that we passed through the midst of them without any examination, and
betook our selves to swimming before it was observed. But it was not long
before they began to suspect something, or other, for that Water is very salt
and has this property, that with the lest motion, or troubling, it burns like
fire. Hereupon they shot at us by guess and random, with the Long-bow (for by
reason of the Rain they could not use their Firearms,) so that the Arrows came
pelting about our ears, and sometimes grazing upon the Water, till at last one
hit the Russ directly upon the buttock. However he swom so long with it, till
we were out of shot, The Russ shot with an Arrow.
but when I would have pulled it out; the poor caitiff began to yell out most
miserably, crying, Let alone, let alone, it is an Arrow with a wicker. And thus
he was fain to swim for two Leagues together, before we came to the Venetian
Armade: and had the stream heavy on our side. When we came to the Armade we
were taken into the Ship Abraham's Offering, where the Russ had the Arrow drawn
out of his buttock, which had pierced him to the very bone, and put him to a
miserable torture before it was drawn out, being a Harpoon with 8 wickers.
However he was by the diligence of an able Surgeon in a short time cured of
his Wound; and we thanked God for his delivery of us from the hands of those
merciless Tyrants, preserving us through the dangerous floods, and bringing us
to a Christian People.

CHAP. IV. The fugitive Slaves brought before the General. The manner of their
Encouraging their Men. Number of the Venetian Ships and Galleys. Names of the
Commanders and Chieftains The Malteezes join with the Armade. The Turkish Fleet
sail up, endeavor to break through, are hindered by the Malteezes. The Turks
throw up two Batteries. A dreadful Engagement, and playing off the Cannon for
three days together. The Turks begin to settle. The Stability and valor of the
Venetians. The Turks loose their Courage.
June 1656
ON the 24 of June by break of day we got the Armade (in manner as aforesaid)
and about 8 a clock, I was brought before the General, to whom I signified what
had passed as to my particular concernment, and gave him what Intelligence I
could from the Turkish Fleet, who intended that day to fall down, had already
reckoned the day their own, and made a Dividend among themselves, of the Ships,
Spoil, and Slaves, for which reason the Officers were very eager, and
indeavored to hasten the Expedition. The General received me kindly, thanked me
for the Information, ordered us each 50 Crowns, and so dismissed us. So soon as
we were come out of the Generals presence, he ordered a Proclamation to be
proclaimed and affixed to the Mast of every Ship and Galley, That every private
person should freely enjoy what they could get by plundering; and a strict
Interdiction was sent to the respective Officers not to deprive or molest them
upon pain of Death: which was no small encouragement to the Mariners and
private Soldiery, At first the Venetians were very weak, but afterward, by the
joining of the Maltheezes and some Dutch, they were increased to 28 Ships of
War, 24 Galleys, and 7 Galeasses. Their Officers were as follow. A LIST
Of the Head-Officers and Commanders in the Venetian Armade, as they were
engaged against the Turks Anno 1656
Lorenzo Marcello, GENERAL. Barbaro Badoer PROVEDITOR of the ARMADE. Joseppo
Morosini, ADMIRAL of the GALEASSES. Antonio Barbaro, Captain of the Gulf.
Zuanni Marcello, LIEUTENANT GENERAL, and Captain of a Galeass.
The Heads, or Prime Officers of the Galeasses were,
Alvise Foscari. Anthonio Priuli. Marco Riva Alvise Bataglia and Giacomo
Loredan.
Captains of Galleys
Pietro Contarini, ADMIRAL. M. Antonio Pasquaglio. Pietro Quirini. Giacomo
Semiticolo. Nicholo Muazzo. Dionisio Disani. Zorzi di Mezo Zuanni Venier
Francesco Vizzaemano. MAY. 1656
Nicholo Colergi. Aurelio Longo. Alviso Basso. Giacomo Polani. Francisco di
Mezo. Pietro Barozzi. Zorzi Mengano. Angelo Muazzo. Alessandro Dondolo. Thomaso
Fradello. Z. Giacomo Quirini. Herolamo Pesaro. Alvize Soscarini. Guglielmo
Avogrado.
Of the Ships of War the Head-Officers were,
Marco Bembo, ADMIRAL Zuanni Contarini, VICE ADMIRAL Gerolamo Malepiero,
RERE-ADMIRAL.
Captains of Men of War.
Z. Andora Bragadina. Barnardo Bragadino. Nicolo Dona. Agostino Marcello.
Vincenzo Quirini. Gerolamo Loredano. Marco Barberigo. Nicolo Zane. Zuanni
Corner. Faustino Riva. Zorzi Zancarat. Francesco Basadono. Francesco Pisani
Bernardin Vizzamano Volunteers without Pay. Francesco Quirini Volunteers
without Pay. Alessandro Zane.
Great Personages and Volunteers.
The Prince of Parma. Zuanni Anthonio Muazzo, a youth of 13 Years. Andrea
Muazzo, aged 12 Years. Dominico Anthonio Semiticolo. Marco Zorzi. Pietro
Gritti. Lazaro Mocenigo.
For the space of one whole month we crused upon the Turkish Armade, which we
waited for daily from Constantinople. In the mean while those of Maltha came up
with their Galleys to the Venetian Armada, under the Flag of the Prior of
Rochel. The Turks on the contrary had 28 Men of War. 9 Galeasses, and 60
Galleys, those of the Bey reckoned with them. The said Fleet was also full of
men, and well provided with Ammunition.

On the 23 the whole Armade came down with full Sail before the Dardanelli, as
if they would direct their course for the Islands of Greece, or some place in
the Archipellago, aiming to make a breach sometimes at one place, and sometimes
at another; But the Venetians were too vigilant to suffer it; for they composed
their Fleet in such order, that the Turks could not find a Passage.
Nevertheless the Maltheezes disowned themselves to be under the Standard of
Saint Mark, but reserved the Command of their own Galleys, as themselves listed
and thought good.

On the 24 the Turks held themselves close to the Banks near the two Castles,
mentioned before (in Page 80) which tended mainly to their advantage. Besides
this they had thrown up two Batteries, one upon the Corner of Barbaria, on the
Anatolian Side, and another, on the Greek, or Western Coast, from whence they
played off their great Guns against the Christian Navy, to work a passage
through for their Fleet. Three days long continued they on both sides firing
with their Canon, the Admiral of the Venetians, as bearing the chief Standard;
riding nearest to the Enemy, and consequenly suffered more damage than the
rest of the Navy: for the Turks threw out great Stones with their Bombs, that
they killd three men on a breast, who stood very near the General. In these
Castles are Guns of an incredible mussin, and as some say, those in the outmost
Redoubts 30 inches diameter. And although there was not any hope of doing the
Enemy much harm, yet the Christian Fleet kept still in good Order; waiting
greedily for the Turkish Navy, which we thought would come out, when ours was a
little more disabled. On the 26 they came out with full Sail, and in good Order,
with such a hideous roaring and shouting, that we could not understand the
words of Command, nor hear one another speak. Their Ships as well as their
Galleys were so stowed with men, that they were a great encumbrance to
themselves.

The Wind was now at North, and favored the Turks so, The Turks have the
benefit of the Wind.
that the Christians were almost blind and stifled with smoke: yet the whole
Fleet kept their Posts without giving way to the Enemy. The General to give a
good example and encouragement to the whole Navy, put the Fleet in the form of
a Crescent and himself in the Nombril; and so expected the Infidels Armade: but
they kept off at a considerable distance, still playing off their Cannon. The
Wind and stream which favored them against us, JUNE. 1656.
was also advantageous for us against the Galleys of the Bey, that were to the
Rereward of us; who also fought courageously, and held their Post all the
while. The Venetians did all they could to close up with the Turks, but could
not move forward and keep their due Order, through reason of the Wind, and violent
Breakings of the Stream, occasioned on purpose by the Turks in opening of their
Fleet, that beat Strongly against the Christian Navy. The Enemy in the mean
while battered the Squadron of Marco Bembo with an incessant shooting of whole
Tears and Broadsides, that all cracked again; nor had Lazaro Mocenigo, and
Gerolino Malipiero the Vice Admiral, assisted by the Prince of Parma, the lest
share in this hot Engagement. But beyond all others, memorable was the
magnanimous and resolved Valor of Bernardo Bragadino Chieftain of the
Contarina, a small, but a well built Friggat: who notwithstanding the Enemy
poured out great shot, like Hail upon her, yet dured all the brunt of the
battle thundering with her Cannon against the Turkish Galeasses, that they were
forced to remove their Post 5 several times. An admirable rare Courage! which
if it either could, or had been seconded, by all the Naval Forces of the
Christians then present, would have given such an Overthrow to the Infidels as
no Age might parallel. Nor may we forget to commemorate the good service of the
Dutch, who served as Auxiliaries in this Naval Expedition, and behaved
themselves very well. The Turks now seeing the prudent Conduct of the General,
and undaunted Courage of the whole Fleet did all they could to draw off, fell
down to the Seaward and retired into the Bay of Barbery, where they dropped
Anchor, hoping that now they were in Sanctuary.

CHAP. V. The Wind turns in favor of the Venetians. The Turks flee and are
obstructed. The brave Courage of the Galleys of Bey. General Marcello killed.
The manly Behavior of Lazaro Mocenigo, who looses one eye. Two Dutch Ships, to
wit, Yet Wapen van Nassau, and Den David en Goliath, blown up with their own
Powder. The Turkish Capitana yields. The General and disorderly Flight of the
Turks. Their total overthrow, and loss on both sides.
AFter the Christians had long labored to close up with the Turks, JUNE. 1656.
but could not effect their Intentions, for the Wind blew hard at North, and
North and by East, and the stream still falling with great Force upon their
Ships and Galleys, rendered their Endeavors fruitless, so that they could not
do any enterprise, than barely what was done with their Ordnance, they had
resolved to rest a little: The Wind turns in favor of the Christians.
till on a sudden by Heavenly providence the Wind came about, and GOD, out of
his unspeakable Goodness, granted the Christians a helping Hand, almost after
the same manner, as about a Hundred Years agon in the famous Sea Fight against
the Turks, under the Conduct of Don Iuan d' Austria, when the Turks had the
Wind fair and favorable, till they came to engage with the Christians, and
then by the Divine Bounty of the Everlasting GOD, the Wind turned to the
advantage of the Christian Fleet; in such sort that the Christians gave them
the greatest and most fatal Overthrow, that ever yet was either known, or heard
of, in the world. The General Marcello had no sooner observed that the Wind
blew a little Southerly, but he gave Command to set sail, and stretch the Oars,
in order to give the Turks a sudden Assault, which was in obedience to his Will
immediately put in practice. The Turks being thus surprised by our silent
Attacque, and finding the Wind directly against them, were dreadfully dismayed:
insomuch that upon our entering the Bay we saw them by whole flocks jump over
board. Some ran with their Ships and Galleys bluntly against the Wall, others
that lay at Anchor nearest the Sea, strove to drive through the Fleet and gain
the Rere; and those that saw themselves not able to retreat, left the Ships,
and betook themselves to swimming; few of which escaped (for there runs a stong
Tide) and most of them were carried to the Seaward, that we met whole Shoals of
them driving in the stream, MAY. 1656.
and amongst them many Christian Slaves, which we took up with our Shallops. In
the mean time the Turks continued their Flight, endeavoring with their Galleys
to tow away some of the ablest Ships, but the Venetians fell so furiously upon
them that they were anticipated, and only made their escape with 14 which got
the Castle for their Refuge: Lazaro Mocenigo, who was Volunteer and commanded
the Sultan (formerly taken by the Turks) made in with great Courage, and cut
off their Passage, where he lay thundering and firing his Cannon till the
General Marcello broke through the midst of the Enemies Armade, put them into
disorder, and kept his own Fleet in good Condition holding still in the Nombril
or Center of the Crescent, jointly with the Proveditor Barbaro Ba^oer, the
Squadron of Maltha, with the Ships and Galeasses of Ioseppo Morosini. The Right
Wing (or Horn) was commanded by Anthonio Barbers, a Captain of the Gulf, the
left by Pietro Contarini. The Turks seeing themselves environed on every side
with the Christians, and their Passage obstructed, began to fight with better
courage than before, and defended themselves very bravely, as sometimes
desperate Soldiers do. The notable valor of the Galleys of Bey.
But above all the Galleys of Bey appeared signally stout, and for their
laudable behavior and singular valor merited as much the Honor, as the
Turkish Mustapha the Dishonor of the Day. But with a Lion-like Courage, and as
wise a Conduct, did a certain Bassi manifest his generous spirit, who was the
same that had promised the Grand Seignior, to present him with Marcello's head,
or to forfeit his own in lieu thereof (being a Greek Renegado) and assuredly he
gave none reason to tax him with Remissness on his own behalf, yet failed in
the Atchievment of his well-intended Enterprise; for when he was bound to board
him, the General got assistance, and offered to enter the Bassas Galley, The
General Marcello killed.
but was unfortunately killed with a Cannon ball, and four Gentlemen that stood
next him. Zuanni Marcello seeing this, held all in silence, for fear of
discouraging the Christian Armada; took the Command upon himself, and pursued
the Battle hotly after the same Order, till he had privately signified the
General's death to Barbaro Badoer, Proveditor of the Navy, who without loss of
time stepped over, and succeeded him, still holding the same Order which the
General had designed. Lazaro Mocenigo in the mean while busy to obstruct the
Passage of the Turks with the Sultan, ran her unluckily upon a Sand, near the
shore, JUNE. 1656.
and at last too eager in shooting set the ^hip on fire, having a little before
lost his Eye with a splinter.

The Sultan had aboard her diverse Persons of Quality and Volunteers, who
maximis ad minimos quitted themselves well and honorably: amongst which was,
Capt. Zorzi Dadick, The Sieur Ebert, Capt. Lieutenant Gremonville, and
Bernardino Canal a Reformado Captain, whereof the two last were irrecuperably
wounded. During the Fight, was the Dutch Ship, called 't Wapen van Nassauw
under the Command of Capt. Faustino Riva blown up with her own Powder, as also
another Dutch Ship called Den David en Goliath by an unfortunate shot in her
Powder Chamber, when she was engaged with the Galleys of the Bey, and lay so
close to the said Galleys that 5 of them were blown up with her. Aboard the
same Ship were 44 Hollanders, and 22 left, being just the half lost. The Prince
of Parma was so forward that his Companions were fain to restrain him by force,
running himself oftentimes into a needless jeopardy of his Person. Remarkable
was that of the General Borri being aboard the Galeass of Marco Riva, who
having his young Son by him, carried him up and down to see what was worthy of
note. When the Night came on, they unanimously left off on both sides, and all
was still; but the next Morning by break of day, they fell on amain, and seemed
for some hours to be equally matched as that the Day was thought dubious, but
at last the Turks were fain to give over, Courage of the Turkish Capitana
only the Capitana held out very manfully, till the Admiral Marco Bembo came to
close up with his Lar-board where he saluted him so with Broad-sides, that he
was forced to yield as well as the rest.

The Venetians seeing the Capitana yield gave a great shout that the Castle and
Banks rang again, and so well encouraged they were that, they fell furiously in
one entire Body upon the Saracens, that they forthwith betook themselves to
flight, and retired to the Fort, but the Christians had so hindered their
passage, that few of them got clear. The Sieur Barbaro Badoer who succeeded the
General concealed his death so long until that the Fight was over, and he able
for to give the Fleet an account of the Enemies Overthrow, which was in the
second Evening, pretty late.

The Venetians having now made themselves Masters of so many Ships and Galleys,
were at a loss for Men enough to manage them, The loss on both sides.
that they were fain to set the most part on fire, reserving only such as were
left disabled, as a token of this notable Victory, which had cost the
Commonwealth above 400 Souls, and amongst those their most faithful and
valiant General Marcello, whose (unhappy Death can never be enough lamented.
The number of those that were wounded was great, but uncertain. The Sultan, and
the 2 Dutch, men of War, which as we have already said were unfortunately
destroyed with their own powder, was all their loss of Shipping. They took 18
Galleys, and the Maltheezes 11 Ships, besides 54 Ships that were burned: so
that of 97 Galeasses, Ships and Galleys, only 14 were saved on the Enemies
side. By this laudable Enterprise and Victory of the Venetians, above 5000
Christian Slaves were restored to Freedom. But how many of the Infidels lost
their lives was uncertain, only by a rude conjecture, and a modest Calculation
were computed between ^ and 6000 Men. When we went to ruminate for Spoil among
their Dead we found the Fretum, or Mouth of the Dardanelli floating so thick
with Bodies, that we could not force our Boat through; but with our Oars and
Boat-hook were fain to drag and draw them behind the Shallop, which again with
the force of the stream were thrown on heaps one above another, like Shoals of
Ice, and so came tumbling into the Boat, in spite of all the means we could use.

CHAP. VI. The Siege of Tenedos. The two Castles surrendered. A description of
Tenedos, Lemnos, it is Situation, and taking in. The present state of Greece. J.
Struys's arrival at Pathmos and Samos. Taken by the Turks with 6 of his
Companions, and soon after ransomed.
AFter this signal Victory, all the maimed Soldiers, together with the Corpse of
the General, and other Noblemen were sent back to Venice: and the new General
Badoer upon this succesfull day, resolved to fire them out of their own nests.
Pursuant thereto he steers away for Tenedos, which is an Island situate at the
very mouth of the Propontis, or River of Constantinople; which is as it were
the Key of the said River, and Commands the Passage so, that no Ships can come
in or out, against their will. There are on this Island two well fortified
Places, the one on the South and the other on the North; both built after the
best manner of Fortification, having Bulwarks and Walls of an incredible
Thickness. We lay Siege to these, both by Sea and Land, but the main Forces we
applied on the Haven-side, Tenedos besieged and surrendered upon Articles.
for the Bay is very wide, where we came to cast our Anchors. Fourteen days
long we lay battering the Castle with our Cannon from the Sea, at what time
they put out a white Flag, and proposed to the General certain Articles, upon
which they declared themselves free to surrender the Fort, the main of which
Proposals was, That all freeborn Turks should be set upon fast Land; and, That
all the Renegados should be at the mercy of the Christians.

The said Articles were mutually counter-changed and ratified by the Heads of
both Parties, and all the Turks and Moors drawn out, even the Greeks too, who
were suffered to stay upon the Island but not within the Castle. The Heads of
the other Castle seeing the Venetians in possession of this, put out the White
Flag and desired Articles of Peace, which after a short Treaty of
Commissioners on both sides were signed, existing mostly of the same Tenure
with the former.

Tenedos lies near the coast of Anatolia and is called Bouchadde by the Turks.
It is of a fertile Soil, and produces plenty of Fruit, Tenedos described
but especially Grapes, and has good store of Melons and other delicacies,
which they have also in the Winter-season. And according to it is small extent
(not exceeding 28 English miles in circuit) has abundance of Cattle. It is
beset with Hills toward the Sea on every side, but within arable, and fit for
tillage. The General committed it to the Trust of Seignior Loredano, a
Gentleman of Venice, with a Garrison of 700 Italians, and others.

Tenedos being now in possession of the Venetians, Lemnos or Scalimene where
situated.
we set Sail for Scalimene, or Lemnos, which we found about 6 Leagues distant
from the other, being Seated directly before the mouth of the Channel, and
therefore a Place in which the Turks had reposed great Confidence. This Island
has several small Towns upon it, as Condea, Which was of old the chief Town,
and called Ephestias. Bellon.
Cochino, Palso Castro, and others, beside 75 Villages and Hamlets. When we
came before the Place in order to lay Siege to it, we found a Fort having 700
men in Garrison; Lemnos Surrendered upon dishonorable Terms.
but the Sou-bassa hearing that Tenedos was already taken in by the Christian
Armade, and finding himself incapable to defend the Place by reason that all
communication was cut off, he desired to treat by Deputies, and without ever a
shot surrendered the Fort and Island upon dishonorable Conditions.

described.
Lemnos, or Scalimene as it is now called, has Thracia on the North, and the
Hill Athon toward the West, and as we have said, lies not far from Lemnos. It
is no whit inferior to any Island in the Aegean-Sea, for a wholesome Air, and a
good Soil: it affoards all kind of Grain and Pulls, as also Almonds, Oil,
Lactuaries, and plenty of Sheep, which for their Wool is no small profit to the
Inhabitants: and from hence comes that excellent and useful Georg. Agricola in
his Dialogue of Metals entitled Bermannus givs this relation of that Earth,
Pastillos praeterea ibidem vidi ex eadem urbe portatos, coloris fere fulvi, and
literis Turcicis signatos quos ob id Terram Sigillatam appellant: quinetiam
Lemnia illa terra olim imagine caprae signabatur. And a little afterward he adds
this. Turcae eam un^ pestis remedium esse asserentes, ita magni aestimant, ut
alter alteri muneris loco ipsam donet. See more ab^ this excellent mineral in
Dioscorides, and in Gallens 9 th Book of Simples.
Earth, called Terra Lemnia, or Terra Sigillata, which is so highly prized by
those that profess Physic. The Inhabitants and Peasantry are Greeks, which may
not live in any fortified Place. In this Island has been a famous Labrynth,
whereof the Ruins yet appear in some places. The chief City thereof is called
also Scalimene, and is indifferent strong. When the General left the Island he
constituted a Governor and sent some Ships to cruse through the Archipelago,
and urge the payment of the Arrearages in the Tributary Places, of which the
Venetians were now Masters, and light also upon such as were free, for so
unhappy are the Islands of Greece that they must pay Tribute both to the Turks
and Venetians, which is a great oppression to so poor a People.

Greece is at this day as fertile as ever, but is greatly deficient of it is
former Power and Wealth, by the Dominion of the Turks and perpetual Wars. As
for the People they are very urban and good ^ converse with. The Customary
Habit of the Merchants and Citize^ is as follows. They wear on their Heads a
long red Cap, with a fold hanging down before, and affect long hair, although
some I have seen shorn, and with a Turbant like Mahometans. Their Breeches long
and narrow demitted to the calf of the leg, and little red boots above their
stockings. Above all a Coat like the Persians but without a Girdle. In stead of
a Cloak they wear a Coat with long narrow sleeves hanging down to the middle of
the Thighs, which they seldom or never put their arms into. The Peasants also
wear long red Caps as the Merchants and Citizens, but wide linen or Cotton
Breeches like Trouzers. Their Gentlewomen wear a white Silk or Cotton Sharf
about their Head, hanging over their back and shoulders like Nuns. Their
Stockings are mostly scarlet and neatly embroyded, their shoes with little
handsome heels, and sometimes for their more easy going with slaps. Those that
are of ability wear a kind of Boddice or wast-coat of cloth of Gold, and above
that an upper-Coat with long Silk sleeves, this is girded about the middle with
Ribbons. Some there are also which wear a short silk Jacket or Justicore coming
down to the calf of the legs, their shifts hanging down 2 palms below that.

Being now as we already told you, sent to collect Tribute, the first Island we
came at was Pathmos, Arrival at Pathmos.
the place where the H. Apostle John, and the beloved Disciple of our Lord, was
confined, or banished to, and where he wrote his Revelations. When we went
shore, they showed us a little Chapel in the cleft of a Rock, which (as the
Greeks ascertained to us) was the very place where he saw those Heavenly
Visions; as also a stone which lay above his Bed. This ^tone the Greeks sell,
and make great profit of it, being stamped into powder is reputed the best
Remedy that ever was known, for a Quartan Ague. The City Pathmos is founded
upon a Hill about the middle of the Island, and has within it a very fair
Monastery with the Tomb of Chrysolodos the Founder thereof. The Island is both
Fruitful, populous and well built, on the Seaside is a little strong Sconce to
defend the place against Pyracy, but when they heard of the Over^row of the
Turks, did not in the lest oppose themselves against us, ^ing overaw'd by the
Cadis.

When we had dispatched at Pathmos, we steered away for Samos, which is an
Island right over against the Gulf of Smirna, to see if we could meet with any
Saiks, or other Turkish Shipping, and according ^ our expectation met with two
rich Prizes, laden with raw Silk, and other precious Commodities. Samos.
After we had Sailed to and again for 5 or 6 days, we came to Samos to demand
the Contributions as at other places. When we were arrived in this Road our
Commander ^hought good to supply us with Water and other necessaries, The Boat
sent ashore.
upon which I and 19 other of our Ships-folk were sent ashore. Ten of our
Company were sent up to the Village to buy Provision and Refreshments, and the
rest, amongst whom I my self was one, were to take in Water, and manage the
Boat. But hardly had we taken in two Boatfulls but we saw a Brigandine making
toward us, stowed full of Men: whereupon we concluded it was no time to dally,
and therefore threw our Things aboard, The Boat intercepted by the Turks.
and betook our selves to rowing as hard as we could drive toward the Ship. But
the Turks having far more hands than we, and consequently swifter at rowing,
came in between us and the Ship, which lay half a Dutch League from Land. We
then seeing little hopes of getting aboard, wheeled about and made toward Land;
but were as hotly pursued by the Turks, and seeing the Brigantine within
pistol-shot of us astern, we jumped over board and betook our selves to
running. But when I saw that I could not run any longer, I was forced to seek a
lurching place, for my feet were sore in running through Thorns and Thistles.
Our Commander and Folk aboard seeing how cases stood, came nearer the shore and
shot at the Infidels with their Guns from aboard, tho they held not up to
pursue us. When I had lay a little there, I began to peep out, to see if the
coast was clear, but was spied by 4 Turks, who were hunting after us, and
seeing no mean to make my escape was forced to submit. When they had tied my
hands behind my back, The Author and 6 more of the Company taken.
as they had done with 6 more of the Company, they dragged us away to the
Brigadine, where coming aboard we met with more civility from the Captain than
we could indeed expect. They were also so civil to us when they took us that
they did not so much as take a rag of clothes from us, for I had then 25 Ducats
about me which I still kept. The Captain, who was a person of a generous
Spirit, and with one compassionat, seeing us in such distress and
consternation, said, Be not grieved for the lo^ of your Liberty, for I will not
use you unkindly, neither shall you suffer want for any thing, that is needful
if we our selves are able to supply you. However he brought us to Rhodes where
the Plague raged with great violence and consequently the Slave-market very
low, for we could not yield him above 100 Pieces of Eight. But the Captain not
willing to part with us at so low a price brought us to Great Scio, where the
Turkish Armada then lay, thinking so to get a better Sum, but found it quite to
the contrary: whereupon we prayed him to sell us to our own Ship. Well, said
he, if your Commander, or your Countrymen will buy you, I am content, their
money is as good as another's. With this Resolution we were brought back again
to Samos, where when we were arrived, sent a Letter to the Commander, humbly
praying him that he would have the goodness to redeem us: upon which he made
answer, That he was well inclined to do it, but that the Ship was at that time
very scarce of Money, and that he could not make up above 1800 Pieces of eight,
which if that would redeem us 7, we might strike a bargain with the Captain.
Upon this answer we were very glad, and under good hopes of coming out of the
Hands of the Turks. The Captain of the Brigantine observing that we had got an
answer from aboard, asked us, What news? will your Commander redeem you or not?
Yes, said one of us, if you will be reasonable with us, we shall find means to
be redeemed, but otherwise not. Hereupon he demanded 2000 Pieces of eight,
whereat we seemed to be astonished, and bad him 800 withal declaring that our
Proffer seemed more to the matter than his Demands; but he would not seem to
hearken to that. We then raised it to 1000 but he told us, That it was but
Labor lost unless we bad something more to the purpose, and at last declared,
That for 1300 we should be redeemed, provided we would pay him that day, but if
not, that the next day he would go out of Town, and sell us to those that would
bid most, be who they will. We seeing it now brought to a good end, and
sensible of our ability, of performance, took him at the word, lest some other
resolution should take him in the head: and presently put out a white Flag. The
Commander thereupon sent out a Shallop, The Author and his Companions ransomed
which came rowing toward us, till they came within speech of us, and
understanding the Conditions of Redemption rowed back again to the Ship, to
bring us the Money for which we had covenanted with our Patron; upon this we
were again Freemen and thanked GOD for his divine bounty toward us. The other
men had stayed at Samos so long in quiet, till they were fetched away by the
Ships Company when the Brigantine was gone.

When we had don, and dispatched our affairs in the Archipelago, we set Sail
toward Venice, tho our Ship was so leaky, that we were fain to pump
continually, however by the help of GOD we arrived Safe. But by the way were
forced to put in at a certain Island right over the City Maddonna, not daring
to trust our selves any longer at Sea, till we had (as well as we then and
there were able) stopped some of her leaks, which were principally at the Bow.
But our Carpenter notwithstanding all he did, could not stop the main leak
being in the worst place it might be in, for no great Nails would hold,
insomuch that the Commander set me at work to stop it which I did with
Sail-cloth 2 or three times folded, and fastened artificially and firm, for
which he gave me a good reward.

CHAP. VII. The Author admitts himself again into the Service of the Venetians.
Arrival at Corfu with an account of it is Strength, Bulwarks, Sconces and other
Fortifications, near, and about the City. Fertility of the Island. Arrival at
Cephalonia, it is Fertility, Situation and Strength. Arrival at Sante, an
account of its Strength, its Villages, Scarcity of fresh Water. Arrival at
Cerigo: Situation of that Island, Relics, or Ruins of the Temple of Venus.
SO soon as I had received the Arrears of my Wages at Venice, I hired my self
again into the Venetian Armade for chief-or upper-Sail-maker, the Armade then
lying before the Dardanelli. We had a Proveditor aboard us, so that we put in
at all the Tributary Islands under the Seigniory of Venice, to urge the payment
of the Arrearages. And in the first place Corfu, Corfu.
an Island lying in the latitude of 34 degr. 45 min. The City may well be
reputed one of the best fortified Sea-towns in Europe, being encompassed with a
strong Wall and higher than ordinary, built altogether after the modern
Fortification, and well furnished with great Ordnance. It is moreover secured
with two Castles, or rather Sconces, one toward the Sea barely named, The
Castle, the other on the Land-side called, Castello nuovo, or New Castle, That
Fort which lies toward the Sea is built upon a high Rock, and munited with 3
Walls and 5 Bulwarks, whereof one is built against the Sea, and beats off the
Floods and Billows. This Sconce, or Fort, has 3 Gates, that on the West is
called, Porta di Castrado, that toward the Sea, Porta di Mandrahico, and the
third Porta Real which is very narrow, and has a Drawbridge. This Port also
serves for a private Sally in time of need, and is the place where they go out
at to the other Fort, for they can have communication and assist each other if
attacqu'd, JUNE. 1657.
by certain cavernal or subterranean passages, wrought through the Rocks. They
lie about 1000 paces from each other and do not only serve for their own
Defense, but also command the whole Island, and that next the Sea of such power
that it might over aw the Town, being well provided with all kinds of
Ammonition, and Cannon which they cast themselves. There are besides these
Sconces several other Fortifications, and inferior Forts, Seated on high Rocks,
and Walls proportionable to the other, encompassed also with very deep Ditches
which receive their Water from the Sea. Corfu is also of it self very strong
and divided into 3 several Wards as Spileo, Urio nuovo, and Spianato. The high
Fortifications have no Fountain Water that is good, and are therefore fain to
make use of Rain Water which they receive and keep in cisterns and pits like
those of Amsterdam: but without the Walls of Corfu, is a certain fountain or
Well which they call Cardacchio, that affoards good Water and very clear. Upon
this Island stand 68 Villages and Hamlets, all reasonably well peopled. The
Venetian Garrison as it then appeared by their Muster-roll consisted of 400
light Horse and 900 Infantry. The Haven is very fair and covenient, and comes
to the middle of the Island on that side which faces the main Continent. On the
other side lies Butriato a noted place for Fishing. On this Island is much
Which I presume is either the same, or much at one with Cavear, or Ichary
prepared by the Moscovians. Arrival at Cephalonia.
Bottarge made, which is a Dish prepared of the Roes of Sturgeon, salted,
dried, and for the longer and better preservation thereof dipped in Wax. Here is
also much Oil of Olives, or Oleum omphacinum made, and the Vine well
cultivated. It is also very fruitful, affoarding plenty of Oranges, Lemmons,
Citrons etc. besides Honey, Wax and Salt for which Commodities this Island is
very famous abroad.

From Corfu we set sail for Cephalonia, where there is only one small City,
raised on a high ground at the South-end of the Island, and well fortified; but
the Haven thereto belonging is large and convenient. There appear the Ruins of
three other Cities, which are said to be dismantled upon the continual Jarrs of
the Inhabitants amongst themselves and at length reduced to such a poor
remnant. Besides this City is a little Fort, in which they repose no small
trust. It is situated in the latitude of 38 degr. and 29 min. and is almost of
a triangular form. The East End faces the Cape of Ciarenzo, Situation and Form
a Promontory of Morea or Peleponessus. The North-point, Capo Guiscardo,
confronts with Staumara, and the west-angle or Capo Sidro looks toward the main
Continent of Africa: Between this angle and Ciarenza which lies to the
South-west is a large Bay, making a fit Harbor not far from the City
Cephalonia, called Argoftoli, where a great number of Ships may very
commodiously ride at anchor. At the entrance of this Gulf is a small Island
called Guardiana, which is fortified with a little Moot or Castelet, which they
call Nasso. They have great scarcity of fresh or spring Water in this Island,
which is nevertheless of a rich and fat Soil, and good pasturage for Sheep
which there abound. It produces also vast quantities of Grain, Wine, Oil,
Manna, Wax, Honey, Flax and Silk, besides the great plenty of Currants, which is
the Staple-Commoditie of the Land.

CHAP. VIII. The Author's arrival at Sante, or Xante, It Is admirable Strength,
Villages, and great Scarcity of fresh Water. Their Dough for bread kneaded with
Wine in stead of Water. Arrival at Cerigo; Situation of that Island. Relics
of the Temple of Venus. Arrival at Candia, with it is Situation, A Description
of the City, as to it is Strength, Inhabitants, the most eminent Buildings and
Churches, Climat, Soil, Vintage, Fruits, Vegetables, Cattle, Fowl, Plenty of
Silk and other Commodities, as also the modern Habit and Attire of the
Candians. A Description of Standia. The famous Fight between Lazaro Mocenigo
and the Tributary Auxiliaries of Argiers, Tripoli, Theunis and Zoeli. The Fort
of Zouaschi taken in by the Proveditor Mocenigo. The Turks attacque Tenedos,
but in vain. The Turkish Armada come out of the Dardanelli. The Beginning of
the Engagement. The Turkish Emperor comes with an Army of 20000 Horse, and
80000 Foot down to the shore, where from a high Tent he sees' the Engagement.
The Turks loose their Posts, and Sail off. The incomparable valor of Mocenigo
and Bembo, who are unluckily killd by the fall of a Sail yard. Their Galley
blown up with 400 Men. The Loss and Gains on both sides.
THe Proveditor which we had aboard not willing to loose much time, made but
short delay at Cephalonia, for he had not much time to spend according to his
Order and Instructions to go to the Armade, wherefore after a short abode we
set Sail, and steered away for Xante.

Xante is an Island lying in the latitude of 38 degr. about 13 [ English]
leagues from Cephalonia. On this Island is a City containing about 4000 Houses,
or rather Cottages, without chimneys, that they say, is by reason of frequent
Earthquakes, of which they are in daily jeopardy: but the Muniments as well in
respect of Site, as Strength are very considerable; for the Citadel is built
upon a high Hill, and what by Nature and what by Art, Strength of Xante.
seems to be almost inaccessible, well provided also with Ordnance and
Ammunition of War suitable. On this Island are several Capes, the most eminent
whereof are Capo del Guardo on the South, and Capo de Tiri on the East: between
which two Capes lies a Commodious Harbor, called Porto de Chietto, which has a
good Road for Anchorage at 8 fathom Water. Xante has 45 Villages and Hamlets
whereof the most principal lie toward the Sea, to wit, St. Chietto, Littachia,
Pigalachia, Villages
Sculicado, Saint Nicholo and Natte. The last of these has a Harbor fit to
receive 100 Galleys. In the hilly part of the Island are several Convents,
Cloisters and Religious Houses of the Greek Church, who have also a Bishop here
as well as the Romanists, but the Greeks exceed the Italians in number, and
consequently have their Religion in greater splendor. You are no sooner come
ashore but you are met by a parcel of Jews, who shall ask you if you have any
money to change. These deal in any contemptible Traffic, but especially in
Slaves, when any Turkish Saiks, or other Shipping is brought up by English,
French or Hollanders.

Xante is of a very fertile Soil and fruitful, in nothing inferior to
Cephalonia, yet exceeds it in Quality and Plenty of Wine, Fertility of Soil.
Scarcity of Water. Dough moistened with Wine.
but yet scarcer of Water, insomuch that the Inhabitants are sometimes
constrained to knead their Dough with Wine, whereof they make their Bread. Here
is also prepared the delicate Botarges, especially in July and August, when the
Sturgeon comes from the Archipelago. The Land is very populous, and all go
armed; so that when the Turkish Corsairs send some men ashore to take Slaves,
do frequently change Fates with them: and for that end the Venetians maintain
70 or 80 Horse, day and night to ride about the Coast. We also brought hither
some new Infantry to relieve the old.

From Xante we sailed to Cerigo which lies in 36 degr. and 45 min. directly
over against Capo Saint Angelo, before the Gulf of Colochino; Arrival at Cerigo
on the other side it has Candia about 13 Leagues distant, insomuch that the
Italians say, It Is Situation.
Congo is a good Corpse du guarde and a Lanthorn for the Christians to enter the
Archipelago. On the south-east side is a strong Fort built upon a proclive
Rock, and has but one way to enter it. The nether-City is populous enough; and
the Inhabitants very diligent in their respective callings. Here they showed us
the Foundations and Ruins of a famous Temple dedicate to the Gods Venus,
Ruins of the Temple of Venus.
in the times of Gentilism. The Land is very hilly, but the Valleys rich and
fertile, having one Well of very good Water. The Inhabitants are chiefly
Greeks, except the Garrisons, and the Governor, who is always a Venetian
Nobleman.

Candia.
From Cerigo we set sail for Candia the renowned City of Crete, which now is
also called Candia. The Island lies about 47 degr. Northerly latitude, and is
about 200 English land-miles in length, lying almost East and West. It has many
Creeks, and abundance of fair Cities, of which the most noted are Candia,
Canea, Retimo, Sitio, Apicormo, Chysamo, Melipotamo, Garahuse, besides a great
number of unwalled Towns, which they say amount to 650, all the inferior
Villages and smaller Granges excluded out of the number. The whole Island has
been heretofore under subjection of the Venetians, but at that time when I was
there, the Turks were Masters of all except the City Candia it self, which was
then under the Venetians and a few strong Holds as appendences on the Town,
which they held (as is universally known) for a considerable time together
against the Ottoman Forces. The Fortifications have been and are frequently
altered, according to the Discretion of the respective Governors: and is from
the very first Foundation famous for it is admirable rare Site, and natural
strength. It lies in a fair flat Country: the East and North Angles fronting
the Sea. Strength of Candia
Upon that Angle which lies to the northward was an impregnable Fort or Castle,
which had not only all the Fortifications that could be thought useful, or any
way advantageous for the Town, but also the Sea for a further strength, which
encompassed it as a Mote. The same Castle has not only the Command of the
Haven, but also the Sea on both the right and left side. Between this Castle
and the City was a Wall of 20 foot broad, on which the Soldiers marched, from
the one to the other. Besides this the Town was munited with diverse Ramparts,
Bulwarks and other Fortifications without; that it seemed to me at that time,
and since, the greatest folly in the World, for the Turks to spend so much
Treasure and loose so many of their best Soldiery in such a long Siege, and so
little hopes or encouragement of taking it in; although at last they are become
Masters of it. The Citizens are Greeks, as are most of the Inhabitants
throughout the whole Island; but the Garrisons and Gentry, Venetians; besides a
great Concurrency of Strangers from all parts of the Levant, which make the
City very populous. The most eminent Buildings, are the Palace of the General,
that of the Bishop, which for its Antiquity and magnificent work is well worth
seeing, the Palaces of several Noblemen, and the Churches, which are 8 in
number, to wit, St Mark, St Francis, St Paul, St George, St Mary, St Catharine,
St Rochus and St Titus amongst which the first is the Cathedral. The Greeks
have also their Churches, but those so mean, that the best which is allowed
them is much inferior to the poorest of those which the Romans reserve for
their own use. Besides these there is not much in the City worth Observation.
As to the long Siege and Storming of this City 't were needless for me to give
you any account, since it has been from the very beginning traced along, and
fully written by others.

The Air of Candia is temperate enough, Climat,
but on that side facing Africa is something hot, and rendered unwholsom by
southerly Winds: for which reason most of the Towns are built on that side of
the Island which lies next to the Archipelago. Soil,
The Soil is exceeding good, and all kinds of Grain and Pulse take kindly well,
insomuch that sometimes, one piece of ground affoards two Crops in one year.
Yet the Inhabitants are more inclinable to the planting and cherishing of the
Vine, which they cultivate with all imaginable diligence, that being far more
profitable than the propagation of Grain and other Husbandry, their Malmsey,
Vintage.
Red and white Wines being exported every where, and reputed the best that
Earth can produce. But they have two sorts of Malevaise or Malmsey, differing
greatly both in taste and quality: the better sort is that which grows about
Retimo, that they boil so soon as the Grape is ripe, and are very curious in
the preparation and ordering of it; but that about Candia and Canea, but
ordinary, for there they let the Grapes be rath ripe before they pluck' em, and
therefore boil them not: but the Wine that comes from them has a kind of slimy
matter in it of which it, is not to be purified. Here I have seen the
Wine-stocks grow thicker, than any where else, which is a great Argument of the
excellent Soil, with which this Island is blessed; and besides that the vast
bigness of the Bunches, Huge and delicate Grapes.
weighing mostly 8 or 10 pound a piece, and those so delicate that after I had
once tasted of these could not for some years after so much as taste the
Spanish. And not only Grapes, but also every other fruit the Land affoards is
passing good and delicate, insomuch that not only the Turkish Emperor but all
the Princes and Potentates near this Island have their Fruits from hence for
Table use and Banquet. Whole Groves and Woods I have seen several Leagues in
compass, having little or nothing but Trees bearing the best kinds of Fruit, as
Citrons, Vast plenty of Fruit. And of Cypress Wood.
Pomegranates, Oranges, Apricocks, Figs, Almonds, Olives and many sorts of
Apples, Pears, and Nuts. Cypress wood is in this noble Island in greater plenty
than in Cypres it self, which they do not only use for Timber, which gives a
very amiable smell, but also for Fuel. The Common pasturage which the
Inhabitants neither use for Grain nor the Vine, is all grown over with
Rosemary, Thyme, Camomile, Abroton, or Southern Wood, and other Herbs which the
Apothecaries use. Nay, the very Weeds which with us have no sent, affoard here
a most amiable flavor, for which Candia is often called an Earthly Paradise.
Cattle and Fowl Wild and Tame.
All kind of Cattle like well, especially Sheep and Goats which run together in
incredible Flocks. Hares, Coneys, Heath-hens and Partridges abound here. The
Woods and Hills are stored with 3 or 4 sorts of Deer, and the Rivers with Fish.
Fish.
The Honey which Candy affoards is preferred before all other in the World, and
that by reason of the abundance of Thyme and other choice Herbs; as also the
various Blossoms of Pomgranats, Citrons, Oranges, etc. and consequently Wax is
a great Commodity amongst them. The Land it is true affoards not only Salt and
Lactuaries for the Inhabitants themselves, but also for the neighboring
Islands in the Archipelago, whence they draw considerable profit. But far
greater profit they have from their Silk, for Mulberries grow here in vast
plenty, of which every School-lad knows the Silkworm is fed and nourished.
Cotton, Wool, Honey, Wine, Vinegar and Fruits are exported hence to every
Maritim Country in Europe. As for the Candians (or Which St Paul seemed to
take notice of in his Epistle to Titus Bishop of Crete, citing that of
Epimenides. (...). Sec. Tit. 1.12. Standia a small Island not inhabited.
Cretians) they are naturally inclined to Laziness, and more addicted to
vouluptuous lives than their neighbors; They are also great affecters of a
glass of Wine, yet not so easily subdued, as the Phlegmatic Hollanders. As for
their Habit, those that are of the best quality ape the Venetians, the vulgar
sort and Pesantry retain still the old Greekish mode, only their heads are for
the most part shaved, which to supply they wear a thin Silk vail, about the
breadth of an ordinary handkercheif, and above that a great, heavy hat.

Our Proveditor having finished his Charge at Candy, we set sail and steered
away for Standia an Island, lying about 2 or 3 Leagues from the North-coast,
but not inhabited; However the Venetians in their ordinary Course and Traverse
through the Archipelago put in here, because of it is commodious Road or Bay;
and therefore used as a Rendevouz for the benefit of Communication. After we
had lay at anchor a few days we weighed and sailed with the whole Fleet for the
Dardanelli to give the Turks battle: But I must mind you, how that by the way
we met with a Squadron of Ships, which were sent by those of Argiers, Tripoli,
Thunis and Zoile, for the Assistance of the Turkish Armada. So soon as we had
got sight of them, we put out Turkish Colors and hovered a little, that they
might come up to us; which they seeing made all the Sail they possibly could,
till they came near us, at what time they began to suspect that they had got a
wrong Sow by the tail, and so endeavored to go off: but Lazaro Mocenigo, the
General seeing them steer to the starboard, made toward them, and coming
within Cannon shot fired a Gun, which did so disorder them, that they thought
better to stay together in one entire Fleet and try their valor, than to break
their Squadron, and accordingly put themselves in a convenient Posture, in
order to receive Battle. Lazaro Mocenigo ^ights the Argierines Tripolezes, etc.
Upon this fell a very hot Engagement: which lasted more than a full Watch; by
which time the Venetians had taken and sunk 4 Ships, 3 whereof were of their
first Rate, and the remainder being 12 in all, were fain to betake themselves
to the Turkish Havens, but were so disabled that they were not in a long time
fit either for Sailing or Service. After this fortunate Enterprise, the General
sailed directly for Zouaschi, being a strong and well fortified Sea-Town, Takes
in Zouasch
and a Nest of Turkish Pirates, lying on the coast of Anatolia: which after a
short attacque we took in and plundered. From hence we departed for Tenedos
where to our great Joy we had the report, which we heard before our departure
from Venice confirmed; which was, That the Turks were sadly foiled in in their
attacquing of that Island, which we had taken in not long before (as was said
Page 91) The Sum of the Attacque was after this manner. When the Turks had got
notice that Tenedos was surrendered to the Venetians, they sent a Fleet
consisting of 33 Galleys, 3 Galeasses and several Brigantines to retake it,
where so soon as the said Fleet was arrived they lay Siege to the Castles both
by Water and by Land, Tenedos besieged by the Turks.
but were at last fain to remove the Siege, leaving some Hundreds of Dead
behind them upon the Island, besides all the damage which the Fleet received,
who also according to the relation given us must necessarily have many Dead and
Wounded. When they ha^ drawn off the Siege and imbarqued their Landforces, the
Weathe^ grew very tempestuous, and the Sea boistrous high, insomuch that 3
Galleys and 4 Saiks were cast away and few of the men saved.

July. The Turkish Armada comes out of the Dardanelli. The Engagement
Four months long we tarried at Tenedos before the Infidel Armade came out,
which happened on the 27 of July. Their Fleet consisted of 33 Galleys (amongst
which was one of an unwonted greatness called the Royalio) 9 Maons, 22 Ships
and 150 Saiks, with a huge number of Soldiers and Mariners. At the
Approachment the Turks weathered us and kept to the Windward, and endeavored
to break our Order, but the Venetians to get the Advantage of the Wind, tacked
and turned so long that they brought the Turks to the Lee-ward, which having
gained they fell upon the Enemy very hot, and with the dawning of the day made
the Turks yield their Posts and betake themselves to the Cape of Troy, upon
which the Fight ceased till the next morning, when the Engagement held on
sharper and heavier than the day before. The Turks for a while had the
advantage of the Wind, which nevertheless turned against them, as it did the
year before, about the same place (mentioned Page 75) Meanwhile Who was
afterward strangled by a Sicilian. Gentlemen.
Oron then Primo Vizier of the Turkish Empire, came down to secure the Strand,
with an Army of 20000 Cavalry and 80 Thousand Foot, and set down near Troy,
where he had caused two Sconces to be made, as well as the shortness of this
Warning would allow. The Maltheezes were the first that drew on to give battle,
and so seconded by the Venetians. The Ottoman Armada knowing that the Emperor
was himself a Spectator (who together with the Primo Vizier, JVLY. 1657.
stood upon a high Tent made on purpose) behaved themselves admirably well. The
Grand Scignior comes to See the Fight.
However the Venetians (without respect to the Land Forces which battered them
heavily with their Cannon) came so close to the Enemies Fleet, and withal
plied their Guns so rank that they stranded several of their Galleys, upon
which the Men stepped ashore and joined themselves to the Land Army. The Primo
Vizier seeing the Fleet continually loose men, partly by their forsaking the
Navy, and partly by the great Slaughter aboard the Shipping, used his utmost
diligence to stop the Deserters, and recruit the Naval Army, but all to little
advantage; for the Christians pursued their Enterprise with such an ardency and
vigor, that they prevented them: and not to be slack when such an apt occasion
presented, fired and sunk a considerable number of the Galleys and Saiks, the
Turks still retiring further and further toward the Coast. And such was the
Zeal of the renowned Mocenigo, when he saw them close to the Coast, he made an
intercourse with 3 Ships and 5 Galleys, to fetch them off, that he made himself
an unavoidable scope for the Enemies Cannon at Land, which was so tended
against his Galley that she took Fire, and himself with the valorous Marco
Bembo Admiral of the Ships, The bold attempt of Mocenigo and Bembo in which
they are both killed.
both killed with the fall of a Yard, upon which of an instant the Galley was
blown up with 400 Souls aboard. This fatal mischance was seconded by another,
which was a Galley that sank outright. This was all the loss that the Venetians
suffered, as to Shipping in general. The Turks lost 6 Galleys, 4 Ships, 4
Mahons and 50 Saiks. The rest drew off endeavoring to conjoin with the
Landforces where the Proveditor Badoer, who by due course and reversion
carried the Standard of S. Mark, gave them an egregious blow, and sunk, burned
and and took several Galleys and Saiks; which ended, the Venetians set sail for
Tenedos, where they repaired their damages. The Turks according to their own
confession lost between 8 and 9 Thousand Men beside 600 and odd Captives,
amongst whom was an eminent Bashaw, and delivered 567 Christian Slaves.

CHAP. IX. The Venetian Armade appear before Napoli di Malvazia, where they
attacque a Redoubt, which is surrendered. The City treats with the Governor.
The Fleet appears before Santorini; 2 terrible Earthquakes: Wine good and
cheap. The Author sent ashore to buy Provision. The Fleet under Sail. The Turks
come upon the Island, and the Author in danger of being made Slave; hidden by
the Greeks, and brought Embro to with a Barque. Arrival before Nicsia, The
Ruins of Apollos Temple. Arrival at Metelino, it is Situation and Strength;
plenty of Marble, Cypres wood, Wine, and Cattle. Nicsia the Winter-haven for
the Turkish Galleys. S. Georgia de Scyro. Delos: Relics and Ruins of
Heathenish Temples and Images of Apollo, Minerva and Diana. The Castle of Tenos
blown up with it is own Powder. The Island Milo, it is Situation, Strength,
Harbors, Inhabitants, Religion, store of Provision and Victuals. The Ship De
Princes, springs a leak. The Author goes aboard a Privateer, leaves her and
goes for Holland.
IVLY. 1668.
AFter we had repaired our Damages, caulked and trimmed our Ships and Galleys,
refreshed and supplied our selves with necessaries, Arrival of the Fleet before
Napoli di Malva^ia.
we left Tenedos, and came before Napoli di Malvazia with our whole Fleet,
consisting of 36 Ships of War, 6 great Galeasses, and 40 Galleys; some of which
last belonged to Rome, and others to Maltha.

Napoli di Malvazia is a City situate in the Bay of Morea, right over against
Canea, on a barren Rock, close to the main Continent, to which it is annexed
with a stone bridge, upon that was a strong Redoubt, fortified with 12 large
Brass Guns, which stood very well for the safeguard of the Town, and served in
place of a Citadel. Our General immediately gave order to approach the said
Redoubt with our Galeasses, The Redoubt battered,
and break it with our Cannon; which was accordingly done. The whole day we lay
battering it on both sides, with a strenuous resolution, till toward night the
Soldiery within saw that they could not hold out any longer to defend
themselves, left the Fortlet, and retreated into the Town; which we perceiving
scaled the Walls and took away the Ordnance. The rest of the Ships and Galleys
drew up close to the Kay, and scaled.
where the Ordnance (from the Top of a Rock where they were placed, and in
which they repose their main Trust) could do us no mischief, for they ever shot
beyond us. When we had made a great Breach through the Wall, the General gave
Charge that the Soldiers, with the help of some of the Mariners should storm
the Town that night. Upon this mandate all the best and most resolute Seamen
jointly with the Soldiery, went ashore and entered the City, but the Governor
sensible, that the Redoubt was disabled, the Bridge broken down, Communication
hindered on the Land side, the whole Fleet before the Town on the Waterside,
our Men in the City, the Garrison scarce of Men, and summarily not in a
capacity to defend himself, at last puts out a white Flag, and so treated with
the General: but what the sum or purport of that Treaty was, we could not
learn, for the matter was held privy; and whether the General had betrayed his
Trust, in making of a disadvantageous Covenant for lucres sake, or some other
strange affair occurred at that time, I cannot resolve my Reader; certain I am
that a Truce was made between them, for we fired not a Gun after the Deputy
left the Ship. It seemed to us no small wonder, that so brave an Enterprise
should be abandoned at such a rate, without so much as repairing the loss, that
the Commonwealth suffered in this short Attacque, especially, that being one
of the most eminent and absolutely the most convenient Place for an Asylum, or
refuge, upon occasion: and not only commands all the maritim Towns of Canea,
but is likewise the only Magazine of the whole Land, through which all Wares
and Merchandises are transmitted, coming from Sea; and is in short the Key of
that Gulf. But this is a Chapter too hard for me to read, and the mysteries of
such Politicians are sometimes so abstruse, as every head cannot penetrate or
unriddle.

When we had removed the Siege of Napoli di Malvazia, Zantorini.
we set sail for Zantorini, which is a fertile Island, but subject to
Earthquakes and influence of Meteors. In the year of Grace 1507 happened a
dreadful Earthquake, which destroyed one Moiety of the Place, and subverted
all the Strand-countrey: and afterward in the year 1653 happened another,
which destroyed another Mediety, or half of what was left, at what time not
only Men and Beasts, but also whole Mountains and Villages were washed away
with the inundation of the Sea. There are at this day many of the Inhabitants
which are stricken blind with Lightning. It is bad coming to anchor about this
Island, by reason of the steepness near the Coast, having within a Pistol-shot
from the shore upwards of 70 or 80 fathom Water. Here is the Staple for
Cotton-stockings, which are fine and very well woven, and so cheap that you may
buy them at 6d a pair single. Wine is here likewise incredibly cheap and good,
being sold at half a Piece of eight the Bariglia, and all kinds of Provision
proportionably. Which is a measure containing about 6 quarts less than half a
Hogshead.
This moved our Commander to send me ashore to buy some Sheep and Wine, and
accordingly I went to a Village that was about two miles from the Fleet, where
I was no sooner arrived but I heard the Admiral fire a Gun, at which I was
mainly perplexed, for I knew by that, that the Fleet was ready to depart, and
ran as fast as ever I could toward the shore: but before I could come there,
they were under sail. When I saw that there was no hopes to get to the Fleet, I
turned back, but not without fear of being taken, knowing that this Island was
but 3 or 4 leagues from Scio, and that it was often visited by the Turks. After
I had been here 4 days and as many nights, came 2 Turkish Brigantines to
receive Contribution-money, which I understanding ran into the Woods to hide my
self, but it seems one Pick-thank or other had told them that a Venetian was
left ashore (perhaps to excuse them of their Quota) they began to make inquiry
after me; and would needs insist upon the Greeks to be responsible for me; they
told them that I had made my escape by night in a Barque; which nevertheless
would not pacify them till they had dawbed the Captain in the Fist, which
closed his Eyes and shut his Mouth effectually. So soon as the Brigantines were
out of sight, the Greeks fearing some trouble might ensue, brought me with a
Barque to Embro, where the Venetian Fleet lay, and gave me my Provision aboard
with me which I had bought for 32 Rix-dollars. Upon my arrival the Commander
gave them 2 Pieces of eight for their pains, and glad he was to receive me so,
and they no less joyful to be rid of me; for the Turks had already taken a
Civil Magistrate of the Greeks into custody, with his Son being but a child,
who might upon my being found there, after they had denied me, have had hard
mesure; and they nevertheless forced to deliver me up at last; which if they
had, the Admiral of the Venetians would have plundered the Town, and taken them
all for Slaves; so that these poor People are in a worse and a more pitiful
state under both, than they would be, if they were entirely under one.

While we lay before Embro, the Fleet was divided into two parts, and sent for
the respective Islands to get in the Contributions: the one part went for
Stampalia, or Astypalaea, which is one of the Cyclades, and from thence to
Nicsia, an Island about 7 Dutch leagues in length, Arrival at Nicsia.
and as many in breadth, for it is almost four Square: the North-side is
montanous, but toward the South flat and arable. On this Island are several
Relics of Gentilism and Idolatry; and amongst those a famous Temple, in times
past sacred to Apollo, now dedicate to S. Salvador. On the South we saw the
Ruins of another Temple, built also to the Honor of Apollo. The Inhabitants
are Greeks, Ruins of Apollo's Temple.
Jews and Turks, who are sedulous Planters and Cultivaters of the Vine, the
land answering their Industry with a fertile Soil. The City which is called
also by the name of Nicsia, lies on the East Side of the Island, having a very
fair and commodious Haven, presenting for all Winds, and fit to contain Ships
of the greatest burden. Here is found a kind of black stone which is held in
great esteem, not much unlike the vulgar Touchstone, called by the Italians,
Smeriglio.

In our Course through the Aegean Sea we touched at Parus, Lero, Arrival at
Metellino, or Mytilene
Embroa, Psyra, and visited Metellino, where I had been the year before, and
was transported thence to the Venetian Armada, in a Candian Tartan, making by
the way a good booty, as you will find more amply related in Page 76 and seqq.
but now I found better opportunity and leisure to take notice of the Island
than before. Metellino lies in 48 degr. near the main Continent of Greece, and
from the nearest point hardly 3 English leagues distant. The City which also
bears the same name, is situated on the North-west side of the Island,
fortified with a Castle that commands 2 Havens, and is called Moliva.

There are besides this several strong Holds and fortified Places throughout
the whole Island. The South-and North-sides are Champain Land; but the East and
West for the most part hilly and montanous, affoarding rich Quarries of white
and black Marble; and about the Center of the Land it is woody, and mostly
grown over with Cypres Trees. The arable part of the Land which is tilled, is
of a good Soil, and affoards plenty of Corn, of which they make two Sorts of
bread, the one they call Trachana and the other Bouchourt, either of which is
more durable than our Ship Biscake. They make an excellent sort of red Wine,
which the Turks, notwithstanding the voice of their Alchoran, greatly covet and
swallow when they can have it. The Pastures swarm with all kinds of Cattle both
great and small; in which, Good store of Cattle.
by reason of their very great abundance, they hold commerce with the Islands
of the Aegean Sea; but especially in a breed of small Horse they have, which
are in good esteem abroad.

After we had done our affairs at Mytilene we went for great Scio but being by
the way warned of some Fishermen, that the Turks had landed a great number of
Soldiery there, we sailed past the Island, and put in at S. Giorgio di Scyro
which is a small Island lying in 47 degr. 23 min. being almost of a triangular
form, Scyro.
where the Inhabitants follow the Vineyard. Delos.
Leaving Scyro, we sailed directly for Delos, which now for the most part goes
by the name of Sdilly and lies in the latitude of 47 degr. The Island is at
present of no great note: only that it is visited by the curious in
Antiquities. Here we found many Ruins of Temples, and Altars, sacred to
Heathenish Deities, and the Image of Apollo, which is in two pieces, whereof
(as the Greeks told us) the English sawed off the Head, and carried it away.
But so much as remains of it I have drawn, as may be seen in the Print. There
appear yet the Ruins of 3 Temples more, to wit, of Apollo, Minerva and Diana,
besides several pieces of Marble and Alabastre, in various figures of Animals,
as Lions, Leopards, and the like. Here are also many Quarries of a rich sort of
Marble, and various kinds of Alabastre. Provision may be had at very easy
rates, Hares and Coneys are for their plenty held in disesteem by the
Inhabitants. Agriculture is a thing quite out of use, but the greatest profit
it yields the Venetians is the convenience of the Haven, which serves them for
a Rendevouz.

The Castle of Tenos blown up with it is own Powder.
Between Delos and Andros lies the Island Tenos, where there is a Castle built
upon a high Hill, that seems of it self sufficient enough to defend the whole
Island. In the year 1656 was the greatest part of this Castle blown up with its
own Powder by Lightning, at what time, I was in the Fleet not far from Delos,
and saw it. I believe also that a great part of this Island is overflown with
the Inundation of the Sea, as Zantorini, or rather sunk: for when we came to
anchor at 26 fathom Water, we wrought all we could to weigh, but thought verily
that the Cable would break before any anchor would loose; at last it was
resolved to try once more for the last, and if it would not then come, to cut
the Cable, but at last the anchor came, bringing a great piece of a Wall with
it. In the Gentile age was a Bath at Tenos, JULY. 1668.
where every one of what rank or quality soever he was, must wash himself, or
otherwise, it was not lawful for him to enter the Temples of Apollo, Minerva,
or Diana. Tenos is of it self fruitful enough and would produce more grain
than indeed it does, if the Inhabitants were inclined to that Tillage, but they
find more profit in Silk, having large Woods of Mulbeery Trees, so that this
Island is the chief place for Silk Stockings in the Levant.

After we had staid a few days at Tenos, we set sail further up, Milo, it is
Situation
and by the way put in at Milo. Which lies in 37 degr. and 21 min. It is in
length about 7 Leagues, tending North and South. Amongst the many convenient
Havens it has, there is one on the Western coast, Havens.
where Ships may ride in the hardest weather that is, Villages,
without either Anchor or Horser. The Villages on this Island are very neat and
close built; and is also fortified with two strong Holds which command the Sea
on each side the Island. Strength.
The Inhabitants are some of the Greek church, but speak most Italian, And
Religion of the Inhabitants.
for that it is much frequented by the Venetians, and other Italians of whom
the Women of this Island (as they say) learn the Language between Sheets, which
their wanton deportment seems to verify Common fame gives Milo the bell for
able Seamen and Fishers, who for both those faculties do the Venetians no
small service. And here is the prime place for the Armada to Water at, where
they also generally provide themselves with Bread, Oil, Salt, Wine and Vinegar.
There is also much Honey found in this Island, but wild, in the Rocks and
Hollow-Trees.

Thus Traversing to and again, to and from the Islands, our Ship, The Princes,
grew very leaky, so that we were afraid, that if we should be taken in a
Tempest she would not hold out, which our Mate observing, willed the Commander
to acquaint the Admiral with her Condition, which he did; and thereupon we were
dismissed, and the Venetians aboard us received order to go aboard other Ships.
Having taken our leave of the Fleet with a Gun or 2, we speeded us for Venice,
where not without much difficulty we arrived. Here I took my leave of the
Ships-folk, and went into a Privateer called the St. John, which was first
intended for Legorn: but by the way understanding that our Captain, whose name
was Herman Been had 3 Commissions and went for a General Caper, I took my leave
of the Gentleman, JULY 1657.
so soon as we arrived at Leghorn; the more because he had already made a
beginning, and converted the Goods entrusted him by some Merchants into a Prize
and Booty, thought it therefore best to leave him betimes, lest I should be
brought with him to pay the shot. The Captain seeing that others, with me, were
resolved to leave the Friggat, and so consequently, he in danger of being
betrayed, and to be called to an account for his Villainy, begins to set sail,
but by an Order from the Duke, the Ship was arrested at the instance of Captain
W. van der Saar, and Capt. de Wild who then lay at anchor in that Haven. The
Ship was brought up and chained, the Ships-folk set free, and the Captain
himself committed to Custody, where for some time h^ remained: till afterward
coming for Holland was taken Prisoner; but what became of his Friggat I could
never come to hear. After I had been at Leghorn 2 or 3 days, I hired my self
aboard Mr, Peter Veldmuys; with whom, after many perilous adventures, I
returned home to my native Country.

THE THIRD VOYAGE of JOHN STRUYS.
CHAP. I. The Author undertakes his Third Voyage for Moscovia. The Names of the
Officers and others employed with him on that Journey and Voyage. Their
Difficulties in going out. Arrival at Riga, with a Description of the Town, and
their Departure from thence. The Nature of the Lifelanders their Houses,
Customs, Condition, Religion, and quaint form of an Oath. Arrival at Wolmar,
with a Description thereof. Their difficult Travels through Lifeland.
THus by Divine Preservation I arrived in my own Country, SEPT. 1668.
after the exposal of my Body to so many Jeopardies and Perils, and now began
to weigh the great Felicity of a settled life, and the many Dangers which
attend such a manner of Living as I had unadvisedly made choice of, to the
great discontent of my Friends and Alliance: I therefore purposed with a new
Resolution to follow my honest Vocation at home, and enjoy that Tranquillity of
Body and Mind, which I then preferred in my Thoughts beyond a restless and
disquiet Wandering abroad. Pursuant to this my Intention I married after I had
been about 6 Months at home, and so continued in that state, for the term of
10 years during which time I found but poor advancement in my Fortune, and mean
Products of so many years hard labor and toil; so that I resolved to take the
very first opportunity I met with to see what was reserved for me in the
Cabinet of Chance abroad. and,

In the year 1668, I came to understand that some Gentlemen were sent from the
Czar of Moscovy to Amsterdam, to take on men into the service of the Emperor,
for equipping some Ships in the Caspian Sea, and so to promote the Trade
between Moscovia and Persia, by Shipping of his own, which otherwise till then
was done by Persians, Tartars and other Nations, and that mostly by Land, from
whence arose many Difficulties by Robberies and the like. The Conditions upon
which they were taken on liked me very well, upon which I applied my self to
Mr. David Butler who was to be our Leader, and to conduct us to Moscovia. After
I had treated with him a little upon what Terms I did desire to go; we made an
Agreement for 75 gilders per Month, for which I was to serve as Sail-maker,
and to make up all the Sail-work for a new Ship and a Yacht, which was newly
built in Russia. The Foremast Men had 50 gilders per Month allowed them,
their Boardwages included, which was 15 gilders.

The Names of those that went, were
David Butler of Amsterdam, Captain. Lambert Helt, Master. William Klopper,
First-Mate and Carpenter. John Alberts, Second-Mate. Peter Bartelsz, Boatswain.
Cornelius de Vries, Gunner. Theodore Petersz, Carpenters Mate. William
Williamsz, Block-maker. Anthony Munster, Diamond-cutter. -- Schack, Surgeon.
Wiggert Poppes. Meyndert Meyndertsz. Cornelius Brack. Else Petersz. Jacob
Trappen. Jacob Tolk. Peter Arentsz, and John Fassely, Servant to Captain
Butter.
The Master together with the Carpenter, Carpenters Mate, Anthony Munster,
Jacob Trappen and Tolk had been the year before in Moscovia. Having furnished
our selves with Provision and things necessary for the Journey, we imbarqued
our selves in the Ship Abraham's Offerhande, which then lay at Amsterdam and was
bound for Riga, being 15 in company.

On the 2 of September 1668 we sailed through the Pampuys, and on the 3 toward
the Evening came before Enchuysen, where we put in and Shipped 50 Tun of
Herring.

On the 4 we set sail again and got the Texel, where we tarried 8 days for a
good Wind: and on the 13 the Wind blowing fair all the Ships outward bound
which were about 50 sail; began to weigh, and we respectivly to take our leave
of Wives and Family, for 5 years: but before we got clear of the Land, the Wind
turned, so that we were fain to traverse and wind all we could to get out, in
the mean time came a Ship belonging to Ter Schelling with a full drift against
us, and ran her Bow-spreet through our main Sail, which was with such force
that he rent our sail, and broke his Spreet-sail yard, insomuch that we were
both fain to put into Ter Schelling, to repair and fit our selves out again.

On the 20 being clear we set sail the second time, and had a fresh gale at
South and by West, which held favorably, so long till we arrived at Riga: but
when we entered the Baltic Sea, it blew so hard that our Mizzen sail was all
rent and unfit for use; whereupon the Master set me to work to repair the
defects.

On the 1st of October we got the Boldera, Arrival at Boldera.
which is the Haven or River of Riga, where we dropped Anchor. Immediately upon
our arrival came the Searchers to visit the Ship, and amongst other Goods found
a Parcel of contra-band Wares, and took it ashore with them, but the Master
told them that it was thrown in by chance, and prayed them to be so kind as to
leave it aboard, which, after he had daubed them a little in the fist, they did.
The next day being under sail, we were becalmed, and fain to cast anchor half
way up the River.

On the 3 ditto we came up to the Kay of Riga, where being arrived, Arrival at
Riga.
the Master refused to pay me the moneys, he agreed with me for, to make up his
sail, which was 10 Rix-dollars; but on the contrary, gave me very ill Language,
and told me if I had any pretense upon him the Law was open, and Judges
appointed for the decision of such controversies. This great ingratitude, made
me to take a course I never intended, which was to send him summons to appear
in the Town hall; where upon a second citation, he made his appearence, and was
condemned to pay the money, in presence of the Court.

Riga described
Riga is an eminent Emporium lying within the Prinsdom of Lithvania, and seated
in a Champain land, on the north-east side of the great River Duna. It is
fortified with Walls, Bulwarks, and Ditches or Motes, populous and full of
Trade, being as it were the Magazin to supply the whole Country above, with
all kinds of Wares and Commodities, and is also a great Thorow-fare. By Winter
they receive Goods over Land in Sledges and Wagons from Moscovia which is
transmitted abroad; It Is Commerce both by Sea and Land.
and by Summer from England, Germany, Holland, and other Places, by Shipping,
which are sent that way again with the Moscovian Wagons and Sledges. The
Country about Riga affoards good plenty of all kinds of Provision, as Kine,
Sheep, Goats, besides 3 sorts of Deer, the Sea and Rivers affoard good store of
Fish, and the Boors, besides their diligence in breeding up of Cattle, supply
other Countries with Corn, of all sorts, and Lactuaries: so that it is cheap
living at or near Riga. This City was formerly within the Jurisdiction of the
Kings of Poland; but was taken in by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, upon
the 16 of September 1621, after a long and hard Siege, and is at this day in
subjection to that Crown.

Departure from Riga.
On the 10 ditto, we left Riga, and with our complete Company and Baggage
employed 30 Wagons to bring us to Pletsko: and took up our first nights
Lodging at Niew-meulen, being a Village where all the Wagons and Horses are
set over a River with great Logs of Timber fastened together, Nieu-Meulen.
that float above the Water.

On the 11 we proceeded again on our Journey and broke two of our
Waggon-wheels, which the Waggoners repaired, and so we proceeded on our
Journey. At night we came into an Inn which was so meanly provided for Bedding
that we were fain to lay all night in the Wagons. The next day we traveled
through a great Wood, in the midst whereof was a broad Marsh, that cost us
some Hours to go over. When we were through the Wood, we passed through several
little Villages, the Inhabitants whereof were a miserable silly People, hardly
able to draw one leg after the other. The Women have only an old Rag, like a
Plad, thrown about their bodies, The Lifelanders their Properties, Habit and
Customs.
hardly sufficient to hide their nakedness, except a little below their ears, to
let the World know, they have hair as well as other People; so that they look
like so many Gypsies newly come from the famous Peak of Darby. As for their
Houses they are but one degree beneath a Hog-sty and those as full of Utensils,
as a Knave is full of Honesty. All that ever I could see was an earthen Pan or
two, and those so clean, that I had rather fast a week than eat any thing, that
has come out of them. Great plenty of Cattle they have, and such as have three
times as many feet as they themselves. As for Beds they have none but such as
their Oxen ly upon, for when they have stuffed their Gutts, they ly down upon
the floor one after another, as the Nap takes them. Their Diet is suitable to
all things else they have, for although they might have Venison for knocking on
the Head, the Creature may live till Doomsday before they will take the pains
to lift a hand to kill it, unless it be a louse, which sometimes they crush to
death for change of Diet. As for their Bread it is not much unlike our
New Castle Coal for color, but how it is of Taste I know no more than the Man
in the Moon, for neither my Appetite nor Curiosity could move me to it, Cabbage
they have in great abundance, which is of a Taste like Sorrel, but close and
white like ours, That and Cucumbers are the main ingredients whereof these
People seem to be compounded, but more especially the latter, for Cucumber
attends them from the Womb to the Tomb, being held in perpetual Slavery by
their Lords. They are conformable to no Laws, unless what they are forced to
observe by a strict aw, which their Lords impose upon them, and enjoin them to.
They are by nature obtuse and dull, inclined to Necromancy and Sorcery, but in
the performance of an Exorcism, so palpably ridiculous, that I wonder how they
have obtained that repute they have in the World among those, who ought to be
wiser than to believe such groundless Fictions. They have no manner of Schools
wherein to educate their Children, that ever I could see or hear of: neither
Churches or other Houses for Religious use; so that they are brought up in the
greatest Blindness and obscurity that may be. Some of them, it is true, will
needs be called Christians, but those are they that have traveled as far as
Riga, which they think is the Head of the World, yet are those so stupid,
OCTOBER. 1668.
as a Lifeland Gentleman told me, that they have learned Catechism enough, if
they can but know the Church from a Dwelling house, or to pull of their Caps
when they see a man with a shoulder knot pass by. Yet they are flexible enough
to Idolatry by Nature, and withal superstitious. In our going through the
Woods we saw a great Troop of them busy about Conjuring of a Tree, which they
had tied with a Garland of twigs, creeping round about it and making a great
Howling; but so soon as they saw us, took them to their Heels and away. By the
Forms and Tenures of the Curses and Conjuration they seem to be sensible of a
Future state and sometimes (by I know not what Tokens) presage Death; and the
Soul of any that has been a disturber of the Public Quiet they deliver up to
the Devil. They have a formal Oath, that they take upon diverse Occasions which
is thus, The Party cuts up a Turf or Sod of Earth, this he sets upon his Head
and takes his stick into his Hand, Wishing if such, or such a Matter, be not
so, and so, that They with their Cattle may be consumed with Fire. They have
besides this, other superstitious Customs, to which they are so strongly
inclined by nature that they will not be better civilized, or if they happen to
show themselves willing, and learn a little Urbanity it must be only for lucres
sake, and they promised something to boot to remember it, which if you forget
to perform, they will forget to observe your Document. In short they are but
one remove from Bruits, and so ignorant, that the most part of them thinks
there is no other Land in the World besides their own.

Two days long we went through the Woods and found it so soft and Marshy that
we could hardly bring our Wagons through in safety.

Arrival at Wolmar.
On the 14 we arrived at VVolmar where we met many Horses, Wagons, and Boors
going to market with Corn and other Things. One of our Company growing weary of
his Journey thought to go away in this Throng, but the Captain being informed
of his Design, watched him so narrowly, that he could not meet with an
Opportunity to march off.

VVolmar, is a little, but a well-fortified Town, munited with a stone-Wall and
a deep Ditch, but without Water. The Market in regard of the Poverty of the
Country is very considerable, and is held twice a week. This City as appears
yet by the Ruins of it, has been formerly much greater than it is at this day,
but with all the Country round about has been often depopulated by the Polish
and Russian Armies. It is about 18 leagues from Riga.

On the 15 by break of Day, we set forward on our Journey, passing through a
Champaign Country, and many small Towns and Hamlets. By the way we observed
that the Boors had burned up great Woods, and converted them into Pasturage and
arable Ground. Afterward we went through a large Wilderness, where we could
not see the Sun, by reason of the density of the Trees, yet the way was full of
Mires, and plashy. About 7 in the Evening we came to our stage, where we were
to stay over night. The next morning we broke our fast, yoked the Horses, and
set forward; passing over a huge River which had only a Bridge there where we
were to pass over, and no where else within 20 leagues above or below: but the
Bridge being old and seemingly rotten, we durst not go over all together, but
one by one. When we were got over, Evening came on, and the Sky began to grow
gloomy, after which followed a very great Tempest that the River swelled over
the Banks and overflowed all the flat Lands, which we seeing so suddenly
happen, left the common Road; for that our Land Pilot told us, that the High
way was subject to such Floods with an extraordinary Inundation. After two
Hours Storming, the Weather began to clear and the Pilot assured us we were not
far from the Town where we were to take our nights rest, and so it happened,
for just as he was speaking of it we saw Light, through the Trees, which
mightily revived us for we were extreme cold and weary. The next morning we set
forward for Pitsiora, and had very good Weather, but came short of the Town
that night, insomuch that we were fain to ly all night in the Woods, where we
gathered all the Windfalls we could find and laid them on a heap, and with dry
Sticks made a huge Fire, which served not only to warm our selves at, but
likewise to affright the Bears and Wolves away, which are very bold and cruel
in these Parts, as also the Muskettos, which swarm here by Millions, and annoy
both Man and Beast, after an incredible rate.

CHAP. II. Arrival at Pitsiora, and at Pletskow, A strange Passage of a hungry
Bear. The spindle-bone or shank of a Giant. The Pleasant Prospects and
delightsome Landships of Moscovia. Arrival at Novogorod. The Antiquity and
former Glory of that City; how taken by the Moscovian, and Fortified by the
Swede. Their Departure from Novogorod, Rescounter with a Company of Robbers,
and Arrival at Colomna. Great abundance of Wolves. Coldness of the Climat.
OCTOBER. 1668.
ON the 30th. of October 1678 we arrived at Pitsiora, which lies on the Confines
of Russia, and under the Protection of that Emperor. It is seated in a fair
and pleasant Country, affoarding all things necessary to the sustenance of
human Bodies. It Is true Pitsiora is no more than a Village, yet for wealthy
Inhabitants, Commerce abroad and Advancement of Manufacture, surpasses any City
in all that part of the Country. In passing through the Town we saw many rich
Mercers and Drapers Shops; the Markets stored with all sorts of Provision, as
Corn, Butter, Cheese and Fruits, with a very noble Butchery or Flesh-shambles,
and the streets crouding with People from all Parts. So soon as we were
arrived, there came several Jewelers, who asked if we had any Pearls, or other
Jewels to sell or barter.

Having refreshed ourselves at Pitsiora; we left the Town the next day about 10
in the Morning, and about noon entered a large Wood where we found great store
of Hurtles or Bilberies, that were far greater and better tasted then any I
have known else where; which moved me to fall a plucking of them; but going a
little way into the Wood, and making a rushing through the Thickets, up starts a
huge Bear, which so affrighted me that I had hardly power to run from him;
however it seemed that he was as fearful of me as I of him, for when I ran
East he ran West, and glad I was to see his Bear-ship turn tails with me. This
was the only Bear that ever I had seen in Lifeland, or all the way from Riga
hither, but the Boors often warned us to take care of our selves, saying that,
sometimes both Men and Cattle are devoured with those cruel and ravenous Beasts.

On that Evening we arrived at Pletskou where we had Lodgings and all
necessaries provided us; and on the 22 paid our Waggoners who returned for Riga.

Pletskou, is a large City, OCTOBER. 1678.
a great part thereof is surrounded with a wall, the rest with huge Balks like
Pallizados, and computed about 8 [ English] miles in compass. Their Houses are
made slightly of Trees and pieces of Timber, let in with joints, without any
Gentility or ornament. The Town it self gives a noble Prospect if you view it
from without, by reason of the many Parish-Churches and Towers it has, but when
you come within, it appears very ugly, the streets are irregular without
Uniformity, and the Houses built after multifarious manners, so that the
poorest Village, in the Low Countries, is a Paradise in comparison of Pletskou.
It Is true they have some Houses of stone, but the most eminent and wealthy
Citizens choose rather to live in Wooden-Houses than in those, for that they
say, The latter are more wholesome. Here I happened to meet with a Hamburger, and
after we had exchanged a few words together, concerning our journey from Riga,
I told him of my rouzing the Bear. He replied that I was happy to make my
escape so, since not only men are sometimes devoured by them, but also Horses
and Kine, and withal told me, how that they dig up the Graves for the Bodies of
the Dead, when they are hungry. But more lamentable was a story he told me, of
a She-Bear, that in the year 1656. broke by night into a House in the Country
not far from thence, where she had found the Woman of the house with a sucking,
Infant in the bed with her. The woman she devoured, leaving only a part of her
left leg and a little of the Scalp, but the Infant was altogether mist, whence
it was concluded that the Bear had eaten it up, as being young and consequently
more delicate. Not long after this dismal hap, the Peasant took his Musket
with him into the Woods not far from his House, with intent to shoot an Otter
which haunted his Fish Pond, and by the way espies a Bear, at which he levels
his Musket, and hits him directly on the skull. The Bear (as the custom is
when shot) rolls himself in a heap, the Peasant runs to her and finding it a
Female, and her Duggs full of Milk, resolves the next day to make search for
her Seat, for then he thought that her VVhelps would be hungry and yell out.
The day following he went out to seek the Cave, taking 2 or 3 other Peasants
with him, who being about the Middle of the VVood, on the side of a hill, heard
a young child cry, and following the direction of the sound, found his own
Infant in the cleft of a great Rock, which he took and brought to Pletskou, to
be nursed up by his Wives Sister, where out of curiosity I went to see it.

In the Suburbs of Pletskou, was to be seen a shank-bone of a Giant, 5 foot
long, OCTOBER. 1668.
which together with the whole Skeleton, was found in a Tomb of stone, by the
Boors, when they were digging up the roots of Trees that they had burned up.

On the 26th it began to freeze hard, and afterward to snow, which made us
uneasy for our delay, being constrained to wait here so long, till we received
the Poddowodda, which is an Order given by his Imperial Majesty, that every
Town we came at should furnish us with Horses, Wagons, Bedding, and defray our
other Charges. On the 28 toward night came an Express from Moscou, and the
next day we set forward, intending first for Novogorod. This part of our
Journey was much more easy and delightful than that through Lifeland, which
was altogether desert and Marshy, this on the contrary, inhabited and tilled.

On the 31th we came at a great Lake before Novogorod, where we left the
Sledges and were fetched over in a kind of a Cymb, or Boat which is made of a
hollow tree, and by them called Knoos; of these they had two sorts, the one for
Passengers, who may sit 4 or 5 at a time, the other broader, and every way
larger, fit to transport Goods. This Lake is very broad but shallow, not having
above 5 foot Water in most places. When we were set over, our Goods were put
into Sledges, and brought after us into the Town.

In passing through the Town we found the Suburbs far greater than the City it
self, which as appears by the Ruins of the Walls, has been formerly a well
fortified Place. In times past it was neither subject to the Russian, Swede,
nor Polander, but had a Prince, who coined Money and ruled as absolute
Sovereign, with an independent and arbitrary Power; Yea, to so high a state was
it once advanced, that it was grown to a Proverb, GOD and Novogorod, who is
able to withstand. Their Puissance I need not dispute, since it is well known
to those that are acquainted with Geography what Sway the Princes of Novogorod
have born, and what a name this City has had abroad for her Wealthy Merchants
and great commerce with other Places. About the year 1477 it was besieged and
stormed by Ivan Vasilowitz, Great Duke of Moscovia, who took away all the
Privileges and Immunities of the Citizens: since which time their Wealth and
Traffic began to decline and decay. However by reason of it is commodious
Situation, it retains the footsteps of its former Trade, and is especially
frequented by Swedes, Danes, Hamburgers and Lubeckers, who come up the River
Nerva, with their small Shipping. The chief Commodities they deal in, are
Wheat, Ry, Lin-and Rapeseed, Furrs, Hemp and Flax. The Country is blessed with
a good Soil, and produces sufficiently enough of what is requisite to human
sustenance, which is here very cheap. This is reckoned the best place in all
Moscovia for River-fish, especially Pikes and Perch, Salmon they have in great
abundance, as also Carp, Bream, and Sturgeon, with other kinds not commonly
found in the Low Countries.

Novogorod (which is as much as to say, New-town, or Newton, being compounded
of the Latin word Novus, and the substantive Gorod, in the Moscovian Tongue, a
City) is at this present strengthened only with a Wall of Timber, but well
provided with Ammunition, and Brass Ordnance. On the one side is a strong
Castle with a high stone-wall, which as then was the Residing place of the
Primate or Archbishop of the West-Province, and some other Temporal Lords. The
greatest Decorum and Ornament of this City is the Pomp and stateliness of the
Churches and some Public Edifices, as at Pletskou, but the Houses and Private
Dwellings of the Inhabitants without any Order or neatness of Structure.
Between the Castle and the Town is a long wooden Bridge where the beforenamcd
Ivan Basilowitz, a great Tyrant, threw in some Thousands of the Inhabitants.
When you enter the Town, by that way you come within view of a famous Cloister,
dedicate to Saint Anthony: which Saint they believe and will persuade you came
driving on from Rome, out at the Tyber, through the Aegean Sea, the Propontis,
the Negropont, the Which is a Lake and has no communion with any other Sea.
Mare Caspium, and so up the Wolga to Novogorod upon a Millstone: where he met
with a company of Fishers, with whom he covenanted for a certain some of Money,
that the first thing they took should be his. The Fishers drew their Net, and
brought up a Chest, which was full of Money, besides a Ghostly Attire, and some
Books, With the money he built there a Chapel where he lies interred, and (as
they tell us) his Body is yet to be seen, fresh and undecay'd, by which many
miracles have been done, but none can see him, or them, but such as are of
their own Faith. And so much of a floating Mil-stone.

In the year 1611 this City was besieged and taken in by I. de la Gardie,
Novogorod taken in by the Swede.
the Swedish General, and in the year 1613 redelivered to the Czar of Moscovy
upon Articles of Peace.

NOV. 1668.
Upon the 8 of November we left Novogorod, having had time enough to view every
Remarkable that was worthy of sight, Departure from Novogorod.
and about 2 a clock in the afternoon arrived at a village called Bruynitz
where we stayed, and took up our Lodging for that night. The next Morning we
took fresh Horses, but the snow was so melted with the Sun that we were fain to
take Wagons, and leave the Sledges: but the way was so miry, that we had much
ado to get the Horses through, for the Earth there is of a tough clay. About 8
in the Evening we came to Miedna, which is a poor Village, and could hardly
affoard us Hous-room for that night.

On the 10th. we had bad travailing way, being for the most part marshy and
full of Boggs, with Planks and trees laid over to make them passable, which
totered and shaked so that our Wagons were often out of order, but were as
often mended by the Pesants who by continual use are very expert at it. By the
way we saw abundance of Squirrels and Foxes which run together in Troops, yet
so shy that we could not come within musket shot of them. That night we got
Gankrezza, a handsome little Village, where we refreshed and supplied our selves
with necessaries for our Journey.

Rescounter with a company of Robbers.
The next day being the 11th of November. we set forward on our Journey, and
traveling through the Woods, we were surprised with a Party of Highway men, well
mounted and masked, who demanded, what we were? We replied, that we were Dutch
and servants to the Emperor. They hearing that, were in a doubt whether they
should plunder us, or not; but at last rode off and bad us adieu. It was our
opinion that they were afraid that our Company was stronger, and that the rest
followed us, for they were better armed and mounted than we, besides the
Wagons we had to take care of, or otherwise in all probability they would not
have neglected such a fair booty, that being, as we were told by the Waggoners,
one of the most dangerous places in all the Country. That night we took our
rest at Iazel-Bitza, being very bad and snowy weather.

On the 12 ditto, we took in fresh Horses, and put our Baggage and Movables
into Sledges because of the snow, passing through thick Woods, and a vast
Wilderness, before we came at Gamzymnagoru where we were to take up our Lodging.

On the thirteenth we changed Horses and set forward on our Journey, passing
first through a thick Wood, and afterward, came into champian Land, which was
dry, level, and tilled as far as we could see. By the way we saw many small
Villages, but at night came into Colomna, which was the fairest and best
Village I had hitherto seen in Moscovia: the Inhabitants are reputed wealthy,
and live in very good fashion. We came pretty early to our Stage, having had
very good way, and reasonable fair weather, so that we had time enough to take
a view of the Town, Our Pristaf, or Guide, who spoke good Nether Dutch went with
us to show what was worthy of remark, and very courteously resolved us in any
thing we desired to be satisfied about.

On the 14th we went through a great Wood where we saw abundance of Wolves
playing together, which, when we would have taken aim to shoot with our Long
Guns, they ran inward and took the Wood. Our Pristaf told me that they knew us
to have Firelocks about us, that being the only safeguard to travel with,
without which they will not fear to assail Horse and Man, and sometime lay
sculking in the way side, where of a sudden they run out and prey upon
Passengers. Toward the Evening it began to freez hard, that we were fain to
step out of the Hurdles, and walk afoot.

On the 16th we got VVaizna, and from thence departed for Gam-VVoldoka, where
we tarried 4 days to rest our selves. In the mean while it froze very hard, and
I with another of our Company went out to ride upon Scates, upon which an
infinite number of Men, Women and Children, yea the Priests themselves, came
running out to see us.

CHAP. III. A Quarrel with the Russians, Eight Dutch Merchants murdered in a
Wood. Arrival at Tweer, Another Rescountre with a Party of Robbers. Money sent
from Moskow. Pursuit of their Journey. They enter Moscou. Their good Reception.
The great Bear-Garden. Wolf and Bear-baiting. Death of the Empress, and the
pompous Exequies.
ON the 22th after we had sufficiently taken breath, we set forth, having fresh
Horses provided us, and so entered a great Wood, where we saw great swarms of
Squirrels fly from Tree to Tree; SEPT. 1668.
as also abundance of Pheasants and Partridges, which the Peasants take and
sell for a mean price. About the Evening we came to VVuidra Pusk, where we
remained that night, but could not get any Lodging fit to entertain us either
for Hous-room or Victuals, this being yet a poorer Village than that of Miedna.
At this place happened a Quarrel between one of our Company and a Russ, the
first having taken the others Ax, for that the Russ had stole some Tobacco from
him: which being made known to the Company, they struck and misused the poor
Russ, after an unsufferable manner, which Capt. Butler resented very ill, not
willing to give the Russians any disgust. But above all the people in the World
there are none that covet Tobacco so much as they do, and will be sure to steal
it, if they cannot otherwise come by it, although they were sure to loose their
Heads for it.

On the 23 by break of Day, we set out and entered another thick Wood. Here they
showd us some Graves where they told us, 8 Dutch Merchants were buried, who had
been murdered by Robbers. When we were got through the Wood we went over a fair
Pasture-ground, and saw diverse Boors Houses by the Way-side. In the Evening we
arrived at Torstock, which we found to be but a small, yet well built City,
although it appeared greater, from the Number of Towers which we saw, when at a
distance, having above 30 Churches and Chapels within the Walls. Here we
unloaded our Sledges and left them, putting our Goods aboard some small
Shipping that was provided for us, and sailed down the River to Troetzka Miedna
where we took in some necessary Provisions. That night pretty late we came to
Tweer which is Seated upon the River VVolga, which River with many windings and
turnings runs to seek the Caspian Sea, into which its disgorges its self. Tweer
is something greater than Torstock and is built on the side of a Hill from
whence it has it is name. Here is also the Place where the River of Torstock
incorporates with the Wolga making a great and loud noise where the Floods are
hurried in together. This City like Torstock makes a greater Show abroad than
it does within; being neither well built nor at all fortified, save only with a
Wall of Wood and 2 or 3 Brass Cannon on the Land side. Here we took out our
Baggage and laid it again upon Sledges, taking our way through the Woods where
we were assailed by two Russians a foot, but upon what account I know not.
DECEMBER 1668.
First they began to make a quarrel, and so boldly offered to strike with their
Axes, saying, that they were upon their own Ground, and that we were a parcel
of Rogues and Vagabonds etc. To which some of our Company who could speak the
Language, prayed them not to molest us, as they tendered their Welfare, and that
we had no time to stand disputing, and answering their impertinent Objections.
This not availing, or persuading them to be quiet, but rather made them worse,
for they came closer and closer to us: which Capt. Butler observing fell a
caning them, whereupon they retired a little, as if they would go away, but all
on a sudden came running in upon us full drive with their Axes, upon which
three of our Company levelled their Muskets, but the Captain forbad to fire,
and let the Mastive loose upon them. The Mastive flies directly at one of them,
and had him so fast by the Throat, that we had much ado to get him off: the
other seeing his Mate so hard put to it, ran away as fast as he could, but the
Dog being loose flew after him, and tore off his left ear; and had we not done
our endeavor to take him off, had rent him all to pieces. So soon as we had
got rid of them we proceeded on our way, and at night came to Gorodna, where we
staid till morning.

On the 24 ditto we went forward, passing over 2 Rivers, where we came to a
Village called Sawidowa, Saulka Spaz.
and at night came to Saulka Spaz which was our Stage. Here we provided our
selves again with fresh Horses, but not without much difficulty, for in the
mean time we were very uncivilly treated by the Inhabitants, whom we found
mightily inclined to quarrel with us, although without occasion.

On the 25 we took our leaves of Saulka Spaz going over a large plain, and at
night came to a village called Klien, Klien.
where for want of Moneys we were forced to stay, till we had an Express from
Moscou which came not before the 4 of December following, at which time came
also one of the Domestics of the Here van Sweden, Kinsman to Captain Butler
bringing the unwelcom news of his Masters Sickness whom the Physicians judged
to be past recovery. The Captain upon the opening of the Letter was sadly
dejected, and immediately took Horse and rode post for Moscou, leaving us Order
the next day to follow with the Baggage. In the mean time it began to snow
hard, insomuch that we were forced to tarry 6 days at Klien. On the 11 we set
forward having fair Weather, which at our setting out seemed to be durable. On
this days Journey we met with, Rivers which we were to pass over that hindered
us not a little; by reason that the Floats were so little, not able to carry
above 3 or 4 Horses at a time with Sledges and Wagons, At night we arrived at
Serkisowo, where we took up our Night-lodging. In the mean time it froze so
hard, that we were all benumbed, and fain to run after the Wagons to keep our
selves Warm.

On the eleventh ditto, we went through several thick Woods of Juniper, where
we saw abundance of Foxes playing together in the Sun. About 3 in the afternoon
we arrived at Nicholo Direverno, from whence we could see the long-wish'd-for
Moscou. About Evening we entered the Suburbs, where by one of our own Nation we
understood that the Here van Sweden was deceased, and that the Ship was fit for
Lanching.

On the 12th. we had order to come into the City, and had Appartments provided
us near the House of the Here van Sweden. Our Landlady had so little
satisfaction in the Guests that were appointed to have quarters with her, that
she addressed herself to Court, to desire that we might be brought some where
else, but instead of obtaining her Request, was sent home with a hundred
strokes on the Ribs for her pains. When she came in, she ran into a back-room,
where was the Image of St. Nicholas painted upon a Plank, and falling down
prostrate before it, shed a shower of Tears. However she was forced to content
her self for 14 days longer, during which time we made good cheer, and spared
not for Fuel in the Stoves. And albeit the Woman was so dissatisfied at our
being there, yet her Husband could have wished us there the whole year round,
for our Brandy and Tobacco sake.

On the 27 we had order to go into the House of the late deceased Gentleman,
even now remembered, which was a very commodious House and provided with a great
Or Cackel.
Stove, which was by reason of the bitter Weather, very welcome to us; the more
because the said House was well furnished with Wood, and other fuel for the
Winter. We stayed here three weeks, during which time there was care taken for
what we had need of; when that time was expired we received sudden Orders,
forthwith to depart for our wharf at Astrachan.

On the 19 of January we brought our Baggage aboard a small Ship, JAN. 1669.
that lay about 3 Miles without Moscou. At this Place was the Court of the
Emperors Sister, being a fair Palace, but of Wood, built after a quaint and
artificial manner. Here was also the Emperors Bear-Garden, being accidentally
when we were there a great Concourse of Gentry, from Moscou, and other places
to see the Pastime, and the Evening before, came the Emperor with the whole
Court and Retinue. The Theater was only environed with Stakes and Pales, that
the People might also see, that were without. Before they began were brought
out about 200 Wolves and Bears, and almost twice the number of Dogs; all which
were drawn in their Kennels set upon Sledges. The Emperor, and the prime of
his Nobles sat in a Gallery made on purpose in a very convenient place, to see
on every side. So soon as the Emperor was set, a sign was given, upon which a
little Wolf and an old Bear were turned out loose together, that after they had
encountered about half a quarter of an Hour, were parted, which notwithstanding
their being in the heat of the Fight, were easily brought asunder and led to
their Kennel. The Wolves were afterward engaged with Dogs of which many lay
dead upon the place, and others so wounded that they were no more fit for use.

On the 23 of February, one of our company married with a Tartarian maid, who
had been taken Captive when she was a Child and brought up in the Christian
Religion, by the Here van Sweden, who taught her to write and speak
Netherdutch, both which she did expertly well. And a day or two after was
another of our Company married with a Lubekker, both these two went with their
Husbands to Astrachan.

On the 13 of March died the Empress in Childbed who by reason of her great
Charity, Piety, and the best of Virtues, Death of the Empress.
was much lamented by the Common People, who oftentimes in distress were
accustomed to address themselves to her, as a Mediatrix. The next day she was
interred with great Pomp and magnificency, for it is not their Custom as in
other Countries to embalm the Corpse, or to let it lie in State. On each side
the way stood the Guards, The Funeral.
but none followed or went before; except some of the chief Personages about
Court who walked a soft pace. The Hearse was cowered with a rich Canopy of cloth
of Gold, having Tassels and Fringe suitable, born up by 8 young Lords. After
the Hearse followd a Train of Noblemen, led by the first Ministers of State who
bore a Bag of money which the said Empress on her Deathbed had bequeathed to
the Poor. MAR. 1669.
These followed next to the Emperor and his two Sons; who were apparreled in a
Garment, lined with Black Fox skins, which is a Fur of very high esteem. The
Emperor and his two Sons were supported each by two Gentlemen. There were also
the several Ministers of Foreign Courts present, who were attired after the
manner of their own Country, these went on each side the Hearse at a distance,
and after all followed an innumerable Train of Citizens and Foreign Merchants,
but those without any Order. On this manner the Corpse was brought into a
Cloister which she her self had founded, and there committed to the Earth.

CHAP. IV. Situation of Moscou. It Is Divisions and Wards. Kitay-Gorod the first
City. The great number of Churches and Cloisters. High Towers. Noted Humility
and Obedience of a Russian Gentleman. The greatest Bell in the World at Moscou.
The Church of Jerusalem, Zaar-gorod the second, Skorodom the third, and
Strelitza Slowoda the fourth Town. Great number of Houses within the City
Moscou. A great Fire, whereby many Houses were consumed. The coldness of the
Climate. Diseases proper to the Country. Fertility and Products of the Land.
BEing constrained to tarry some time at Moscou against our will, it gave me
opportunity to take a view of the Town, and to make what observations I could
during the time of my abode there, which I shall according to my best knowledge
impart to the Reader.

Moscou it is Situation and state
Moscou is the Metropolitan, or Capital City of Moscovia and the Imperial City
of Russia, and all that is within the Jurisdiction of the Emperor, whose
Empire is bounded on the North with the white Sea, on the East severed from the
Samoieds, and other Tartarian Countries, on the South it has the Mare Caspium,
and on the West, part of Poland, Lifeland, and Sweden. So that the large and
wide Dominions of the Czar, are extended as well into the Asian as the European
Continent.

The City of Moscou (which seems to have it is name from the noble River
Moscqua) lies in 50 degr. 37 min. Northerly Latitude. It is a very large City,
and computed to be about 30 or 35 English miles in compass, yet was almost
twice as great, before it was taken in and depopulated by the Tartars. It gives
a very fair prospect from without by reason of it is many Towers and high
Buildings. This City is divided into 4 wikes or Wards, to wit, Kitay-gorod, or
middle City, Zaar-or Czar-gorod, the Emperors City, Skorodom and Strelitza
Slowoda. These several Divisions seem rather so many distinct Towns or Cities
whereof Perhaps from Cathaia.
Kitay-gorod stands in the midst, and is environed with a high wall, which
they call Crasna Stenna, that is, Red Wall. It is feated between 2 Rivers, to
wit Moscqua on the South, and the Neglina on the North, which are united behind
the Palace. The Palace together with its Appendences, to wit, the Wall,
Hornworks, Crescents and other Fortifications is the larger part of the
Kitay-gorod, called also Crim-gorod; being well provided with Men and
Ammunition. In the midst of this Palace is a very stately Church, in which we
saw a Silver branched Candlestick, formerly presented to the Czar by the
Ambassador of our States. Besides this Church is another dedicated to the
Archangel, where are to be seen the Tombs of those of Imperial blood, as also
Triotzis Maria and that of St. Nicholas which are both very sumptuous. Those
which are in Kitay-gorod without the Palace are also reputed the best and
fairest in all Moscou, being reckoned 56. Besides the Churches which are within
the Walls of the Palace are 2 very beautiful Cloisters, the one for Young
Gentlemen, and the other for Ladies, who have resolved to live a monastichal
Life; although the former may rather go under the denomination of an Ilustrious
School, because it is appointed for the Education of the Young nobility in all
kinds of Literature and good Manners, who at 16 Years have a choice preferred
them, whether they will lead a Ghostly or a Secular Life: but that for the
Ladies, dispences not with such a Freedom, but all that are admitted must
continue durante vita. In the middle of this Palace, or rather Fort, is a high
Tower, which the Russians call Ivan Velike, that is Great John being covered
with Copper and double guilt. This is that Tower, This Story has been recorded
of another Potentate, but it is no great matter.
on whose Top the Emperor Boris Gudenow (as is to be seen in their Chronicles)
brought a Persian Ambassador to view the City Moscou, and amongst other
discourse began to speak of the great Loyalty and Obedience of some subjects to
their Sovereigns in past ages: Whence the Emperor took occasion to say) So
faithful are my subjects from the highest Bojar, to the meanest Vassal, that
there is not one of them who would refuse to throw himself praecipitantly from
the Top of this Tower, if I thought good to command: and thereupon calls a
Bojar, or Lord, whom he instantly commanded to throw himself headlong down,
which after he had taken his Leave of his Imperial Majesty and those that were
with him, jumped off from the highest pinnacle, where he was taken up dead,
buried with greated Solemnity, and his Children promoted to the greatest Places
of Trust, in which they and their Descent continue till this day.

The great Bell
Besides this there is yet another Tower and one of the widest that ever I have
seen in my life, in which is the greatest Bell without doubt in the World,
weighing 394000 lb. and the Clapper 10000 lb. I measured it and found it 23
foot Diameter, and 2 foot solid metal. It is as much as 50 strong men can
move, and that only so as may just be perceived. It is seldom rung, and that
only upon Festival days, or when any Foreign Prince or Minister of State
desires it. When they intend to do it at any extraordinary time, they make
proclamation through the Town, by which warning the Citizens take down all the
Glasses and Earthen Ware, for it makes all tremble and shake.

There are besides the Imperial Court several other spacious Palaces for the
Bojars, or Nobility, as also for the Spiritual Lords, amongst which that of the
Patriarch is the most magnificent. Without Kitay-gorod, directly before the
Palace of the Czar, is one of the fairest Churches (I must neds say) that I
have seen in all my Travels, Jerusalem Church.
which is built after the model of the Temple of Jerusalem, from whence it has
that Name. Near unto this church is the great Market having Shops of all Wares
and Merchandises that may be imagined, but every Shopkeeper has his own Row or
Street, so that people of one Dealing have all their Shops together, and by
themselves. In this part of the City dwell likewise the ablest Merchants [
Kneesen] and other Persons of note, who dwell in stone houses to preserve their
Goods, if a Fire should happen.

Zaar-gorod which is the second part of Moscou encompasseth Kitay-gorod almost
in the form of a Crescent, which is also environed with a huge Wall, which they
call Biela Stenna, that is, The white Wall. Zaar-gorod is divided into two
parts by the River Neglina, which runs through the midst of it. Here is also a
famous Founding-House for casting great Bells and Ordnance, as also the
Emperors stable. Near the River is a Beast-market, and a famous Butchery or
Flesh-shambles, where you find not only Beef, Veal, Mutton, Pork, Lamb,
Venison, etc. but also Horseflesh to sell. Corn, Meal, Butter, Cheese and
other Provision is here good, cheap, and very plentiful.

The Third City which is Skorodom, embraces Czar-gorod on the East, North and
West-sides likewise in the form of a Crescent. In this City, or Ward, is the
House-market, where at a low price you may buy a House, of what greatness you
please. These Houses are made of Square pieces of Timber notch'd and let into
each other, which when you have bought you can disjoint and bring it where you
list upon Sledges, that amongst many inconveniences has this one Convenience,
that if a Citizen has his House burned he may be every day supplied with a new,
which (considering the old is brought to Ashes) may without much cost, be
placed where the other stood; whereas on the contrary, we are often forced to
stay sometimes a year or more before the Rubbish be taken away and a convenient
House built in lieu of the old. Besides that convenience, they have another,
which is, that at what time any House happens to take fire, and any probable
danger of breaking out, the Neighbors upon timely notice have their Houses
taken in pieces and removed as if they were but Tents.

The fourth and last Wike is Strelitza Slowoda, Strelitza Slowoda
which reaches out toward the South, over the River Moscqua, and toward the
Tartarian Country. Here is the placc where the Soldatesque are inquarter'd,
which they call Strelitzen, from whence this Part of Moscou has it is name. It
is very well fortified with Bulwarks, and other Fortifications.

The number of the Houses within the four Divisions and the Suburbs, according
to their computation are said to be about 95000, the Palace and all its
appendencies excluded. The Churches, and Cloisters, wherein they preach are
1700. Amongst this great number of Dwelling-houses you find few or none, but
what are altogether of Wood, except some Merchants Houses in Kitay-gorod, who
as we have already said, build mostly of Stone for the better security of their
Goods. They use no Chimneys as we do for fires, but great Cackels, or rather
Ovens; made altogether of stone, which sometimes being over heated, or by the
negligence of the People, who are great affecters of Brandy, is the occasion of
setting their Houses on fire, as it happened about 6 Weeks before our arrival
there, at what time, by the negligence of a poor Woman, happened a most
dreadful Conflagration, A great Fire in Moscou.
that reduced about 35 Thousand Houses to ashes, and that in the best part of
the City, which besides an incredible loss of House-furniture, Merchandise and
the like, there were many children and impotent People killed. The Dutch
Merchants, who had mostly their Residence near the place where the Fire first
broke out, sustained an incredible loss. It Is true the Houses are upon such
occasions removed with as much ease as ours are blown up, but if the Timber be
knotty the Sparks and Cinders fly abroad and kindle other Houses at an
incredible distance, which being covered with dry Planks are not so easily
extinguished, The Czar upon consideration of the frequent Fires has appointed a
party of the Strelitzers, to be quartered in several places, at a due and
convenient distance from each other throughout the 4 Wards; who are continually
to be at hand upon such occasions. Now by reason of the great scarcity of Water
in Moscou, the first thing they lay their hands to, is to disjoynt the Houses,
and therefore for the most part are trained up in that kind of Architecture, to
be assistant again in the rebuilding of the same, when all danger is supposed
to be over.

Great but miry Streets.
The streets of Moscou are very spacious and wide, but in rainy weather so miry,
that in walking you are up to the very knees in mud; for which reason both Men
and Women are fain to wear Boots. Although it is certain that inconvenience
might be remedied, by paving it with stone, as they do in the Low Countries and
else where. During the time we were there, it was not possible to thwart the
streets if they had not thrown great beams and planks across the way.

The Air.
Moscou, and all the whole Country toward the North is capable of a very
unwholsom Air, for those that are not brought up in it, being in the Winter
exceeding sharp and cold, and in the Summer hot and moist. In Winter they
muffle up their Nose and Ears in Furs, especially when they go upon a Journey.
And in Moscou it is well seen that many of the Inhabitants have neither Nose
nor Ear, which they say is by coming out of the bitter cold Air into a hot
Stove: for although it may seem strange, yet cannot that be avoided in some
places, unless they rub their Noses and Ears, which are frozen, in Snow till
they grow hot, which done they may come into a House without danger, and this
you shall see them continually a doing in such Seasons. It is also observable
how that after a hard Winter the very Earth chinks and opens when it once
begins to thaw. But on the contrary, it is there so hot in the Summer that a
stranger cannot endure it, at what time also the Marshes and standing Pools do
so stink that one is ready to faint away: besides the great annoyance of Gnats,
Muskettos and other Vermin, against which there is no way to defend ones Face.
The Pestilence is seldom ever known there, The Country Sic^ness.
but in lieu there of another Epidemy, which so torments them in their Bowels
that those that are taken with it rarely recover, or live above 3 days. Some I
have heard say that in times past it was far more frequent and rigorous than at
this day, for before, they had not the use of Physic nor would admit of any
that professed it to practice, as of late, finding the great benefit thereof,
they have done.

Moscovia is a Country of a fat and fertile Soil, far beyond that of Lifeland.
Their Wheat, Ry, Barley and Oats, they sow about St. John's day at Midsummer,
which within 7 or 8 Weeks is fit for the Sickle, or Sith (for they use both)
and that by reason of the constant heat. They have besides the beforementioned
fruments, good store of Pulse, as Pease, Beans and Lentils. Cucumbers, Pompions
and Melons are more common there than with us, of which last I have seen some
weighing above 40 pound. The Fruits they have are Pears, Apples, Quinces,
Medlars, Cherries Plumbs, and of these several kinds. There grows in the
Country lying upon the River Mosequa a kind of an Apple so transparent that
you may discern the Seeds, as Grapes: The Shell or Rind thereof is very thin
and subtle and the Fruit it self very delicate, but too juycy, and after a
long Rain so watrish that they grow insipid. It Is generally known abroad that
Moscovia affoards Flax and Hemp to that exuperancy, that they supply almost all
Europe with Rope-work. The next Staple-Commoditie of Moscovia is Wax and Honey,
which the Russians take wild and make a vast profit thereof. In short there is
no Vegetable of general use with us, but what likes there, save only the Vine,
which the Extremity of the Winter will not suffer to like or come to
perfection: but that defect is sufficiently supplied from abroad, by the
English, Dutch and others, who bring the Products of every Vintage from France
and else where. They have no Mines save only of Steel and Iron.

Of their Cattle.
Russia if taken in general is better stored with tame Cattle and Wildbeasts
than any Country in Europe, or as some believe, in the whole World. Kine is
without doubt in greater abundance there than in Tartary, agreeable to the
opinion of all Travailers and Geographers, who have given an account of either.
The rich Furs which are yearly exported hence to most places of the World
sufficiently testify the superabundancy of Foxes, Sables, Martens, etc. But
most dangerous it is to travel alone for the many Beasts of prey which run
together in vast and innumerable Troops; and those, when the Earth is covered
with Snow, very bold and daring, insomuch that the Inhabitants are in continual
danger, and are fain to keep their gates barricado'd from those cruel Animals,
to secure themselves and their Cattle; nay, it has been often known that they
have undermined Houses in some parts, Fowl.
and devoured whole Families at a time. Wild-Fowl I have seen of several kinds,
as chiefly Heath-hens, Herns, Wildgeese, and Cranes by Millions in a flock
together. As for smallbirds, by which I mean Larks, Finches and the like, which
we hold for great delicacies, they have them in little, or no esteem, and that
by reason of the vast swarms, for they fly together as thick as Gnats or
Infects over a Pond. These are havock'd by the Hawks, Faulcons and Merlins,
which are there in a proportionable plenty to the prey. The Rivers and standing
Lakes are stored with Fish of all kinds, and Fish.
which are throughout the whole Land incredibly cheap; in sum Moscovia has
whatsoever is necessary for Food and Raiment, as good and at as easy rates, as
any other Land in the World, none excluded: although I do not say but that one
Province differs much from another, and that every particular Province and
Region has something or other, as proper or peculiar to it is self.

Woldomir.
Wolodomir is reputed to be of so good a Soil, that from one Bushel of pure
Grain sown is sometimes 20 or 25 produced in Harvest and yet Rhesan is reckoned
far more fertile than the other, for from every single Seed arises 3 stalks,
Rhesan.
and sometimes more, which is not commonly found in any other Province in all
Russia. This Province affoards likewise the best and most Beavers.

The Duchy of Syberia is the most woody of all other Provinces within the
Empire of the great Czaar, especially toward the Northeast where at Braquin
there is a Wood which takes it is beginning, Syberia.
the end whereof none ever yet was known to find out. This Wood is the main
place whence the Moscovians fetch their richest Pelure and Furs, as Ermins,
Sables and Black Fox, which is one of the richest Pelts in the World. Volske,
Volske, Smolens ko and Beleosor. Ustioga. Rostof.
Smolensko and Beleasor deliver vast quantities of Skins and Furs, which the
Inhabitants bring up yearly to Moscou and other eminent Marts. Ustioga is a
Province that yields great store of Cattle, and many sorts of Fish, yet very
Barren as to grain. Rostof is the only Province for Salt. Dwino is a barren and
dry land, but the Inhabitants obtain great Riches of the Furs, which is the
Principal Trading of that Province. These they barter with what Commodities and
Necessaries they find themselves destitute of. In this Province are many white
Bears, which seem to live as well by Sea as Land. Viatke.
Viatke has great want of Grain, yet store of Fish, Honey, Wax, and also Pelts.
Petzora, is very montanous, Petzora.
in which Principality I have heard it averred, That there are some mountains
that require 10 days work to ascend. The Valleys of this Province are fertile
enough, High Mountains.
and very good pasturage, yet Corn will not take kindly there. What may be
further said of Astrachan, and the Tartarian Regions, now in subjection to the
Great Duke, I shall wave till I come to make mention of things, as I found them
upon our Arrival there.

CHAP. V. The Form, Nature and Property of the Russes. Their ordinary Diet.
Their great esteem of Brandy. Their litigious humors and inclinations to
Quarrelling. Their ordinary Habit. Women use painting of their Faces. Their
manner of their Marriages, and nuptial Solemnities.
THe right Moscovians, or Russians (for the Tartars now under Protection of the
Czar we shall speak of in their due place) are mostly able, corpulent and big,
especially of Head, Arms and Legs. The Common sort are very hard by Nature and
patient in extremity, seldom pamper their Bodies with soft lying, when they
rest, or delicat Diet when they eat. In summer they lie upon boards, or at best
upon straw, and in Winter on the tops of their Ovens, or Cackels, where Man and
Wife, Children and Servants lie all down together, without any distinction at
all. Utensils they have not many, but so many as themselves judge needful,
which are Earthen or Iron Pots, Wooden Dishes, Brandy-and Metheglin-Cups, which
they rarely rince. As for rubbing and scouring they are mere strangers to it,
as also to ornaments and Toys, unless it be a Figure which they call St.
Nicholas, or perhaps some other Saint for whom they have some particular or
extraordinary veneration. Slaves they are by nature, and born to servitude and
Bondage, seldom ever aspiring so high, as to endeavor to make themselves
franc, and yet will be excited to nothing by fair means, or use diligence about
any affair, save what they are driven to by constraint and blows: and yet so
sweet this Slavery seems to be to them, that rather than to become free upon
the Decease of their Lords to whom they ow allegiance by nature or otherwise,
that they will immediately sell themselves durante vita to some other Patron.
They are very prone to Theft, yea and to Murder when they think that they can
do it clandestinly, or to any advantage, how poor soever it be, which seems to
be primordially occasioned from the Penury of their Lords, who hardly allow
them what is requisite to support and sustain human Bodies: as for Brandy and
Tobacco they hold it but a venial Transgression to filch when they can come at
it, notwithstanding the strict and severe Laws against Theft, in the lowest
nature and lest importance.

This only is to be applied to the Vulgar sort, as for those of greater Ability
and Rank, they spare not for what tends to a voluptuous Life, and indulge their
senses, as much or more than is tolerable. Free they are, and indeed generous
enough at their Table, especially when they treat or welcome Strangers, who are
very welcome and received with all imaginable Urbanity, on Condition, that they
observe the Country fashion, which is to bring a Present with them, that may
countervail more than thrice the value of what is set before them: and this if
you forget to bring, you may take my word, they will forget to make you welcome.
The Slaves in Moscou are very hardly dealt withal and poorly fed, but much
harder those that are in the open Country, where their Lords are sparing of
their Allowance, and therefore connive at their Filching; thinking it falls out
at last to their own profit, especially if it be any thing of Food.

The Russes feed most of Roots, Pulse and Fish, Their Diet.
use much Onions and Garlic in their Pottage and also for sauces. Their Bread
is mostly of Course Ry. As for Fish they eat it rather pickled than fresh,
which is plentiful in their Markets, and by reason that washing and making
clean the shambles is a kind of an Abomination to those people, you cannot come
within a hundred paces of the Market, unless you stop your nose, so nauseous
and hateful is the smell. Those of the greatest Rank and ability do in general
hold good Tables, but eat most Spoon-meat although it were but bread out of
Water that Fish has been boiled in. Cavear is a great Dainty amongst them, but
not so high in esteem, there as abroad. When they have drunk more than well
agrees with them, so that their stomach be surcharged, they prepare a certain
Dish which they call Pochmelie made up of cold Beef or Mutton sliced very thin,
and Quas: Quas is a Liquor which they use as Beer of which it is made, with a
Composition of Water, Beer-Vinegar, Garlic and Pepper: this Quas being so
prepared they put their meat into it, and sees it a little, which afterward
they eat with Spoons. The poorer sort have a certain Liquor much in use among
them, which they also call Quas, this is made of Water with a little Bran and
Barley-meal, which according to their ability they temper thicker or thinner.
The Gentry drink Beer, that there is very strong and heady, but more commonly
Metheglin, which they make of the best Honey, adding Cloves, Cinnamon, Pepper,
Galangal, Cardamom and other Spices: This is a very strong and stealing Liquor
of it self; yet they think good to mix it with Brandy to make it more
effectual. Brandy which they call Wina they covet above all other Liquors,
which without any discretion or noted difference is drunk both by Spiritual and
Temporal, Nobles and Plebeians, Men and Women, Young and Old, and that at all
times of the Day, before and after Meals; Sometimes to add a medicinal virtue
they put a little Pepper amongst it. Nay, so besotted are the Vulgar with
Brandy, that in the sharpest Weather, they will not only part with their Caps
or Coats for the Reckoning, but likewise with their Boots, Shirts and
Stockings, so that I have seen some of them come mother-naked out of the Kaback
or Tipling-House. The Common people were formerly so irregular and void of
Order that they would drink themselves full, and afterward the men and Women,
setting aside all Reputation and Modesty commit sensual and beastly Actions
together: This great Disorder was lately remedied by the care of the Czar, who,
by the advice of the Patriarch, put down all the small Tap-houses throughout
the whole Empire, appointing in every Town and Village one public House, or
Kaback, which they are to farm of the Emperor himself. They are very covetous
of Tobacco, as has been elsewhere said, notwithstanding the Tenure of a Decree
or Mandate promulgated about the year 1634, which strictly forbids every person
of what degree or quality he may be, to smoke it: which nevertheless is done
privately.

The Russians are generally gross of Body yet subtle enough in affairs of
Merchandise which they can manage very well. Their Women are much inclined to
Gossiping, and busy Tatlers, often beat by their Husbands, who sometimes use
them unkindly: upon which they sometimes address themselves to Court, where the
men once convicted over such Crimes are sent to Syberia. The Emperor
considering the multitude of Complaints of this nature, has ordained that if
any Woman makes complaint without sufficient Evidence, that the Man is to be
tortured on the Rack, which if he stands out, the Wife is condemned to exile,
her self, before which Law the Court was daily troubled with such like
Differences.

Backbiting and Jarring a property of the Russians.
Few people, there are in the World that are more accustomed to scolding,
railing and calumny than these, although it is very rare to see them come to
blows, yet much more rarely do they make use of their Weapons. This evil
custom of abusing one another oftentimes is the occasion of Quarrels with
Strangers to whom it seems a Novelty.

Their Habit.
The ordinary Habit of the Citizens, is first an upper Coat of a dark green,
red, brown or violet-colour'd Silk, open before and on the sides, and garnished
with loops, having behind great Capes, almost like old-fashioned Cloaks in the
Low Countries: Under that they wear another coat of Say or Silk, with a high
and stiff Collar, these have long sleeves which are tied up round with loops
and stand Cooks in good stead to remove hot Pots and Cauldrons from the fire:
Those that have, an intent or design to steel or murder, usually have an iron
Bullet, or some other hard and ponderous thing wherewith they knock their party
down at unawares. Under this they wear yet another Coat which nevertheless is
not very close, for they affect looseness as well in their Habit as in their
life. Their shirts they tuft with Silk on the back, as also the Necks, which
the Gentry adorn with Pearls, Gold, Silver, or Precious stones. In Summer the
Citizens wear white Felts, in Winter Caps turned with Beaver or some other
Furs, and the Kneeses, Bojars and other Persons of the greatest quality Black
Fox and Sables. The Habit of the Women is not so much different from that of
their Men, as they differ from each other, agreeable to the Quality of the
Person. They wear generally Caps turned with Sables or other Furs but greater
than the Men's, set with Pearls and Rubies upon the Crown, under which they let
their Hair hang in its full length, these are those of higher Rank and Quality;
those of meaner Condition have them only turned with red Fox. The Young-women
when they grow Marriageable, have their hair knotted up above the crown of the
Head in a round ball, but under the age of 10 or 12 years have their Heads all
shaven, except only two Tufts that hang down on each side so that they can
hardly be distinguished from Boys in their Habit, only the Girls are known by
the great rings which hang at their Ears. On this manner the Gentry and
Citizens are attired, but the Peasantry as poorly as those of Lifeland, and
much after the same manner. Their Upper-garment is ordinarily of sheeps-skins,
with a Cap of the same stuff; their Boots and Shoes are made of the Barks of
Trees cunningly plated.

The Women are by nature well proportioned, Painting of faces in use among the
Russian Women.
and fair enough to boot if they did not paint, which they do so botchingly
that every one may discern it. Spanish Wool and Tincture of Brazil-wood it
seems they do not yet know the use of, but instead of that use Vermilion and
Minium, and for Flake, a dull White-Lead, or Ceruse at best.

The Reader may observe that their manner of Marriages is far different from
that in the Low Countries, Of their Marriages.
and all Europe elsewhere a Young Man having fixed his eye upon some Maid with
whom he could be content to enter into a nuptial state, he Courts her and
Solicits by Friends to make an Overture. A Russian Youth inclinable to admit
himself into the conjugal number detects his purpose and desire to his Parents,
or nearest in Consanguinity, who thereupon go about and seek out a Virgin
suiting his Degree and Condition, whom having found, they apply themselves to
her Parents or Guardians, to treat about the subject; where neither the Young
man nor any near Relation of his are to see the Bride, in sum the Purchase is
like a Pig in a Poke, for all people of fashion keep their Daughters chamber'd,
setting always an old Woman to look to her, who is as vigilant in her Office,
as a Turn-key at Wood-street Counter. And hence it comes that they live in
perpetual Jarrs, and contention, when sometimes in hopes of a sweet,
well-shaped, and comely Darling, they are chained to a stinking, crooked and
deformed Hag. This induces me to a Tale of a young Squire, who thinking himself
old enough to be a man, intimated his Inclinations to a common Broker, or
Match-maker, withal conditioning beforehand that he would not come to any
conclusion with the Parents of his Party, till he had by some means or other
got a sight of her Face, which the man promised to do; and accordingly goes to
an old Couple who had long entreated him to procure a Husband for their
Daughter: this said Couple he acquaints with the business who no less joyful
to understand it prayed him to hasten the Match: now you are to understand by
the way that their daughter had but one eye, which made some difficulty in the
carrying on the matter, by reason that the Young man would not venture upon the
purchase, unless he saw what kind of a Bargain he had: However the Broker gives
her instructions, how to behave her self in passing by the House where this
Youngman was to be, and bad her look always on one side, which she did. The
young man peeping through a crevise, saw her have a good half face, assents to
the Articles and Propositions whatsoever they should be, but coming before the
Altar, was so concerned that he took an Ax and clove his own head.

They have many quaint Ceremonies about Marriage: those of the highest Rank use
these following Rites. The Bridegroom and Bride have each of them one to attend
them, to prepare and provide all necessaries; these they call Swachas. The day
before the Wedding the Brides Swacha goes to the Bridegrooms House to provide
and furnish the Brides Chamber and Bed with what else is requisite, being
attended with 60, 80, or perhaps 100 Persons according to the degree and
ability of the Parties. These all go in their under-cloaths, bearing each
something upon their Heads which will be requisite at the Marriage. Having once
entered the Chamber she takes the Bed and spreads it upon 40 small Garbs of Ry,
which is first brought thither by her Husband, together with a great number of
little Barrels, containing several sorts of Grain, set up and down the Room,
which perhaps will signify Fruitfullness in procreation. The next morning the
Bridegroom goes to the House of the Bride accompanied with the Priest who is to
marry them, where they are kindly received by the Friends of the Bride, and
invited to sit down, and here they have 3 sorts of Dishes brought before them,
which they nevertheless touch not. Here the Bridegroom is to tarry so long
discoursing with the Friends of the Bride, till she sends a Servant to
introduct him into her Chamber, where being come she is brought in, stately
apparrel'd, and set by his side, but he not suffered to look her in the Face,
nor she him, and when they cannot withhold their curiosity but offer to look
aside, as longing to see that dear Visage, which ever after they may mutually
do with more freedom than any other in the World, there is a Flag or Tablet of
red Silk set between them, to hinder it. When they are set the Brides Swacha
plates the Hair of the Bride, and sets a Gold or Silver Coronet upon her Head,
richly set with Precious stones and Gems, to which are fixed two long Pendants
of Diamonds, or (if it be Persons of a lower Calibre) of baser stones, these
hang down to their Breasts. So soon as the Bride is dress't, the Bridegrooms
Swacha likewise combs his head; upon which all the Women fall a dancing. After
they have danced a little, there come in two young men with a Basket of White
bread and a great Cheese upon a Barrow, covered with Sables, which is
consecrated by the Priest and sent to the Church. When this Ceremony is ended,
they bring a great Silver Charger, and set it upon the Table, in which are laid
some pieces of Atlas, and Taf, with several Square plates of Silver, as also a
handful of Hops, Barley and Oats, mixed together: upon that that the Swacha
arises and covers the Face of the Bride, and strows the mentioned things out of
the Charger amongst the Guests, when as those that are minded may take up the
pieces of Silver. When that is done the Parents of the Parties interchange the
Rings of the young people.

When these Ceremonies are ended, the Swacha sets the Bride in a Riding-sledge
which is richly accoutred and set out with Cloth of Gold, and Fringes suitable:
The Horse is also covered with costly Trappings and rich Furrs. Then follows
the Bridegroom, accompanied with the Priest both on Horseback; and after them
the Friends on both sides. When they enter the Church the Bridegroom takes his
Place which is covered with Taffataf, whither also the Bride is brought. When
they are set together there are several Images of Saints set up before them,
upon which the Priest pronounces a Blessing: and afterward taking the
Bridegroom by the right hand, and the Bride by the left, asks, Are you content
to enter the state of Matrimony together? The Parties then answering, Yea, the
Priest sings the 128 Psalm, which they likewise mutter out after him. This done
the Priest sets a Garland upon their Head, uttering these Words, Increase and
multiply, what GOD joins together let no man separate. Then all the Friends
light their Torches, and the Priest takes a Glass of Red Wine into his Hand,
which he delivers over to the Bridegroom and Bride to drink off, then taking
the empty Glass from them delivers it to the Bridegroom who throws it down and
the Bride stamps it with her foot to powder, saying, So may they fall before
our feet, and be crushed to powder, who go about to set us at enmity together.
Upon that the Married Women strew them with Hemp, wishing them Prosperity and a
happy union. These Ceremonies being ended they return home again after the same
manner that they went to Church. So soon as they have entered the House, the
Bridegroom goes and takes his seat at the Table where he receives, and bids all
his Guests welcome but the Bride is brought directly into her Chamber where the
Swacha undresses her to the Shift and lays her down upon the bed, The Bride
being thus laid sends to call her Bridegroom by two of her Servants with
Torches in their Hands. Immediately upon his entering the Chamber* she jumps out
of the Bed and puts on a Gown fur'd with Sables, and giving him the hand goes
out with him, but her Servants in the mean time put out their Torches by
running them into one of the little Barrels [mentioned in Page 142] Thus hand in
hand they go to the Table where all the Guests sit. The first Dish which is
brought up is a roasted Pullet, this the Bridegroom himself is to carve and
throws some part thereof over his Shoulder which the Brides Swacha catches in a
Napkin, and keeps for a Monument. When the Meal is done the Bridegroom takes
his Bride by the hand and so leading her to her chamber they go to bed, upon
which all are to go out of the Chamber, and the Music which sits before the
Window expecting Notice of it imediately fall a playing, and upon that a noise
of Trumpetters begin to sound, and sometimes the Kettel-Drums to beat. After
they have been about an hour in Bed the Swachas come and conduct them to the
Bath, where they are both bathed and washed with Wine, Water and Metheglin,
dulcified with odorous flowers and spices, and, as the custom is at Moscou,
the Bride presents her Bridegroom with a Bathing shirt. After they have bathed
they come and accompany their Guests, who all the time were merry at Table, in
which Humors they continue sometimes a Week, or 10 days, before they depart to
their respective Lodgings.

The foregoing Ceremonies are such as those of the best rank use, by which you
may perceive more vanity than Reason in this Folk: However I think we have no
great cause to hiss at them for their folly, since we have as many
insignificant Rites amongst our selves, which are with them equally senceless
and as plain puerility, as theirs may be esteemed by us.

But as for the Plebeians and Pesantry theirs is after a different manner. The
day before the Marriage is to be solemnized, the Bridegroom sends a Kinsman of
his own to the Brides House with new apparel, a Cap, a pair of boots, a Comb
and a Box of painting and other materials for Rigging. The day following comes
the Priest and gives the benediction: which done, he brings them a
Looking-glass requiring them to look into it both at once. In the mean while
the Swachas strew the Guests with Hops wishing that the Bride may be as
fruitful and increase her stock, as that hopeful Weed. After that comes
another who presents the Bride with a Sable or Beaver-skin, withal wishing her
so many Children as there are Hairs upon the Hide. These Ceremonies ended at
home they go to Church, and are married. in manners as before.

After the Wedding is past, the Women keep at home for sometime together, not
daring to stir out.

CHAP. VI. Divorcement among the Russes and the sundry occasions thereof. Their
Superstition about Cleanness and Uncleanness. Baths, and the use of the same.
The Hardiness and Patience of the Russes in suffering the Extremities of Heat,
or Coldness. Some strange customs among the Russes. Solemnities at the Burial
of their Dead.
SO much, kind Reader, may serve by way of account about their Marriages, as to
what I have observed my self, although I am sensible some have written
otherwise and described these Solemnities much different to what I have found
them, yet rather willing to fee with my own eyes than with another, so I
thought fit likewise, rather to give you these few Memorials with my own pen
than (as some Plagiaries of late have done) transcribe out of others.

Divorcement among the Russes.
If we regard the forementioned Manner of their procuring Wives, without any
former sight or conversation, Reason will inform us, that they must needs live
discontented Lives, which oftentimes turn to Divorcement at last. Divorcements
are with them very frequent and those obtained upon very easy terms; for when
either party finds themselves too weak at blows, and not able to repugn the
other, it is only to shave and betake themselves to a Cloister, whence they may
never be brought out by any legal mean. The Man so going into a Cloister is
capable of Holy Orders, after a certain Term of years, if he be accordingly
qualified. They are also divorced when either Party is convict of Fornication,
and the Offender confined to a Monastery. Barrenness is also the Occasion of
Divorcement, upon which the Wife becomes a Nun, and the Husband may marry again
within six Weeks.

But those who marry again after once Divorced are for ever after excluded the
Church, yet may enter the Porch or Gallery, but if they be divorced a second
time and married a third, they are totally Excluded the Church and Congregation.

They have several superstitious Ceremonies concerning purity, as to the
outward, and carry themselves very strictly according to the Traditions of the
Church. They hold it not for so heinous a Sin to perform the Works of
Unchastity with a Woman, as to do it in presence of an Image, or having their
Cross about them, for that they lay off upon such Occasions, and if it be in
the Room where an Image hangs, they draw a Curtain before it, as if they were
sure that that Image was an Informer, and one that got Bread and Butter for
telling School-tales.

They are very observing of their Duty in the great Fast at which time if any
man among them chance to sleep, he is forbidden to communicate, during the Term
of a year and 9 days. If it be a Priest he is suspended from Office and
Benefice for a whole year; but if a Proponent, he is rendered incapable of
taking any sacred Function upon him so long as he lives.

They hold it for a Crime unpardonable for a Russian to marry with a Stranger,
but to commit Adultery with a Heretic-Woman only Venial and pardonable in it is
own nature, but if a Woman of that nation become Prostitute to another of a
different Opinion to their own, it is not accounted so heinous, by reason that
the Offspring may be educated in their Religion, and consequently tends to the
Increase of the Church, for they have a Maxim contrary to that of S. Paul, Ne
faciamus mala ut eveniant bona, Let us not do Evil that Good may come of it.

These external superstitions of purification are the main reason that every
person that is of any Considerable Ability, has a Bathing-tub in his House,
which in Turkey and Persia are equally made use of for Purification and Health.
They have also Common Baths in every Town and Village, whither both Men and
Women, without any distinction have recourse; running in and out naked, only
some of the Women for Modesty sake have a few Bur-dock leaves about their
middle, which are first dried and afterward laid to steep in Oil of Olives,
which afterward they rub their Bodies with, in the Sweating-tub. They can
endure extremity of Heat and Cold to a Miracle, for I have seen them run out of
the Water, which I could not suffer my finger in, and of a sudden over Head and
Ears in Snow, where they would lay a quarter or half an Hour and then into the
Bath again, that remained scalding hot, which if one should do who is not
hardened to it from the very Cradle, he were sure to leave his skin behind him.
Besides the several Instances I have already given you, I have seen the
Children walking over the Ice, without either Boots, Shoes or Stockings, and
that in such piercing cold Weather that we could not go out of Doors.

The Dutch Merchants that have their Residence at Moscou, have also
(conformable to the manner of the Country) their Baths, which they strew with
odoriferous Spices and Flowers, and make frequent use thereof. When they have
bathed so long as they think good, they have a Retiring-room in which is a
Sweating-tub or Stove, whither they go and rub themselves.

The Russians as they differ from all other Nations as well in Religion as in
Habit, so they have several Customs, Gestures and Actions proper solely to
themselves. Their Shirt they wear above their Breches and tie it above the Wast
with a Girdle, like their upper Garments; When they Whistle they do it through
their Teeth, not with their lips, saying, that in so doing they abuse their
true shape in which GOD has formed them: When they are surprised either with
Wonder, or a sudden Danger, they do not throw back their Head, like the
Hollanders, nor shrink up their Shoulders, as do the Spaniards, but throw their
Head first upon one Shoulder, and then upon another, or perhaps turn it round,
as a Fencer flourishes his Rapier, or an Ensign his Colors in token of Victory.

When they pray they do it not upon their knees as we do, thinking that GOD is
displeased with such an irregular posture: and when they write they never make
use of a Table, although they have one at their elbow, but always upon their
knees; and what they write is altogether in Rolls, pasting one sheet to another
as they write them. Fatness they hold for a prime token of Beauty, as also long
fore head and eyes for which they pull and draw as much as they can to correct
nature, which in things of smaller moment they seem to abhor and detest, if a
property of other People.

Ceremonies in Visitation of their Sick.
About the Sick and Burial of their Dead the Russes have these following
Customs. When any lies Sick, and by his Friends thought in danger of long
Continuance or Death, they send for a Priest who administers the Communion to
him, he first confessing the most noted Sins he can remember that he has done
in his life time, to the Priest alone, adding a Promise and Resolution to live
a pious and devout Life, if GOD grant him recovery. When he has communicated,
they shave, anoint and put him in a Monks-hood, which they call the Seraphic
Weed: After which they administer no more Physic to him, but commend him to the
Grace of GOD. Now if it happen that he recover, he is obliged to abandon Wife,
Children and Estate for ever, and betake himself to a Monastery, where he is to
spend the remainder of his days.

But if our Patient die, Ceremonies and Questions propounded to the dead.
then all the Neighbors and Friends come together to bewail the deceased
asking the Corpse, how he came to die, and for what reason, for what defect or
want, like those of Madagascar, remembered in my first Voyage. I remember that
having occasion to visit a Countreyman of mine upon a Monday morning I entered
the House, where the Master was dead and the Corpse laid out, above a score of
old Women, were set round about him, and speaking to him as if they expected
some answer from him; but above all, his Wife began to howl and yell aloud, who
in his life time wished him a thousand times in Hell, for he behaved himself
very severely toward her. Oh, quoth she, Timminni Do Shinca [for that was his
name] my Dearest, how have thou left me thus? What failing did thou discover
in me? Did I ever neglect to paint my self? Have I not brought forth a fair
Issue? Had not thou all things at Command? Metheglin I am sure we had always
in plenty, nay, and Brandy too. What then persuaded thee to leave me desolate
and forlorn, Oh remember the disconsolate state of Widdow-hood and return to
the merry World, etc. These, and many other foolish expressions by way of
Interrogation, she accosted him with, which made me at first to think that he
was not fully dead. So soon as the Party is departed they open the Windows, and
set Basins of Holy Water, together with several Dishes of meat beside the Body,
to relieve his Wants on so long and tedious a Journey, as do the Circas
Tartars; which seems to be the Relics of Heathenism, not long since professed
in many parts of Russia. Imediately upon his departure they send Brandy, and
Beer, with other Liquors and Presents to the Priest, who is to pray for his
Soul. The Body they wash from Head to foot, as do the Jews, then winding it in
a sheet, put it into a Coffin which is hollowed out of a Tree, and so carried
to Church, where they besprinkle it with holy Water, and perfume it with
Incense; which done they say Mass, and with several Hymns commit it to the
Ground.

But if a Person die without administration of the Extreme Unction, be
Murdered, or Frozen to death, or die by any unnatural or violent means,
whether casual, or thereto condemned to satisfy Justice, the Corpse is not
permitted to enter the Sanctuary, but carried to a place to that end appointed,
which they call Zemski Precaus, where it is exposed to public view, and if it
be a person unknown, is to remain there 3 or 4 days to see if any will own the
Body, which if none come to claim it is immediately carried to another Place
without Town, which they call Boghze Dome, that is Gods House, and there thrown
into a great Pit, where sometimes a Hundred or more Bodies lie on a Heap
uncovered, till about Midsummer, at what time, the Priests go and cover them,
with a few Rites and Ceremonies.

The Ceremonies which are used in some places in Russia differ from others.
About Moscou the Corpse is followed by a Train of Gentlewomen who are nearest in
Consanguinity or Affinity, who with a great Noise and Howling bewail the early
departure of their Friend, then presently all are silent, that not one is so
much as heard to whisper, or give a Sigh, and then on a sudden elevate their
Voice and yell out like some of the more brutish and savage Irish.

On each side the Hearse go the Priests, Chaplains and Monks, bearing Images,
Torches, and a Thurible, or Incense-pan, which is all the while waved to and
again, to expel Evil Ghosts which they believe still haunt the Body of the
Deceased. After the Corpse follow the Friends and Acquaintance, without any
order, each carrying a Wax-tapour in the Hand. When they come to the Grave, the
Coffin is opened and the Incense pan swing'd 3 times over the Corpse in
remembrance of the H. Trinity, and then the Image of that Saint which he in his
Life time made choice of for his Patron, is thrown into the Coffin with him,
upon which all his Relations come near and take their last view of him, kiss
the Coffin and go backward. When the Friends have so taken their leave the
Priest delivers him a Letter superscribed to Saint Nicholas, containing a
hearty recommendation of the Deceased. A copy of one of these came once to my
hand which before I had Transcribed it out, was taken from me by a Priest being
the Brother of the Gentleman who lent it me, for it is not lawful for a
Russian himself to know the Contents, much less for a Heretic. The Paraphrase
of the Fragment was after this Manner, Great and Powerful Saint, Beloved of Men
and Angels.
Our immaculat Brother, and Partaker of Mortality, who leaves us in this World,
more worthy than to dwell amongst men below, desires to be commended to thy
Tuition, whom we heartily commit to thy Protection and Care. Receive him we
entreat thee, Oh Wonderfully Great, and Powerful Saint, and let him rest with
immortal and glorious Angels. Piety was his Joy, Shrift his Delight. Earth what
he hated, and Heaven the Object of his love; prayers were his Exercise and --




This fragment is all I can give you of the Letter, which as I told you was
taken from me. The body being interred they return home, where they junket and
drink till they forget their Sorrow. This feast dures sometimes a Month or 40
days, according to the ability of the Person: among others it is not customary
to make one long Feast at the Funeral, but an anniversary Meal, and celebrate
that same day every year in remembrance of the Deceased.

CHAP. VII. The Religion and Church Government of the Russians. The Patriarch
and his Office. Of their Sacraments, etc.
THe Moscovians are professedly Christians, The Religion and Church Government
of the Russians.
but tainted with many superstitious Ceremonies about Imagery and other Relicts
of Gentilism; which the good Emperor Basilius about the year 989. rooted out
of his Empire, baptizing himself, and causing all his Subjects to do the like.
They boast mainly of their Continuance and Conformity with the Primitive
Church, which they say is still the same in purity without the stains of
Innovation, as indeed in many things it seems to be nearer than the Church of
Rome, as well in matter of Faith as Government of the Church.

The Church of Moscovia has like that of Rome, one supreme Head, who is the
Patriarch. Under the Patriarch are 4 Metropolitans, 4 Archbishops, besides
many other Bishops, Abbots and the Inferior Clergy. The Patriarch is almost
Sovereign in Spiritual Affairs, having an absolute and immediate power without
any appendency on the Temporal Government unless it be in case of inducing
Heresy, upon which he must Submit to a Synod, as in the year 1662, a General
Council was called, and the Patriarch summoned to make his appearance; at what
time he was impeached for Innovations, and indevouring to alienate the present
condition of the Church and reform it is Government by diminishing
Image Worship, which he held for little better than Idolatry. After many days
sitting that Council thought fit to confine him to his Mansion House, and
ordain the First Metropolitan in his room, who was then living when I was at
Moscou. The Revenues of the Patriarch, as also of the Metropolitans, are very
great, out of which they are obliged to levy and Maintain an Army of 15000 men,
during the time of War.

The Habit of the Patriarch, and the Metropolitans differ but little. The
Patriarch has always a great Crosier born before him, or a little one in his
hand and sometimes both, this they call a Posok. Mitres they wear only upon
Convocations or high Assemblies, and upon solemn Occasions. Abroad they are
distinguished by a high Cap, flat at top like the Switzers, or Yeomen of the
Guard. Next their Body they wear a Cassoc, and above that a long Gown or
rather a Pall, which is born up by two Gentlemen. The Inferior Clergy and
Priests wear a Cap but not so high as that of the Superiors. This Cap is given
them when they are ordained by the Bishops, at what time they shave their
Heads, and suffer it to grow no more, save in two little tufts just above their
ears.

There is a Law among them that whosoever beats one of those Clerks so, that
his cap fall to the ground, he is liable to a very severe penalty (if I well
remember to loose his hand) which nevertheless happens frequently in the Cabac:
but to prevent the worst when a Layman is minded to beat one of those
Mushrooms, he first takes off his Cap and then trounces him off so long as he
will, which done he sets the Cap upon the right Block again.

The Clergy are not forbidden Marriage, nor none that serve at the Altar, but
on the contrary are obliged to marry, and that only once, Of the Marriage of
the Clergy.
gathering that from the Saying of S. Paul. A Bishop ought to be the Husband of
one Wife. Nor is it lawful for him to marry a Widow. If a Priests wife come to
die before him, he is not only enjoined by the Church to remain a Widdower, but
also to leave the Altar, yet not wholly to lay down the Priestly Function, for
he may sit in the Chore or Chauntry and assist at Mattins and Vespers, as also
at Administration of the Sacraments, as far as it is done without the Verge of
the Altar. For this reason the Priests are best matched, as usually making much
of their Wives, and treating them more gently than the Laity generally do, lest
by hard usage they should drive them into melancholy, and consequently send
them too early out of the World, which sends them as suddenly from the Altar.

Baptism they hold forth as a Sacrament very necessary, Of Baptism.
for which reason they make as little delay as may be between the Womb and the
Font. If they fear the Child be weak they have it Baptized at home, but never
in the same Room where it is born, for that they hold unclean. The Consponsors
or Godfathers being come to the Church Porch, the Priest meets them and
repeats the Benediction. The Godfathers deliver 9 Wax-candles to the Priest,
which he places round about the Font afterward turning about toward the East
mutters out a Versicle or two, then taking the Incens-pan goes round about the
Font, which done he sings a Psalm or Hymn, making a brief Oraizon, and after
that demands the name of the Infant which is delivered him in writing. So soon
as he has read the Billet, asks, whether the Child believes in the Sacred
Trinity? and, Whether he utterly Forsake the Devil, etc. To which they
confidently reply in the Affirmative. Then the Priest pronounces this
Adjuration, Get thee hence, than unclean Spirit, and make way for the Holy
Ghost, Then he takes the child into his Arms, blowing three times in his Face,
and making a cross upon his Head, dips it three times in Water, Saying, I
baptize thee in the Name of the FATHER, and of the SON, and of the HOLY GHOST.
Having thus plunged the Infant, he puts some Salt into it is mouth, anointing
the Fore head, Breast and Hands with consecrated Oil, and then draws a clean
white shirt over it is Body, which done he says, Now thou art cleansed from thy
Sins. Last of all he hangs a Cross about it is neck of Gold, Silver, Tin, or
Ivory, with the Image of some Saint, to whose Patronage he is specially
committed and commended, and so the Sum of this Sacrament is performed. The
Water is thrown away into a Cave of the Earth, because it is impure. If any
Person be so far besotted, as to become a Proselyte and embrace their Religion,
he must renounce his former Baptism, and be rebaptized after their manner,
first spitting 3 times over his shoulder in token of Abhorrency of his former
Errors.

Their Communion,
The Sacrament which we call Coena Domini, or the L. Supper they hold forth
likewise as necessary to Salvation, receiving it in both kinds, yet not as is
usual among those of the Reformation, for they break the Bread into the Wine,
which the Communicant takes with a spoon. This Sacrament is also administered to
Children, and all under the Notion of Transubstantiation, although not in so full
a Sense as the Romanists. The Sick do likewise partake of this Sacrament, which
is given them upon their Deathbed, as the Host in the Church of Rome.

Auricular Confession,
Confession is also a Sacrament held forth by them, and is much after the
manner of the Church of Rome, and are enjoined to Penance according to the
Nature and Degree of the Sin, which they obey wondrous well, and if the Crime
be very Heinous, they wash themselves at the Epiphany.

and Fasts.
They have also their weekly and annual Fasts; Four times in the year happens
the latter, in which they show themselves outwardly zealous, agreeable to the
literal Injunction of the Church; but are at no time so loose and wanton as
then, passing away the time in Drinking, Dancing, Gaming Whoreing, and what
not? No time, nay all the time in the year round affoards not more news of
Murder: and since the Main Fast happens in the Winter, there are many so far
besotted that they are not able to find the way home, but dropping asleep by
the way are so frozen to death; whence (if they escape the Wolf and Bear) they
are carried to the Zemski Precaus, and from thence to the Bogzi Dome, of which
we have already made mention.

CHAP. VIII. The Jurisdiction of the Czaar, his Titles, Revenues and strict
Justice.
ALl Russia together with the several Kingdoms and Principalities is subject to
one Sovereign Monarch, MARC. 1669. Jurisdiction of the Czar.
whom they call From the Greek Word (...) Caesar.
Czaar. The name of the Emperor when I was there, was Alexie Michailowitz
Romanou, that is, Alexius, Son of Michael, Roman; for so they use that
Patronymic Roman, from Ivan Basilowitz, or Joannes Basilides, who was a Roman
by descent, and of Imperial Lineage. The Arms of the Emperor are as follows.
Sol, an Eagle displayed with 2 necks, Saturn, in chief a Mitre Imperial Mars,
On the Nombril, on an Escutcheon Jupiter, the Chevalier Saint George, armed
proper, and mounted on a Horse Luna, under his feet a Dragon Venus.

The Czaar is absolute Sovereign and Lord, conferring Dignities and Honors,
Subordaining Ministers of State and Officers whether Civil or Military, Coining
Money, raising and lessening the Value of the same. Making Peace and
Proclaiming War at his own discretion, and in short whatsoever any King in the
World can claim as Praeroguative. His Title is as follows.

ALEXIUS Michailowitz Romanow, by the grace of GOD Emperor of the Greater,
Less and White Russia, Lord of Moscou, Kief, Wolodimera and Novogorod, Czaar of
Casan, Czar of Astrachan, Czar of Syberia, Lord of Pletskow, Great Duke of
Smolensko, Tweer, Jugoria, Permia, Weatka, Bulgaria, etc. Lord and Great Duke
of Novagarada within the Low Countries of Zernigou, Rhesan, Rostof, Jerislaw,
Belooseria Udoria, Obdoria, Condinia, and absolute Sovereign of the Northern
parts as also of Iveria, Cartalinia, Grasinia, Carbadinia, Kirkassia and
Georgia, and of many other Provinces and Dominions in the East, West and North,
Haereditary Lord and Sovereign,

As the Titles of the Prince are great, so his Revenues are conformable.
Imperial Revenues
The Kabacks or Taverns are altogether farmed through the Empire of the
Emperor himself, whereof there are 3 at Novogorod which bring up yearly Ten
Thousand Gilders, and so all others according to proportion. The Imposition
upon Iron, Corn, Salt, Tar, Furs and other Commodities are very considerable.
If so the Revenues of this Prince be Great, so likewise his Court is as
sumptuous, and Housekeeping very Royal, besides the vast Charges in
maintenance of the Strelitzers, who are exactly and duly paid.

Of their Justice.
Their Laws, as we have elsewhere said, are very rigorous against Malefactors,
and quite different from other Nations. The first and lightest is the Battoki,
which is when the Patient is to lie upon his belly, then come two men, one
sitting down upon his Neck and the other upon his Legs, who beat him till the
Judge or Officer commands them to hold up. The Knutten is a Punishment of a
higher degree, and such as usually those that sell Brandy, Metheglin or Tobacco
without a special License from the Czar, are punished with, and is after this
manner: The Executioners Servant takes the patient and strips him from the
middle downwards, and takes him upon his back, which done the Executioner with
a scourge of Thongs made of a raw Elks-hide dried gives him a certain number of
stripes, according to a Ticket which is delivered him immediately before he
takes the scourge in his hand. This punishment is exceeding severe, and yet not
sufficient to suppress continual smuckling, and selling by stealth, which the
more they are punished and threatened, the more eager they are to do it. The
Executioner and his Office are not there so contemptible as with us, for it is
sometimes purchased by the most wealthy Merchants in the Land. Other Crimes are
punished with Chapping off a Hand or a Foot, and sometimes only a Finger
according to the enormity of the crime. False Coiners have liquid metal poured
down their Throats: and Ravishment of Virgins [or as our Laws call it a Rape]
is expiated by gelding of the Delinquant, of which if he recover well and good,
but it is very rare that any does.

CHAP. IX. Celebration and Solemnity of Palm Sunday. The Departure of the
Author out of Moscou to Astrachan. Heads and Officers. They set Sail. A heavy
storm. Arrival at Nisen-Novogorod; Plenty of Provision at Nisen. A description
of the famous River Wolga. Beginning of the Cerem Tartars. Their Customs and
Nature, Their Idolatry. Ceremonies about the Dead. Their Habit, Polygamy, etc.
ON the 18th of April being Palm Sunday was celebrated a great Feast, wherein
was much Triumph and Joy manifested with Arches and Pageants, amongst which was
our Savior his manner of riding to Jerusalem. This Solemnity was performed with
an infinite number of People, and led by the Emperor himself in Person,
attended with all the Bojars and the greatest personages about Court. The
Patriarch sat upon a Horse apparelled all in white, representing the L. Jesus
Christ. The Czar being supported by two Bojars, led the Horse by the Bridle,
being richly apparreled, with an Imperial Diadem upon his Head. The Patriarch,
as was said before, was arrayed with a long white Stole, with a Hierarchichal
Infula or Mitre upon his Head, richly set with Pearls. In his right Hand was a
Cross of Gold set with Diamonds and precious stones, with which he signed the
Multitude that came thronging to him with great Reverence and Devotion. He sat
cross over the Horse, which Horse was set out with splendid Trappings and
richly Capparison'd, after the manner of an Ass. On each side the Patriarch
went several Bishops; and the Superior Clergy, with white Surplices, Having
Thuribles. The Host, the Chalice, the Pax, Books, Bells, Tapours and other
things used at Mass, besides a great number of Flags. The Way from the palace
to the Crescent was all laid with Red-cloath. Here it was where the Patriarch
first took Horse: the Horse being there tied to a pale. After the Patriarch
follow the Bojars, bearing a huge Tree, woven and wound with Silk and Ribbons,
as also many sorts of Fruits thereto annexed. Herein sat several little
Children, with Apples, green Twigs and Branches. After all came the Mobile,
strowing the way with Branches which they had in their Hands, crying out,
Hosanna Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
Hosanna in the Highest, etc. When they were returned to the Crescent, the
Patriarch gave the Benediction to the Multitude and so the Procession ended. In
the Evening the Patriarch sent the Czar 200 A piece of Money valuing about 9s.
6d. Their Celebration of Easter
Roebels, for his good service in leading the Horse. I also saw their Paschal
Solemnities, at what time they continually kiss one another at meeting, saying,
Christ is risen, with one delivering a died Egg, and therefore at this time
they have many Booths all over the Town where they have Eggs of all colors to
sell. These Ceremonies are so universally observed, that none passes the street
without giving and receiving of Eggs of what Condition or Degree soever they
be. Toward the Evening, they entertain one another, every one in the best
manner he can, as well Clergy as Laity, and now are all the Taphouses, or
Kabacks crowded with men, where they toss off whole Bowls of Metheglin, Brandy
and strong Beer, till they fall together by the Ears.

Departure from Moscou to Astrachan.
On the 4 of May, we departed with a A small Vessel almost like a Huy, about 30
Tuns burden. Arrival at Colomna.
Strough from Moscou, which was laden with Ammunition and provision. We were 15
men in all who were sent down with this Vessel. We made quick passage down the
River, for the next day we arrived at Colomna, which is 134 English Land-miles
by Water, but thwart the Land about 50. This City is well fortified with a
strong Wall, and many Turrets. It is seated upon the Mosqua, having a long
Wooden Bridge over that River.

On the 6 dito we came into the River Oka, making a deep and broad stream where
it unites with the Mosqua. Here we saw a very fair Village called Dydenof, by
some Gedino, and about the Evening we arrived at the Wharf where the Ship Eagle
lay, having the Imperial Paludiments on her Stern. We were very kindly received
by the Here Cornelius Roeckhoven Coll: and Mr. Lambert the Master, who
expressed great joy for our arrival. Besides those were other Officers
preferred aboard the Ship, to wit Monsr. Stark Lieut. Coll. 2 Captains, a
Surgeon a Jeweller, an Interpreter, and a Purser. Their Pay was as follows,
The Colonel 100 Rix-dollars per Month. The Lieutenant Colonel 30 The
Captains 40 The Surgeon 20 The Interpreter 10 The Purser 10 Captain Butler
160 Gilders The Master of the Ship 100 The Mate 60 The Carpenter 80 Carpenters
Mate 36 Foremast-men, each 50 My self 57

Our whole Company consisted in 20 Dutch.

On the 12 we set Sail from Dydenof which was the Wharf where the Ship Eagle
was built, MARC. 1669.
conducted by the Col. Boekhoven about 2 leagues downward. The same day in the
Afternoon we came to a Town called Nicholo, where we found provision incredibly
cheap. Here I bought some Wild-fowl in the Market about as big as Wild-gees,
for a A coin about the value of a Penny.
Kopeke the Couple, and satisfied my Chapman to the full.

On the 13 we came to Omula, which is a Village about 40 [ English] Leagues
from Dydenof. After two days Sailing we came to Pereslaf, which is a small
City, rebuilt, as I have been told out of the Ruins of Resanski, which formerly
was a famous Town, surprised by the Tartars, demolished, and the Inhabitants,
removed to Pereslaf.

On the 17 we came close to Resanski where we viewed the Ruins of the City,
which testified the former Greatness and Strength of the Town. From hence we
sailed to the Eastern side of the River, where we saw many famous Houses and
stately Buildings, with Fair Orchards and Groves.

On the 18 we saw many goodly Towns and Religious Houses, and at night arrived
at Novosolki, a Place solely belonging to the Archbishop. Here we bought
provision, and all kinds of Refreshments that the place affoarded, finding all
things very cheap and good: and from hence we sailed away passing by Schilko,
Tericho, Tinersho Slavada, Koponaw and other fair Towns.

On the 22 we came to Kassienie-gorod, a beautiful little City, and the
Residence of Prince Reskitski. Our Captain and Master intended to visit the
said Prince, and for that end came here to Anchor, but coming a shore
understood that he was departed for Moscou, with the old Princess his Mother.
However they went to view the Palace, and were magnificently entertained by the
steward, of whom after the Exchange of some Rarities on both sides, by way of
Presents, they took their leaves. Kassieme-gorod has been formerly a Hold of
the Tartars, but the present Prince at the age of 12 years surrendered it up to
the great Duke of Moscovy, whom he as then obtained to be his Protector.

On the 23 we sailed past many fair Villages, Churches, Monasteries and other
Houses built for Religious uses, coming the next morning to anchor before
Leshi, which is a very great Town, but not walled.

On the 24 we came before Moruma, a Town inhabited partly by Russes and partly
by Mordwin-Tartars whose Country begins here, although both the City Moruma
and the Circumjacient Land-ship is at present under subjection of his Majesty
of Russia.

On the 27 we sailed by Prewas Palo and some other lesser Towns. Near this
Place are two Rivers which vent themselves into the Wolga, the one called
Morsna Reka on the starboard-, and the other Klesna on the larboard-side in
sailing downward, which last comes from the City VVolodomur. The Bank on the
one side is very high Land, and steep, yet above level and fair Land; but to
the Northward the Bank is level with the Water, and the Land woody and desert,
nether inhabited nor tilled to any purpose.

On the 28 we sailed past Isbuilets, and Troitska, dropping anchor before
Slowoda.

A great Storm.
On the 24 we set Sail and came that day before Dudwina, where we were forced to
remain 4 days and 4 nights, by reason of the tempestuous weather.

The boistrous Winds and Rain somewhat abated we set sail, and on the 3 of June
came before Nofunki, and the 8 before the great City Nisen Novogorod, situate
on an angle of the great River Wolga, JUNE. 1669.
which is there conjoined with the Oka.

Nisen-gorod lies in the Latitude of 36 degr. and 28 min. under a wholesome
climat, and in a fertile Country. Nisen-gorod.
It is well fortified with Walls, Bulwarks, Towers, Men and Ammunition of War.
About 2 [ English] miles without the City live more Inhabitants than within,
being Russes and Tartars, but in subjection to the great Duke. The Germans had
formerly built two Churches here, one for the Lutherans and another for the
Calvinists, both which went to decay upon their leaving the Town. It is here
very cheap living, and all things necessary for the sustenance of Human Bodies
may be procured at easy Rates. The Pastures abound with Cattle the Villages
with Poultry, the Woods with Venison, the Rivers with Fish, and the Land with
Corn, Fruit, Roots and Plants. Butter we bought there for 10 gl. the 100 lb.
[which is after the rate of 2d per pound] and yet we esteemed that the dearest
Purchase we bought there. We bought there a good sort of Linen for 2 stivers
the Ell, which served us well for shirting and other uses aboard the Ship. And
by reason of the Cheapness of Provision and all necessaries, we received here 6
Months pay: and because that they had here an excellent Ropeyard, the Heads of
our Company thought good to leave the Lieutenant Schack with our chief
Boatswain, to look after some Ropes which we had given order to be made, as
also to fit us with new Anchors.

On the 21 dito we put off from Nisen and left the Wolga. Description of the
River Wolga.
This is reputed one of the greatest and longest Rivers in the whole World,
taking it is beginning in the highest Mountains of Nova-Zembla, running past
Ierislaf, or Ierislaw, Tweer and other eminent Cities, whence with many
Windings and Turnings it runs through the Land till it come at Astrachan, where
it divides it self into several Heads like the Nile, and so looses it self into
the Caspian Sea, receiving by the way many great and navigable Rivers, and
those mostly on the Northeast side: from whence by reason that the River
receives it is Water, it is subject to rising and falling, as at June it is at
highest, and in July begins again suddenly to decrease, insomuch that it is in
all places full of Banks and Sand-beds, as hereafter, in the pursuit of my
Journal shall more particular and ample mention be made; whereas when it is
increased to it is height, one may sail over several Islands. This said River
is in some places more than 3 [ English] miles broad, and proving in other
places very narrow making at each side of the River a Whirl-pool, which cannot
be avoided without great difficulty. The course of this River from Nisen to
Casan is mostly East and South-East; but from Casan to Astrachan and so to the
Mare Hyrcanum, or Caspian Sea altogether South. On each side the River you have
for the most part very good Land and many fair Towns, as I have already noted,
whose Inhabitants are sedulous in their Husbandry, and are well supplied with
the particular Products of all the several Landships adjacent on this noble
River, as also with many sorts of excellent Fish. In times past the Wolga was
much incommodated by the Cosaks of Don, who being very strong in small
shipping, would sometimes, surprise, assail and take the Russian Fishermen and
Strougs.

On the 22 we passed by the Islands Tlerinski and Subsinski, but toward the
Evening were fain to drop anchor, by reason of the many Sands and Banks.

On the 23 we weighed but found our Anchor fast among the Roots of the Trees,
which cost us some pains to get clear. About midday we got the Island Dioploy,
about 3 in the afternoon Musa, and about the Evening Kremonsky, where we
anchored.

On the 24 we proceeded forward and got Parmino, where we took in Provision,
which we found very good and of a low Price. From hence we loosed, and sailed
by many pleasant Islands, Towns, and an Excellent prospect from Land, which was
stored with Cattle, fruitful Dales, Woods, Meadows, Currents and whatsoever
natural Delights that may content the heart of Man.

On the 29 dito we came to VVasili-gorod a little Town on the West side of the
Wolga, and because it was here a level Country we took the height of the
Arctic Pole, which we found 55 degr. and 50 min. above the Horizon. This said
Town was then without Gates or Walls, and is built mostly of wood, save only
Public Edifices, and Religious Houses, which are there but few, since it has
not been long in possession and subject to the Czar, or great Duke of Moscovy.
On the South Side of VVasiligorod, is a little River called the Soura, which
here gushes out with a violent rushing and buzzing into the VVolga.

Above VVasiligorod begins the Land of the Ceremish Tartars which extends it
self out as far as Casan. Those again are divided into two sorts of People; The
one sort is called Nagorni, which are those that inhabit the hilly Country,
and the other Lugowy who dwell mostly in the Valleys. The former follow
altogether Pasturage, the latter Agriculture, for which they have a happy Land,
blessed with a fertile Soil. The Inhabitants are a rude and barbarous People,
utter strangers to good Manners and Learning. They speak for the most part the
Russian Language, but some places there are where they speak Tartarian, and in
other places they have a peculiar Tongue of their own. They are the most stupid
Heathens that I have yet seen in all my 3 Voyages, have neither Sense nor light
of a Divine Power. Houses of Worship, and Priests, Resurrection, Heaven and
Hell are things they never heard of, nor nor will ever learn to know what they
are. However I may not be so general but that I may except some, who have some
light and knowledge of an immortal God, and such an one as has the direction of
all, but only rules them as a King upon Earth does his Subjects. They are
further of Opinion that there are Devils or evil Spirits, whose power is
limited and circumscribed, and that they cannot do any mischief save only in
this Life, for these doubt much about the Resurrection, and for this end they
do Sacrifices to them as do the Madagascars that they should do them no harm.
They tell you of a strange Water by the means whereof the Prince of the Devils
comes in horrible and most ugly shapes, for which they dread, as Children do
Bugbears they never saw. To that Immortal Deity and divine Essence they offer
up all manner of Beasts as Oxen, Horses, and Sheep, which when they do, they
take the Hide and stretch it out upon a Rack made on purpose, making thereby a
Fire, over which they hang the Flesh to boil, When it has seethed long enough,
they take out a Bowl of the Pottage in the one hand, and a Bowl of Metheglin in
the other, and throw them both upon the Hide, upon which it falls into the
Fire, saying, Accept, O God, this Offering at my Hands, and be pleased to hear
my Prayers; which Prayers do commonly import their own Health, or the increase
of their Cattle. So that their main Opinion about that God, is only that he is
a good-natured and benevolent-Lord, and the Devil malevolent, which is all that
may be gathered from them. Others I have seen who worship the Sun, Fire, and
Water. Ceremonies about the Dead I could never perceive any, save only that
when any eminent Man among them comes to die they make a Feast of Horseflesh,
at which all the nearest Relations are present, and the Corpse given to a
ravenous Beast called Briggachol, which I have not elsewhere seen: That done
they hang up his Vestments upon a Tree in memory of him, as we do Escutcheons,
and this was all I could learn of my self, or from the Observations of others
that had been longer and further within Land. Their Habit is as course as their
Breeding, mostly of Skins or a kind of Canvas. Their Upper-coat comes down only
to the Thighs, and their Breeches and Stockings all one. Those that are married
shave their Heads, but whilst single they let their hair grow, but all in one
Tuft, which they commonly ty up in a ball above their head, or plate it, as our
Jockies do their Horse-tails. The Women wear also course Garments having their
faces muffled up to the eyes: but more quaint is the Habit of a Young-woman
ready to marry, who besides other od accoutrements wears a piece of Wood,
shaped like a horn directly upon her Forehead, about an Ell in length, and at
the small end a little Bell. Circumcision they have not yet learned from the
Turks or Jews, nor yet Baptism from the Christians; but have some few
Ceremonies about the naming of their Children, which is done when they are
about half a year old. Polygamy is in use among them, and that without any
order or regard to nearness in Blood, for it has been well known that the
Father takes the Daughter and so procreates Issue, and the Son the Mother,
after the manner of the Cingaleezes in Ceylon, where the Father about marrying
his daughter out, bereaves her of her Virginity, saying, Should I plant a Tree
and not enjoy the First Fruits my self?

CHAP. X. The Ship set fast upon a Foord. The great Vtility of the Linden-tree.
Some of the Company drowned. Fertility and excellent Soil of the Banks of the
Wolga. Arrival at Casan. Casan taken in by the Russes. The Casan-Tartars fight
the Russes. The Russian Army flee. Moscou taken in. The Czar becomes Tributary
to the Tartars. The good Conduct and valor of the Governor of Resan, who
restores the Czar and the Empire to it is former Freedom.
ON the 30 dito we set out again, JUNE. 1669.
and suddenly were run aground upon a Shallow place, where we were very hardly
put to it to get off, and besides our great Labor we lost an Anchor and a
Dragg. We were no sooner got clear but we ran immediately upon another Bank,
and so from one to another that we were almost out of hopes of ever coming
through, for we saw danger on every side, and our Pilot very unskilful of the
River, which detarded our Voyage very much.

The next day we gained the Deeps, and came before Cusmademianski where we cast
anchor and provided our selves with Victualling and Refreshment. This City is
founded upon a rising ground having on the one side high and steep Mountains,
and on the other side a level Country. The Land round about as well the
montanous as the flat affoard many Woods and Groves of The same, as I take it,
which Pliny and other Naturalists call Tilia or (...), the inner Rind whereof
they made Parchment ^r Paper of, as of the Shrub Papyrus. Of this more amply
see Pliny lib. 16. cap. 14.
Linden, on Teile-tree. The Bark of this tree is good for many uses, and
therefore pilled and sold by the Inhabitants, the Body they hollow, and make
Tubs, Troughs, Pales and other Vessels thereof: which is the only Traffic and
Work I know of in use amongst them.

On the first of July we sailed by two Islands, to wit, Turig and Mastof, and
ran the ship aground, where we lost another Anchor, Toward the Evening we came
before Makrity.

On the 2d we set Sail, and came before Sabaksar, where some of our
Ships-company went ashore, and took our Pasport and Credentials to show the
VVaywode, or Governor, who gave us a supply of Men and necessaries to help us
forward to Astrachan. Sabaksar is one of the neatest Towns I had hitherto seen
since we left Moscou, JULY. 1669.
being well built, fortified and since the uproar of the Casaks, the Garrison
better supplied with men than before. Having dispatched here we weighed anchor,
and on the 3 of ditto, gained the Island Cousin where we were fast again, but
without much difficulty got clear. We sailed that day past Sundir, a handsome
little Town, and dropped anchor before Cokschaga: loosing thence we were fain to
cast out our Fore-anchor to hale over a Foord, which was 10 Dutch leagues long,
and found work enough to bring the Vessel over, however after much pains taken
we gaind the Deep, without any damage to the Ship.

On the 4 we came past the Shallow places, and before VVolofka were fast again,
where we were fain to cast anchor and wind our selves off. At night we lay
before Swiatkhi, which is a fortified Town, having many fair Churches and
Monasteries within walls.

On the 5 we weighed anchor and set Sail, having a brisk Gale, which in 3 hours
time, or less brought us before the River Casanka, from which River the City
and Kingdom of Casan have their name, here we came to anchor where some small
Shipping belonging to that place, aiming to enter the River, ran against our
Bow and some fell overboard.

Here about is a very fair Country and as fertile as any that ever I have seen
in all my Life. It is mostly low arable and meadow ground overflown once a year
upon the swelling of the River VVolga. On the Banks of this said River are
variety of Fruit trees of many kinds, which grow in whole Groves together and
wild, for a hundred Dutch Leagues, as Hasle-nuts, Cherries 3 or 4 several
sorts, Black; White and Red Currants, etc. That part of Casan which lies most
within Land formerly belonged to the Tartars, but the Inhabitants speak the
Russian Language, which was first brought in when the Country was conquered by
the Russes, as shall be hereafter said. They do not convert any man to slavery,
nor make that their Traffic, as do the Nagay the Crim-Calmuc-and
Dagestan-Tartars, for if they had they might have sold me when with other two
of our Ships-company I was under their Hands, and that above 3 leagues within
Land, where on the contrary we found them civil after their Manner, for they
gave us Bread and Milk to eat.

On the 6th our Shallop was sent up to Casan, to acquaint the Deputy with our
Arrival.

On the 8th the Deputy of Casan, together with the Metropolitan came aboard,
where they seemed to receive great satisfaction, having never seen the like
before. The Common people came likewise flocking in great multitudes to see a
floating Castle, and notwithstanding all the aw of the Deputy and Provincial,
we had much ado to keep them off, for they strove to come aboard.

Casan is a great City, and reasonably strong, Description of Casan.
but it is Walls and Towers of Wood, as almost all the Russian Towns are. The
Citadel is walled with stone, and well provided of Ammunition and Men. The
Town is situated upon a Hill, but in a Champan Country. The Citadel is
encompassed with the Casanka, which renders the Water within inexhaustible in
time of Siege. The Traffic of this Place is very considerable, regarding the
Country it lies in. It is frequented by the Crim-Tartars, who bring thither
all manner of Merchandise their Land affoards, and not only the vendible
Products of the Earth and Cattle, but as orderly their own Children, which they
sell at a low rate, a Boy or a Girl of 16 years of age, for the value of 20
Crowns a piece. The City Casan is equally inhabited by Russians and Tartars and
governed by a Deputy, as we have already said, but the Citadel kept solely by
Russes, where no Tartar is to come upon pain of Death. There is besides the
Deputy (who is only as President and supreme in Civil Matters) an extraordinary
VVaywode, who is always as Superintendant in time of War, having the sole
Direction of Martial Affairs.

The Country of Casan, which has been formerly a Kingdom, is of a very wide
extent; bounded on the North with Syberia, on the East with Nagaya, and on the
South with the River VVolga. This Country was formerly very populous and able
to bring a great Army to field, as in recorded of their famous Expeditions
against the Russes; but since depopulated, made wast and subdued, by Basilius
Ivanowitz, who overcame these Casan-Tartars in a very bloody Battle, and after
that so notable a Conquest set a Viceroy. This Viceroy, although a
Casan-Tartar, was always more loyal to the Czar, than favorable to his own
Countrymen; which occasioned great murmurings and jealousy, among the
Casaneers, that at last they called in the Crim-Tartars for their assistance,
who were Mahometans. These made not much delay, but on a sudden raised a mighty
Army, which incorporating with the Rebels gave the Viceroy battle, and
gained the Field, and pursuing the success of the day invaded the Emperors
Territories. The Czaar in the mean while being informed by Express that the
Hostility kept the Field, had put the Forces under Conduct of the Viceroy to
flight, and that they approached with a great Body, he levied as great an Army
as he could do with so short warning, and engaged with the Tartars in open
Field. But the Hostility increasing more and more, what with their own Nation,
and what with the Malcontents within the Russian Jurisdiction, were almost 15
to 3, and after a short but very hot Battle the Emperor was fain to flee and
betake himself to Novogorod. The Tartars seeing themselves Masters of the
Field, marched forward to Moscou which they attacqued, took in and plundered.
However the Citadel Cremelena held stoutly forth all the time, without making
Proposals or Articles upon which they would seem willing to surrender it, till
at last finding themselves not in a capacity to hold forth they gave it over,
upon very honorable Conditions as to themselves, but disadvantageous Terms for
the great Duke himself, and the City of Moscou. Shameful was this Loss to the
Emperor, and no less ground of Honor for the Victory to the Hostility, who
now as it were in a moment had regained all their Freedoms which from time to
time before they had lost. Right loath was the Czar to give his assent to the
Conclusions of the Treaty, but was at last compelled to sign it with his own
hand, partly for that his Bojars and Council pressed him to it, and partly upon
his own considerations, how that his Country in all probability would in case
he continued refractory be overrun, and he himself with all his Race be
secluded from the Monarchy. The Tartarians had 2 Generals, Brethren and equal
in command, whereof the elder called Mendligeritz, erected a Statue in Moscou,
to which he obliged and enjoined the Moscovians to pay certain Homages. The
younger called Sapgeri marched on for Casan where he had his Residence,
thinking, that because it had formerly been a Sovereignty, and that the
Footssteps and Relics of a wasted Kingdom were still apparent, he might the
better erect and rear a new Monarchy upon the Foundations of an old.
Mendligeritz the elder marched with his Army toward Rhesan, well knowing that
the great Power of that Province might check him, upon opportunity. So soon as
he was set down before the Town, he signified the occasion of his coming, sent
the Governor a Copy of the Articles signed by the Czar, demands the Town, and
willed him to surrender. But the Governor (who was a Gentleman both of known
Fame and Worth, in regard of his rare Conduct in several Battails at the Head
of an Army) let him know, That all the Infidels and Barbarians in the world
should not deterr him so far as to transgress his Duty, and Oath, since he
himself had no such Intelligence from his Lord, the Great Duke, and till he had
Assurance of what the Tartarian General had advised him about concerning such
Articles, he would defend the Town and Citadel. The General upon this Answer
sent him the Original of the prementioned Articles, and so willed him to avoid
Bloodshed: but the Governor detained the Messengers and kept the Schaedule,
resolving to stand out the Siege. Upon this the Tartars raised the Siege, and
attempted to storm the City; but those within courageously defended themselves,
and played of their Canon; together with an incessant shooting of Arrows, at
the Enemy, that they were forced to retreat and remove the Siege to another
side of the Town, where some disloyal Russians had acquainted them that the
place was weakest and consequently the most easy to be stormed: however finding
no hopes of gaining the Town, the Tartarian General sent a Herald to urge the
Governor to resign the Papers, declaring himself thereupon willing to draw off
his Forces, which the Governor refusing the General left the Town. Several
Narratives were sent off to Moscou, which occasioned a general Joy, and
encouraged the Townsmen to revolt, and unanimously fall upon the Garrison, who
being incapable to make resistance were fain to submit and beg Quarter. The
Statue of Mendligeritz was also pulled down and broke to pieces in detestation
of his Tyranny. The Czaar immediately upon these news gathered all the Forces
he could, which when drawn to field amounted to 25000 Men, and marched forward
to Casan, where he gave the Tartarians Battle; and after a hot fight gained
the Camp, the Enemy retiring into the Western Provinces of Tartary, shortly
after the Czar died, without the performance of any honorable atchievment, save
that during the time of his Reign. But Ivan Basilowitz, MAR. 1669.
son to the deceased Emperor, seeing the good footsteps of his Father, and
perceiving a sure foundation, Levies a new Army and recruits the Old with well
experienced Germans; but having no trusty Person to whom he durst commit the
new Army as Commander in chief, he joins the Forces, himself leading marches so
in the Head to Casan, which City when he had besieged 8 weeks and lost many
men, fearing likewise that Mendligeritz might come to assist them he gave them
Offers of Peace, which nevertheless the Tartars would not accept, expecting
succor from the Field-Army. Ivan Basilowitz thought it high time either to
take up the Siege or to storm it on a sudden; which last he resolved upon and
accordingly, set 70 German Pioneers at work, who did the work so effectually
and without discovery of the Enemy within, that they had under-mined the
Northeast Gate in the space of 24 Hours or less, and thereupon blew it up which
done the Moscovians surprised them within and made themselves Masters both of
the Town and Citadel. The Townsmen obtained Quarter althoug the Great Duke had
threatened the Contrary, for that they had twice rebelled against the Imperial
Crown and of their own accord sent succor to the Enemy, when it was not in the
lest urged from them. The Czar being now Master of Casan fortified it with a
strong Wall, Towers and Bulwarks. But now to our present Journal.

After the Deputy of Casan had thoroughly visited our Ship, and well entertained
by our Officers aboard, he departed with the Metropolitan ashore, and entreated
us all to come up to Casan, which we did, and received a reciprocal kindness
from him there. When we returned aboard the Mobile followed us with Music and
Dancing a good part of the way.

On the 10th we received a good Quantity of Lead aboard, which we were to
unload at Astrachan.

On the 13th I got permission of the Officers to go up to Casan to buy some
Biscake for my own use, which I had for a mean price, and having much more than
I could use, I sold it and got a considerable profit, as well of the Officers
as the Foremast men, for we were to take care for our own Victualling.

CHAP. XI. Departure from Casan. The strange manner of taking Fish. Cities
demolished by Tamerlan. The Ship run fast aground. The Salt-Pans, and manner of
making Salt. Difficult Sailing in the Wolga. A New City built for defense
against Robbers and Pirates. The great abundance of Liquirice about Astrachan,
The Land of the Calmuc-Tartars.
ON the 17 ditto leaving Casan, we set Sail and that morning were aground 2
several times, Departure from Casan.
but without much difficulty got clear again.

On the 18 we came close to an Island called Staritzo, where we anchored, our
Pilot went ashore to view the said Island and coming about 3 furlongs within
land found stones, of the shape and bigness of Lemmons which being broken had
within the similitude of a star, but those not all alike in Color, for some
were like Gold, others like Silver, and others of a Yellow and Tawny color.
This Island is situated in 45 degr. 31 min. being of it self about 3 Dutch
Leagues in length and 2 broad.

On the 19 we got the Island Potenski where we came to anchor expecting that a
great storm would come on.

Upon the 22 we sailed past the Buytma which is a branch of the famous River
Lanca being about 12 Dutch Leagues from Casan. This same River has it is Rise or
Fountain about Chambretoky which lies to the North-east of Casan.

Here we met with a company of Fishermen of whom we bought some Bream, which
they take in great Abundance, and after an od way, which if time had permitted
us we would have learned.

On the 23 we came to a very pleasant Coast where we went to ashore, and found
there the Ruins of a great City which had been made wast by Tamarlan. While we
lay here it began to blow very hard, and the next day we were fain to keep at
anchor. In the mean time I went with some of our Ships Company to the Hill
Arbuchin, where we found the Ruins of another City, bearing one name with the
said Hill. In ascending the Hill we found a great stone with this Inscription
in old Russian Words and Letters, IF THOU WILL REMOVE, THOU SHALL NOT LOSE THY
PAINS. Some Russians had a mind to see what would come of it, JULY. 1669.
and after long digging and much struggling at last got it turned over, but,
instead of finding a Treasure, met with another Motto, which was, THOU ASS GO
SHAKE THY EARS. This vexed them so that they rather willed to let it stand in
that posture, than take the pains to set it as it was before, to deceive others.

The Land round about is very fair and withal of a fat Soil, yet not
cultivated, for there are no Inhabitants, but the Relicts of several Towns and
Villages, formerly depopulated by the famous Tamerlan.

On the 17 we sailed past the River and City of Adrobe, lying in the height of
54 degr. and 48 min. At the mouth of this River we were again set fast, and
after much labor, and all the means we could imagine to be any way helpful,
we gave the Ship and Yacht both over for lost, but in the Evening it began to
Thunder, and abundance of Rain fell, that the River began to swell, and so set
us adrift again.

On the 29 we came before Calmaka, where were many Salt Pits and two new Towns.
We found there several Pans where the Russes made their Salt, which they fetch
out of great hollows and cavernal Rocks; this being boiled is sent up the Wolga
in Stroughs, and so dispersed over the whole Country of Moscovia. These
Salt Pits keep abundance of Men in employment, and is no small profit to the
Overseers.

On the 30th we set sail again, and after half an hours sailing ran aground
upon a sand, where after much ado we got off, but with the Loss of an Anchor
and 80 fathom of our Cable.

The next day it began to storm very hard, wherefore we thought good to come to
anchor, for the River was here about very perilous, and so we were fain to
continue till the 4 of August.

On the 5th of August we came to Morrakzy where we saw abundance of Fishers, of
whom we bought some Cavear, and Sturgeon, having as much of that Fish as 20 Men
could eat for the value of 11 stivers [or one shilling sterling. A great Storm.
] Here we were forced to tarry for the space of 24 Hours by reason of the hard
Wind, lying near the Island Kistowato, where is a very shoaring or slanting
strand on both sides, which makes the stream of the Wolga at that place very
narrow and deep. Here we saw the River Ussa which encompassing Samara almost
round, empties it self into the Wolga. On each side this River is a fair and
pleasant Country so far as one can view: AUG. 1669.
but we were informed by the Russes that it was there very dangerous to travail
by reason of Robbers, and the vagabond Cosaks, who kept themselves in the
Woods, whence they sometimes salley out in whole bands, and surprise
Passengers. The Cosaks also haunt the River, having Boats which are made long
and small, with which they row admirably swift. On one side of the Ussa are
some Mountains and amongst those one of an incredible height called Sariol
Kurgan, where they say an Emperor of the Tartars with 70 Kings ly buried, when
they came up the Wolga with intent to invade Russia; which Mountain being bare
and rocky, they say that the Soldiers carried up so much Earth and Mold as was
sufficient. Some of those Mountains are woody and other some bare stone and
cliffs.

On the 8th we sailed forward and came to Samara, which is so called from a
certain River that runs through it; where it runs into the VVolga. The City is
built four Square, and mostly of Wood; only the Churches and Cloisters are
built of stone.

The day following we saw the Mountain Cosak-krim, so called from the Cosaks
which were there beat by the Moscovian Army; having sadly molested all the
Country, under the subjection of the Czaar, by a continual Plundering: but
having at that time received such an overthrow could never since complete so
great a Body, as might be any way obnoxious to the Russians. Behind Samara the
Mountains are very high, but Cosak-krim surpasses all the rest for height.
About the going down of the Sun we sailed past the Island Pantzina and the next
morning found our selves, as far as Sagenisko.

On the 11 we sailed past the Island Zagra, where we met diverse. Fishers-boats
and supplied our selves with fresh Fish. Here we had news that a great number
of Cosac-Rebells were entered the Island Satyry-Boggere, at the mouth of the
VVolga, on the Caspian Sea, and annoyed the River.

On the 12 we sailed by several Islands, namely Sasnow, Ossino, Schipnamago
Koltof, and other not inhabited.

The next day we saw the Mountain Smiowa, which in their Language is as much as
to say, a Snake, or Dragon, having it is name as I conjecture from its
similitude of a Snake, rising up into hillocks and falling down again into gaps
like a serpent when he creeps. Although the Russes as also the Inhabitants tell
us a Fable of a famous Cavalier who went out to kill a monstrous Animal like a
Snake, that wasted all the Country round about, and devoured every day 50 Men
for a Breakfast. The Knight having killed the serpent it was metamorphosed
into a Rock which is now this Mountain.

The day following we came before Saratof, where we cast anchor, This City lies
in 52 degr. 12 min. in a valley upon a Branch of the VVolga, on the larboard
side in sailing down, and is only inhabited by a Military Officer and a
Garrison of Soldiers to free the River and Country of the Cosacks and
Calmuc-Tartars, whose Country is bounded here. These Calmucks are the most
ougly and misshapen People in the World, worse favored by far than the
Hotentots or Moors, which are Angels in Comparison of those. Their Faces are
broad and almost four square, their noses flat, their mouths reaching almost
from one ear, to the other, their Eyes long and small, upon their Heads they
wear a Quoif; the rest of their Habit is sufficiently denoted in the following
Plate. They seldom go afoot but mostly on Horseback, as if they were Centaurs,
for some of them do not only eat and drink but also sleep upon their Horses.
Their only weapons is the Long-bow which they use with an admirable Dexterity.
There is a continual enmity between those and the Nagayans, for they
perpetually steal one another Children and Cattle, which they bring to
Astrachan to Market, for there they have 3 several market days, one for the
Russians themselves, another for the Nagayans, and another for the
Calmuc-Tartars, which 2 last-named may not come together, although they be both
Mahometans, and under the Jurisdiction of the great Duke. The Calmuks dwell not
in Towns as other People do; but travail all over the Country, pitching their
Tents where they find a fertile fat Soil, which when their Horses, Camels, Cows
and small Cattle have eaten bare, they break up and march forward to find out
some other place, as History records of the Scythians, who without dispute
were the same People. Their chief and choice Diet is Horseflesh, which they
eat raw after they have rode a little upon it, thrusting it between the Sadle
and the Horse.

Upon the 15 of August we sailed past 2 Islands, to wit, Criusna and
Saponoufka, as also by the Hill Solottogory, which is as much as to say
Gold-hill, so called from a rich booty of Gold the Tartarians had once taken in
a Caravan, which they divided among themselves by cap-fulls.

On the 16 ditto we came before the River Ruslan on the left hand, right over
against a round Hill called Vrak-ofskarul, from one Vrak, a Tartarian Prince
who lies there buried. This Beck comes from the famous River Which is also
called Tanais and divides Europe from Asia, its course is from North to South,
See Strabo lib. 2.
Don, upon which River those that are called the Don-Cosaks have their being,
which also is the Country and Residence of Stenko Radzin. In the year 1668 the
Russes had build a new City at the Mouth of the River Ruslan, to give a check
to the Don-Cosacks, who much annoyed the VVolga with their small Boats, coming
down the said River daily in great Troops, and committed many insolences:
However it seems not much available; for they have devised a new mean to shun
the Fort and come into the VVolga by drawing their Boats over land upon Wheels,
which they do for 7 Dutch Leagues together, for the Country there is flat and
even.

The next day it began to blow very hard for which reason we were fain to
remain that day at anchor, and on the 18th to set sail having a gentle Gale
which brought us before the City Czaritza, which is as much to say Caesarea, or
rather Empress, lying on the Right hand at the foot of a Hill. The City is in
it self not great, but very strong munited with 6 Ramparts, or Bulwarks,
besides other Fortifications. The Garrison is well maintained with Recruits of
Strelitzers, being a Place of great Trust and Importance, especially for that
it lies upon the Tartarian Continent.

On the 19 we came before the Place where Czares-gorod of old had stood, by the
Ruins thereof we could observe that City had been built of Brick. It was
demolished besides many others by Tamerlan the Great. The stones have been of
good use to those of Astrachan, wherewith they built their Walls. Towers,
Churches and Monasteries.

On the 20 we haled over several Riffs and shallow Foords, and at last ran our
selves aground upon a sand, where we stuck 3 hours before we could yet clear.
From this place where we were fast all along the Banks to Astrachan, grows
great plenty of Liquirice, but all the Land to the Caspian Sea wast, and not
fit for Tillage.

On the 21 we got the Island VVesaway, which we left on the Starboard-side, and
that Evening came before Tzornogar, or Tzornojar, being in regard of any
requisite occasion in such a place considerably strong: AUG. 1669.
it is environed with Palizados, and about an [ English] mile without the Town.
On each side are several Watch-houses, with Towers from whence they can see the
Enemy at a distance, the Country being level and not Woody. The first occasion
of the building of this City was said to be from a party of 400 Cosacks which
had spoiled a Russian Caravan, intercepting it between the Land and the Boats,
where the Strelitzers were, that were appointed to Convoy it, and by reason
that the stream was so strong that the Boats could not row against it, the said
Robbers made their escape with a very rich Booty. At that same time there was
at Tzornogar a Persian Ambassador arrived with all his Movables and a great
Retinue, intending for Moscou. The said Ambassador came aboard our Ship and
received Presents from our Officers, which although he willingly accepted, yet
remunerated them with things of greater value and worth.

On the 22 we set sail and saw the Mountain Polowna where the Russian Fablers
say the Moon goes every night to bed, because that over that Hill is always a
great mist. About 2 in the afternoon we got the Island Kitzier in sight and
speeded our course so that we gained the sight of Astrachan before the Sun set.

The 24 before noon by the grace of the Everlasting GOD we arrived at the
long-wish'd-for Astrachan, where we for Joy fired all our Guns to the
Astonishment of the Inhabitants, who had never seen a Ship of that Burden and
Force before. From the day of our Arrival here, we lay off in the stream till
the first of September and then came up close to the Kay with our Ship and
Yacht, thanking the Almighty for his special Bounty, in delivering us through
so many perils, and bringing us at last to our desired Port.

CHAP. XII. Situation of Astrachan. The Inhabitants. How Astrachan became
subject to the Czaar. Strange manner of Tents, or Cottages. Provision very
cheap and Brandy dear. A Desert affoarding good Salt, and a strange kind of
Fruit. The Form and Nature of the Nagayan Tartars. Their Habit, manner of Life
and Housekeeping. Their Trades and way of earning money, Horseflesh,
Mares-milk and Blood in great esteem by them.
A Strachan lies upon the Dividing of Europe from Asia, AUG. 1669.
upon the Island Delgoy, in the Country of the Nagayan Tartars, Situation of
Astrachan.
where the Northern Pole is elevated 46 degr. and 22 min. above the Horizon,
and is about 50 Dutch Leagues from the Caspian or Hyrcan Sea. It is environed
with a thick stone wall, and that time I was there furnished with 500 great
Brass Cannon, besides a very strong Garrison, with Ammunition proportionable to
defend it against the Tartars and Cosaks, who have often had a design to retake
it. It gives a very noble prospect from abroad, with it is many Towers and Lofty
Piles of Buildings, as well what appertain to the Fortifications as to the
Churches and Religious Houses. It is a famous Town for Traffic, frequented not
only by all the Regions of Tartary adjoining to the Caspian Sea, but also by
Persians, Armenians and Indians, who bring their Goods and Merchandises in a
certain sort of Shipping which they call Boeses, being about 80 Tun burden a
piece. But these Vessels cannot Sail by traverse, but always before the Wind.
Of all the several kinds of Merchandise which those of Astrachan deal in, Silk
is the chief, so that this seems to be the sole Magazin of that Comodity,
whence it is re-exported up the Wolga, and consequently through the whole
Russian Empire.

Astrachan has been formerly the Royal Seat of the Nagayan Tartars but making a
League with the Crim-and Casan-Tartars was a means to detrude the King, and
bring the People under the Subjection of the Grand Czaar of Moscovia, for
according to the Tenure of their Alliance, each was obliged to assist other,
whether upon offensiv or defensiv Occasions: so that Ivan Basilowitz, declaring
war against those of Casan, they were assisted by the Nagayans, who were beat
in open field, and after both Armies defeated, several Holds belonging to the
Casans were taken and demolished. Astrachan at last it self was besieged and
taken by storm by the said Great Duke, the Tartarians driven out, and peopled
with Russians and a strong Garrison of that Nation. Astrachan, when in
possession of the Tartars, was but a small town in comparison of what it now
is, for the Father of the then Emperor when I was there had enlarged it by a
3d part, and called the Addition Strelitza gorod, that is the Soldier-Town, for
it is mostly inhabited by military persons: and since that time it has been
continually augmented with new buildings. The Customs and Duties besides the
Bartering of Commodities in this City is a considerable profit for the Czaar.
Air and Soil of Astrachan.
The Air about Astrachan is very indifferent and tolerable as to it is
Temperature, neither rendered unwholsom by the scorching heat of the Summer
Solstice, nor in any case insufferable for the penetrating Frosts in the
Winter, as if this place had the benefit of two Climats. Hence is the Soil also
very fertile and the Country fructiferous beyond (I had almost said) any other
Country in either of the temperate Zones, if the People and Inhabitants had
but two Advantages in cultivating it, which tend mainly to the Improvement and
maintenance of Agriculture, that is, an assured constant Peace, and the
Mysteries of Husbandry which we have in the Westermost Countries of Europe.
They have many and various kinds of select Fruits, as Water-Lemmons, Oranges,
Apples, Pears, Cherrys, Damzons, etc. The Vineyards are in a short time very
much improved, for before the year 1613 that Plantation was not known among
them, till certain Persian Merchants bestowed a Vine upon a German, but a
Proselyt and Monk of the Russian Church, which he planted in a Garden belonging
to the Monastery: the same Vine thriving so well, caused diverse great Merchants
to do the like whose endeavors had in the space of 3 years that success, that
they presented the Emperor with 200 Pipes of Wine, and 50 Pipes of Brandy,
upon which the said Emperor gave them all the Encouragement he could to
propagate that laudable beginning.

The Nagayan-Tartars who for the most part inhabit the Champan land about and
near Astrachan, are not permitted to dwell in the City; nor may they fortify
their villages with Walls or Towers: only by many Entreaties they have obtained
a Grant of fencing in their Tents with Stakes and Palizados, to secure
themselves from the Assaults 1 D' voorstadt: 2 Stadts Magesyn. 3 Het Slodt: 4
Tooren Staende Int slodt: 5 Bvee Niewe Cercke. 6 Even Cerck. 7 D' Poort Vande
Hoate voorstadt: 8 D' Vismardt. 9 D' Sout Bergen. 10 D' Revier De Wollega. 11
Het Tartarise Leeger Onder. D' Beschermingh van D' Stadt. 12 to Schip d'
Adelaer. 13 d' Calmicke Mard^: 14 d' Boogaert:


and Insolences of Night-Robbers and the Calmuc-Tartars, who sometimes
surprise them at anawares, and carry away both Men and Cattle. They have no
fast Towns, or Cities, but use Tents, as their Ancestors have ever done. Their
Tents are built round, the Diameter of the fund being about 10 foot: these are
twisted with Reeds or Barks of Trees, and to defend them from the Rain covered
with Felt. The Chimney is turned round with a Weathercock; in the middle of the
Tent they make the Fire, which is commonly of Cows-dung and small Twigs dried
together in the Sun about which they sit, and as they are ready for a Nap drop
down one after another.

Astrachan being almost on every side surrounded with such a fruitful
Country, has good plenty of all sorts of Fruit brought every day to Market;
and those very cheap. Melons I have bought 10 or 12 for the value of a penny
and other fruits after a conformable Price. Fish and Flesh they have in better
plenty than any where else I know in the World. For the value of 3d I bought a
huge Sturgeon, a Carp weighing 30 pounds, and 25 Herrings, greater and fatter
than ever I have seen in Holland. Perch, Pike, Bream and Sandaks are there so
plentifully taken, that only poor people eat them, of which a family of 8
Persons may have as much as will suffice them, for the value of 3 farthings.
The fish Sandach is a great Rarity, and proper only to the Wolga, and such
Rivers as run into it: being about the bigness of a Haddock, and something like
it in taste, but much more delicate and faster, if taken about November and the
3 following Months. Their Beef and Mutton is exceeding good, sold usually for
a Farthing the pound. All kinds of Waterfowl are very plentiful and cheap,
especially a sort of Wild-gees and those we call Moscovy-Ducks which the
Tartars take with Hawks, and bring them in such plenty to Market, that they may
be had for a penny the dozen. The Tartars who live chiefly by Fishing and
Fowling use also Hunting, and in several woody Islands about Astrachan take
many Wild-swine which are fed with Accorns, that being known for the best mast
that is, for Hogs. These they also bring to Astrachan which by reason that that
Flesh will take Salt well, they buy and use it aboard the shipping, that trade
to and again in the Caspian Sea, the more because of it is cheapness for none
but the Moscovians and Armenians buy it, the Persians and Tartars themselves
being mostly Mahometans, and therefore not permitted to eat it. To be brief,
there is not that thing which may delight the Pallat, but may be had for a very
mean and inconsiderable price, and at a far easier rate than the coursest Diet
which necessitated people must be content with in the West of Europe; and if
any man of a mean Estate could deny himself that Society of his Relations and
Acquaintance in which every one has more or less solace, and retire thither, he
may live as contentedly there as the greatest Lord, or richest Merchant in the
World, who, as it were in taking Honey are frequently stung with the Be, and
in receiving Prosperity and Benefits from the right hand of Fortune, are as
often buffeted with her left. However by way of exception I must mind you of
one thing, that the Russians are here at a great Loss for Brandy, since the
promulgation of a Late Edict, the tenure and purport whereof was, That no
Brandy should be distilled there for a certain term of Years: but upon what
insight it was that moved his Majesty to order such an Interdiction I know not;
unless to prevent the Strelitzers, or Soldatesque, to forget themselves so far
as to let the Tartars, which ly on every side the City, to surprise them with a
sudden Invasion: for Brandy is not only under a special Interdiction of being
made there, but also the Importation prohibited to a certain Quantity, every
year, which makes the Russians the more to covet it, insomuch that sometimes
they have drunk all the Kabacks and Brandy-cellars in Astrachan dry before 3
Months of 12 be about. At Nisen-Novogorod we bought a measure, holding about a
Gallon for about 3 sh. 2 d. Sterling. which here when at cheapest is sold for 50
sh.

Salt how gotten.
On the West side of the VVolga is a great dry and wast Heath called the Step,
where they find abundance of good Salt, which is concreted in the Sun, and
thrown up on Heaps like Ice. This Salt is dug out of the Hollows and Caves
of Rocks, and proves a very rich Commodity, being exported as well up the VVolga
into all parts of Moscovia and Russia, as Persia, Armenia, Tartary and other
Countries bordering upon the Hyrcan Sea. Every man is licensed to fetch it that
lists, only allowing. Two pence halfpenny for 80 Pound, for duty to the
Emperor.

A strange kind of Fruit.
In this Heath, or Wilderness, called the Step is a strange kind of Fruit found,
named Baronez, or Barnitsch, from the Word Boran, which is a Lamb in the
Russian Tongue because of its form and similitude, much resembling a sheep
having Head, Feet and Tail, and what is more worthy of Note, a skin of white
shining Hair and soft as Silk. This Skin is held in great esteem by the Tartars
and Russes, and sold for a good price, as I have paid my self sometimes 5 or 6
Roebels and doubled my money when I sold it again. One of those Skins is to be
seen at the House of Mr. John Swammerdam, in Amsterdam, a Gentleman famous for
collection of the Rarities of Nature from every place of the World: but that of
his he had from a Seaman that had been formerly a Slave in China, where coming
into a Wood, found of this Fruit, and brought away as many Skins as made him a
Coat. The Description he gave of them, did very much agree with what the
Inhabitants of Astrachan informed me of them. It grows upon a low Stalk about 2
foot and a half high, some higher, and is supported just at the Navel: the Head
always hangs down as if it pastured, or fed, of the Grass, and when the Grass
decays it perishes, but this I ever looked upon as ridiculous, although the
Inhabitants asseverated to me by many Oaths, that they have often out of
curiosity made experience of that, by cutting away the Grass, upon which it
instantly fades away. However what I might further add as to what they say of
this Fruit, and what I my self believe in the wonderful Operations of a secret
Sympathy in nature, I shall rather keep to my self, than aver, or impose upon
the Reader, what, I am sensible will be universally exploded for a Fable.
Certain it is there is nothing which is more coveted by Wolves, than this, and
the Inward parts of it are more congruous with the Anatomy of that Animal, than
Mandrakes are with Men.

The Nagayan and Crim-Tartars are thick and corpulent, broadfac'd, and
litle-eied. The Eyes of the Men are wrinkled like old Wives. Their Beard grows
very slovenly, here and there a hair, and shave their Heads bare on the Crown;
yet these are not altogether so ougly as the Calmucs. Their Habit is altogether
as gentile as their Persons are comely, their upper vestment either of a very
course stuff with every thread as fine as a Tobacco-pipe, or else of Sheepskins
with the Wool-side outward, their Caps and Hose of the same color, where they
wear any, for they use as little Rigging as they can. The Women like the
Calmuccers wear a course linen Coat and round Caps, bulging out like a Helmet.
Their Firstborn Children are generally dedicated to some Saint, or other, in
token whereof if it be a male, he wears a Ring in his right Ear, but if a Girl
in her right Nostril.

In the Summer season they have no fast place, but pasture over all the face of
the Country as we have said of the Calmucs. When they march they carry their
Tents upon high Wagons made on purpose, and so take their Wives and Children
with them, and drive their Cattle before them, their Movables they set upon
Camels, Horses and sometimes upon Kine. Thus they go up and down all the
Summer; and when the Winter approaches pitch together about Astrachan,
appearing like a great Army; where they can assist each other in time of need
against the Calmucks their perpetual Enemies, who when the VVolga freezes
sometimes assail them: and to the end that they may the better oppose their
said Enemies in such case, the VVaywode, or Governor of Astrachan provides
them Arms, which at the breaking up of the Camp they are to redeliver, and for
security send some of their chief Princes as a Pledge to Astrachan, where they
are committed to the Citadel; and upon their restoring of their Ammunition are
surrendered into their hands again.

The Nagayans follow the Fishing-trade, as also Fowling, Hunting and Pasturing
of Cattle, and are reputed the best Herds-men in the world. Their Kine are
generally great, their Sheep very fair and fat, having great Tails like the
Rams in Palaestine, some weighing 20 or 30 pound a piece, their noses bending
upwards, and their Ears hanging like a Spanial. Their Horses are but ugly
shaped, but very durable in running. They have also some Camels but not many.
Their chief Diet is dried Fish which they use in stead of Bread. They have also
a way of making bread of Rice, which they knead in Oil and Honey, and so bake
it in Cakes. All kinds of Flesh they eat, except Swine, holding Horseflesh for
the best. Their Drink is Water and Milk, esteeming Mares-milk above all other.
They profess the Mohammedan Religion, and are of the Persian sect. The Czaar
allows them Laws and Judges of their own. They are also Tribute-free, but in
stead of Tribute are to bring several Thousand men to field upon occasion.

CHAP. XIII. Divisions and Limits of the Cosacks. The Offspring of Stenko. The
Reason of his Revolting. The first beginning of his Insolency. His treacherous
Cruelty: The Governor of Astrachan makes preparation against him. He betakes
himself to flight and reconciles himself with the Czar. The Incredible Riches
and costly Attire of the Cosacks. The Person of Stenko Radzin described. The
meeting and discourse of the Author with Stenko Radzin. He keeps a Persian
Princess for his Concubine, which he throws with his own hand into the Wolga.
His Punishment for Adultery.
ON the 3 of September came several Dutch Officers aboard, SEP^. 1669.
who bad us welcome and invited us respectivly to their Houses, where we went,
and were kindly received and entertained. Just upon our Arrival here the
Russian Fleet was set out against the Cosaks. But before I treat any thing
about that Expedition I shall give you a praevious Narrative of an Uproar
raised and headed by Stenko Radzin, and then the rest in order.

There are two Nations of the Cosacks, the Saporoksky, and the Donsky. Two
sorts of Cosacks.
The former of these were sometime subjects to the Polish Crown, and keep
themselves about the Boristhenes and Kiof, upon 50 Islands which are environed
with that famous River. They call those Islands in their own proper Tongue
Porog, which is as much as to fay Stairs, and therefore are called Sa-porogsky.
Their work is to watch the Irruption of the Tartars or other Enemies upon the
Polish Territories. They are called Cosacks from the Slavonian word Cosa, which
is as much as to say a Spirit, by reason of their admirable celerity of Motion,
being always ready at hand upon occasion. The Donski or Don-Cosaks are those
who live upon the famous River Tanats, by the Natives called Don, and are
properly under the Jurisdiction of the Czar, although more out of their free
and voluntary disposition; for they have been endowed with many Privileges, as
to have their own Princes, Judges and Laws, as also a General of their Army
whom they themselves Elect. As also this Immunity that when a Moscovian Slave
runs away from his Lord, and betakes himself within their Territories, they are
not obliged to deliver him up unless themselves list. Of this People last
mentioned was Stenko Radzin the famous Rebel born, who, as we have said, so
stoutly opposed the Emperor Alexius Michailowitz.

The first occasion of this Revolt (as himself confessed) was to revenge his
Brothers death, who was killed by an Eminent Personage, whose name was Jury
Alexowitz Dolgeroeky in the year 1665. The Brother of Radzin was at that time
in the service of the great Duke in the Polish Wars, under the command of the
before mentioned Bojar, Jury Alexowitz Dolgeroeky, who commanded in chief: and
when the Camp broke up to go into their Garrisons, the young Radzin desired to
be discharged with his Men, having done the Emperor very good service in that
last Expedition, and that then there was no more occasion for their Aid: but
the General refused to let them go, as not having any certain Intelligence that
the Hostility were sent to their Winter Quarters. The Cosaks were hereat
greatly discontented, being Volunteers, and had deserved yet greater Civilities
than their Request, or than ever they had received from the Russians: they
therefore marched off silently, led by their Colonel, brother to this said
Stenko Radzin, which was so badly resented by the General, that he took the
Colonel, and hanged him. This was the sum and ground of his revolting, which
prompted him not only to employ his Weapons against the Russians, but as well
against the Persians.

In the year 1667 he began to commit many Insolences and himself and all his
crew betaking themselves to the VVolga, where they took all the small Shipping
they met with, and plundered them, killed and threw over board all the Men,
unless they would admit themselves into their Company: They entered also all
the Towns seated near the River, where they pillaged the Churches and
Monasteries. From hence he took his way directly for Iaik, which he took in and
set a strong Garrison. From hence he marched toward the Caspian Sea gathering
vast multitudes of discontented Persons, who came upon the noise of Rebellion
from all parts. From the Caspian Sea he went for the VVolga by the way
committing many Insolences, plundering and sinking all the small Shipping,
wasting and depopulating of Cities and Villages, and using the People very
inhumanly if they would not resolve to join in that Rebellion. From hence he
went to the City Terku, and so onwards to the Bounds of Persia, where he also
sadly molested the Subjects of that King, as well as those of the Czar. AUG.
1669.
The Inhabitants of a small Persian City hearing of his approaching deserted
the Town and betook themselves to the Hills and Mountains without the Town,
where they though themselves secure from his violent and tyrannical Actions.
Stenko Radzin perceiving that, sent out Emmissaries to see where they kept
themselves, with Instructions, to tell them that his End was not to do any harm
to their Persons or Estates; but only to buy Provision for his Money, and
therefore willed them to return into the City. The Persons who were sent did
their message, and the credulous Citizens came down entered their Houses, and
set open their shops, of whom Radzin and his followers bought several
Commodities and Necessaries paying them to the utmost farthing: but had given a
token to his Men by setting of his Cap after an unusual Manner, upon which they
were all on a sudden to fall upon the Townsmen and massacre them, which after
a most barbarous Manner they did, sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child.

The Waywode of Astrachan, whose name was Ivan Simonowitz Prosorofski, hearing
how many places they had despoliated in the Country of the Medes and upon the
Borders of Persia, thought it high time to put himself in a Posture of Defense,
and suppress the growing Army of the Malcontents; he in order thereto caused
all the Shipping as well Merchantmen as others to be put into an equippage,
and dispatches Simeum Ivanowits Geboof, who had then the third suffrage of
Astrachan, to find out the Cosacks-Rebells, and give them battle. This Navy
consisted of 36 Stroegs, and about 40000 Men. The Rebels had already 22
Stroegs with a proportionable number of Men, keeping themselves about the
Island Satyry Boggere, which lies about the Entrance of the Wolga into the
Caspian Sea, where they had set up a Watch-House upon the Top of a high Hill,
from whence they could view the whole Country round about, as also the Caspian
Sea and the VVolga. This Island lay very commodiously for their Ends being all
along the Coast of a high solid Rock, and had only one way to enter it.

So soon as the Cosacks saw the Astrachan Fleet approach, they put off their
Shipping, and betook themselves to flight, so that that Expedition was in vain.
Seeing now that the Cosaks kept themselves together and would not come to open
batttel, their were new Measures deliberated upon either by fair or foul means
to suppress the Rebels. JUNE. 1669.
It was not long before the VVaywod Prosorofski received Letters from the
Czaar, with a Pardon for Stenko Radzin on condition he would submit to the
Emperor, and for the future demean himself as a loyal subject. The subtle
Cosack not expecting so gracious a tender, accepted of the Emperors Grace,
being already by Hunger and other extremities brought to such a state, that he
would of his own accord have requested it, for they were then put to a short
allowance, and had taken a Persian Boes having some Horses aboard that were
sent to the Czaar, from the King of Persia for a present; these they took,
killed and used very sparingly, whence it may be gathered in what a mean
condition they were. Having thus obtained an assurance of Pardon from the
Emperor, they marched forward for Astrachan, where they were very kindly
received, and congratulated by those of the Townsmen, every one of them
appearing in the most splendid manner he could, for they had rifled many
Gentlemen's Houses where they found always Apparel, Jewels and other Plunder
for habit and Ornament. Stenko Radzi the Ringleader of that Rout, could not be
distinguished from the rest, but by the Honor which was done him, being
saluted by the name of Batske, Father; and certainly he was a father of many
impious Sons. I have seen him several times upon the Stroegs and in the City;
he is a brave man as to his person, and well proportioned in his limbs, tall
and straight of Body, pock-pitted, but only so as did rather become than
disfigure him, of a good conduct, but withal severe and cruel, as has been
already instanced. The Cosacks who were his Followers came daily into Astrachan
where they sold their Booty which was very rich and costly. The Silk they sold
for a 3d of the current value, which was bought up of the Persian and Armenian
Merchants. I bought a Gold-chain of one of them which was almost a fathom long,
and in joints like a Bracelet, between each piece were precious stones: the
price I gave for it was not fully 7 pound sterling. Shortly after their Arrival
Captain Butler went to visit him, taking 2 bottles of Brandy along with him,
which he thought might be an acceptable present, since they had been so long at
Sea, and presented them to him and his Minion, whom the Russians called
Devils-whisker by a Nickname. When we came to his Tent; and desired
admittance, he sent to know who we were; Answer was returned him that we were
Dutch, JULY. 1669.
and employed in the service of the Czaar, upon a Ship in the Caspian Sea. He
forthwith gave order to a Gentleman to conduct us into his Tent where himself
and some of his Council sat, and caused us to sit down, took our present in
good part, and drank the Emperors health. Another time we went through the
Camp where we saw him going aboard a Yacht to divertise himself upon the Water,
with some of his Officers: he had with him a Persian Princes which he had
taken, together with her Brother. The Brother he presented to the Waywod of
Astrachan, but the Sister he kept for his Concubine. Being now in the height
of his Cups, and full of Frolicks, bragged of the many presents he had given
and received since his being restored to the Emperors favor, and on a sudden
brake out into those Extravagant terms, speaking to the Wolga: Well, said he,
thou art a noble River, and out of thee have I had so much Gold, Silver and
many things of Value. Thou art the sole Father and Mother of Fortune and
advancement: but, unthankful man that I am? I have never offered thee any
thing: well now, I am resolved to manifest my gratitude. With those words he
took her into his Arms and threw her into the VVolga, with all her rich Habit
and Ornaments; her attire was of rich Cloth of Gold, richly set out with
Pearls, Diamonds and other precious Stones. The Lady was of an angelical
Countenance and amiable, of a stately carriage of Body, and withal excellently
well qualified as to her Parts, being of a singular wit, and always pleasing in
her demeanor toward him, when he was in the heat of fury, and yet at last
became the instance of his Cruelty. However there is no man so addicted to any
one Vice but there are ever more some sparks of virtue. His own outrages as to
the sin of Adultery he would allow himself, but would not indulge or dispense
with it in others. It happened that a certain Soldier of the Cosacks had been
taken in the action with another wife: this being made known to Stenko, he
caused them both to be instantly apprehended, and the man to be thrown into the
River with great stones made fast to his neck and heels: but for the Adulteress
he provided another punishment which was to erect a Pale on the Water side, and
tying her by the feet caused her to be so dragged along the Earth, and from the
Tent to the Pale which was almost 2 [ English] miles, and there hoised up,
where she hung 48 Hours before she died, and yet nevertheless the great torment
of which she must needs be sensible, all that time she never was heard to
shriek or cry out.

Besides the many Robberies and great insolences they had committed, as well
within Land as in Sea-Towns in Persia, as at Nisabath, Scabaran, Mardore and
Tackusi situated near the famous Hill Barmach, from hence they went to
Astrabath and Bachu which they surprised took in, and plundered, committing
many barbarous actions in massacring of the Inhabitants and setting the Houses
on fire. Here they found a great Quantity of Wine, which they divided among
themselves, and caroused so long, till they were all besotted and drunk, being
about 6000 Men in all. In the mean while the Persians had drawn down several
Companies, and all on a sudden fell on this Rout, and made such a slaughter
that the twelfth part, or little more were left alive and Stenko himself 5 times
in danger of being taken. The Remainder betook themselves to the Stroegs. This
so much weakened them that they were not in a capacity to do any considerable
damage by land, the more by reason the Persians watched their Coast with very
great vigilance; as did also the Cosacks and Dagestan Tartars, so that they
were constrained for some time together to keep off at Sea, and keep close to
Pyracy, where every one was well warned of them and consequently so cautious
that they got but very little Booty. But finding that they could not long
subsist they were forced to land at Satyry Boggere an Island (of which before)
where they waited for what Providence would allott them.

CHAP. XIV. JUNE. 1669.
Stenko returns back and is followed by many Russes, but opposed by an Order
from Psoforoski, which Stenko disobeys. He returns again with a greater Power.
The Waywode of Astrachan sends out a Fleet against him, which shamefully
yields. The Officers murdered. A great Perplexity at Astrachan, Power and Aw
of Stenko. His cruelty and Pride. His Legates are devoured of Dogs in Persia.
Kumuskinka surrendered by Treachery.
STenko Radzin whose implacable fury against some that had interposed
themselves to incite the Emperor against him, and to deprive him of his
favor, would not suffer him to remain still; but their bodies being now
somewhat assuaged which before were swollen with drinking of salt Water, and
their Vitals again revived with fresh Diet, which were almost spent with long
fasting during the time of their extravagancies, they resolved to go for Don,
and to visit their respective homes. Radzin gives them a short warning to
prepare for a March, and in order thereto gets all things in a readiness himself.

Some discontented Russians seeing the Cosacks ready to depart, they came and
desired to list themselves under his Conduct, to which he readily assented, and
by fair Promises drew abundance after him.

It happened sometime before he designed to leave the Town that meeting with
about 20 or more Russians whom he could see by their countenance to be
inclinable to follow him; these he fell in discourse with, and liberally
distributed a Bag of Gold among them, promising them that if they would follow
him they should fare no worse than he. This was encouragement enough for them
who did not only list themselves, but persuaded also many of their Friends to
take the like Course, and join their Fortunes, amongst whom were diverse that
were in the Emperors Service.

The Governor of Astrachan coming to understand that several Persons in the
service of the great Duke, his Master, had withdrawn and listed themselves
among the Rebels, he sent one Wederos a Captain of the Strelitzers to Radzin,
with Instructions to demand the Russians, and to will him to send them back
upon pain of the Emperors Disfavour, which should not be so easily
accommodated as before, when perhaps he should be compelled to make satisfaction
for the former Crimes with the new. AUG. 1669.
The Captain goes to fulfull his Order, and declares to Radzin the Reason of
his coming, and his Message, who would not so much as allow him Audience; but
when the Captain began to insist hard upon the remitting of the Men, Radzin was
so enraged that he drew his sword and threatened Death, if he persisted any
longer, and with that made toward him, but the Captain being a discreet
Gentleman demeaned himself very fairly, when he saw him in such a Rage, so that
he escaped that Danger, and all the vent of Radzin's fury melted away in these
words, How dare you, said he. make such an impudent Demand? shall I then betray
my Friends who have out of a pure inclination to me ward deserted their nearest
Allies and Fortunes? and shall I be threatened with loss of Favor to boot?
Prithee, go tell thy Master, that I equally value him and the Emperor, and let
him know that I shall be with him ere he be aware, and reward him for this
Protervity. The Captain was fain to smother his thoughts, and contented himself
with this Answer which he related to the Governor. The Governor hereupon
assembles a Council, and consulted what to do; learning from the answer of
Radzin that he intended to come down again, and so it happened, for within 3
days he began to march toward the VVolga, where he had 80 Stroegs and other
Shipping provided, filled with Ammunition and Men, but did not at first any
hostile feat. The VVaywod of Astrachan called a Counsel the second time, where
it was concluded that so long as Radzin did not do any attempt or violence upon
any Town belonging to the Emperor, he should not oppose him till the whole
Navy were come together.

About fourteen days after the whole Fleedarrived, consisting in a great Number
of Stroegs with about 6000 Strelitzers, or Soldiers besides Powder, shot and
Provision. No sooner was the Fleet arrived but Radzin by his Emmissaries had
Intelligence of their whole aim employing such persons therein as he thought
lest suspected. He therefore intimates his mind to some of those in whom he
could repose best confidence, to run away and oyn them to the Governors Forces
under name and color of Deserters. These speeded them away to the Astrachan
Fleet and feigned themselves discontented with the abuses which they pretended
to have fuffered by Radzin, and were accepted in frienldy manner by the adverse
Party, who the rather did it for that they had hopes of a discovery and
detection of Radzins Councils. But so soon as they were under Sail and almost
close with the Enemy, the Villains on a sudden and unanimously fell upon the
Officers, The Officers of the Astrachan Fleet murdered.

The great perplexity at Astrachan.


and dispatched them surrendering the rest with the whole Fleet into the Hands
of the Cosacks, Radzin having got so rich a prey without any difficulty or
dispute, instantly ordered his men two Months Pay in hand, with promise of
free enjoyment of what they should take by Plunder, besides other Means of
Encouragement.

The Governor was not a little dismayed at these tidings, the more when he
understood how the Commonalty murmured against him, and that Radzin was in
general laudably spoke of, and that not only in Astrachan but as well in all the
Towns round about that were under the subjection of the Emperor. The
Strelitzers who had not in a long time received Pay, and hearing how Radzin had
given his men 2 Months pay in hand found now occasion to grow mutinous, and
that so unanimously that the Government and Officers durst not oppose them by
any rigorous course or violent mean, but did all they could to persuade them by
fair words and promises.

Radzin finding himself grow stronger and stronger, Radzins Power and Aw.
and that with the Russes now under his command, he had about 16000 Men, he
unship'd a part of the Men, and sent some to Czaritza, and others to Txarnojar
but he himself remaind upon the Fleet, where he was as much respected as a
King, and had a sovereign aw over the People. His kruelty when drunk.
When he was drunk few of the Officers durst appear in presence, for it was
very customary with him, for a small offense to behead a Man, although the
greatest Minion or Favorite he had: The meaner sort were in no danger, for
those were wont to flatter him, and upon a Wink would dispatch their Officers,
when he had taken any dislike against them, and therefore willing to have them
removed, and others in their place. Thus by giving ear to the Commons more than
to the Officers he became more dreadful and formidable for the sole command
and direction of the whole Army lay in himself. This besides that gave the
Rabble such encouragement that in the space of 5 days after he had got the
Astrachan Fleet, his Army was raised from 16000 to 27000 Men, being a mixed
multitude of Pesants, Slaves Tartars and Cosacks, and men of restless minds
from all Parts, being tickled with the thoughts of free enjoyment of Plunder.
These running to and again over the face of the Country, committed many
inhuman acts, SEPT. 1669.
and murdered the Gentry, who were fain to belake themselves to Astrachan
disguised in Slaves Apparel. The Pesantry who indeed are very tyrannically
dealt with throughout all the Emperors Dominions, here found an occasion to be
revenged of their Liege-Lords, and to show their Manhood brought the Heads of
their Lords and threw them at the feet of a Provost or Executioner there to
ordained, who gave them a reward for their Pains.

Radzin being arrived to this Pitch of Greatness was so puffed up as is he had
conquered all the Empire; it is true he refused the Title of Emperor, saying,
that hes purpuse was not to rule as Lord and Sovereign but to live with them as
a Brother to revenge that Tyranny and Oppressions which they had for so many
gears, and their Progenitors for so many ages past suffered against all Reason
and the Law of Nature. But on the other side, he mainly opposed the King of
Persia, and assumed the confidence to Dispalck Ambassadors to that Court to
whom he delivered Instructions, full of lofty-proud swelling Titles, and in his
Compellation styled the Sophy, Brothen. The Main and Sum of his Memorials and
Instructions was. To urge the Sophy to enter into an Alliance with him, and to
supply him with Ammunition of war for his Monye and what else he might have
occasion for. The said Legates were ordered at first to insist upon this by
soft means, but in case of refusal te menace the Sophy, and to let him
understand that he, (the said Radzin) had 200000 Men ready to invade his
Territories, and that he would lake occasion to visit him when he least dreamed
on it, etc. So Soon as the King had understood their Instructions were to
threaten him in case he refused to comply with Readzins Proposals, he sent for
them and having an Executioner at hand made him forthwith chopp off their hiads
with a Scimmatar, The Legates of Radzin beheaded am their Bodies thrown to the
Dogs.
and commanded that their Rodies should be throw to the Dogs which were kept in
the Kennel on purpose, reserving only one to acquaint their Master how kind a
Receptian they had m^t with at the Persian Court, and gave him a short but
sharp Memorial for Radzin, threatening to come ere long and chaw those Boars
which had so depopulated the utmost Borders of his Dominions, at what time he
would not throw him living but deat to the hungry Mastirs. This Cosack Envoye
glad to come of so well with Soul and Body inseperate came only to deliver
Radzin the Result of his unsuccesfull Embassage; APRIL. 1670.
upon which the Rebel was so nettled that he commanded an Executioner to hew
him into morsels for Ravens meat.

Radzins Passion being over he did all he could to increase his Fleet and Army,
for which end he dispatched several Emmissaries to allure the Russian
Soldatesque to desert their service, in diverse Towns upon the VVolga, judging
those the fittest for his Turn, for that they were the best acquainted with the
Intrigues of the Russian Militia, and consequently the more serviceable upon
occasion of attacquing any Town or Fort he designed upon. Thus having
accomplished his Ends with very good success, he Musters up his Forces, and
sends some of the Strelitzers to Kamuschinka, who were to go under the Notion
of Imperial command (for as yet they had no further Intelligence from Moscou,
since the Rebels left Astrachan) these then pretending to come from the Czaar,
to advise the Governor how he should behave himself, in case they attacqu'd
the Town, were caressed by the Military Officers, and consequently so much
confided in, that they found an opportunity to dispatch the Governor and
almost all the Officers of the Garrison, having before hand created the
Remaining party Members of Rebellion, and immediately fired a Gun, which was a
Token to Radzin that he should Approach and surprise the Town, which he did
with expetible success, and planted a Garrison of Cosacks, removing the Russian
Strelitzers into the Navy.

CHAP. XV. The Animosities and Tumults in Astrachan. Stariza taken in by the
Cosacks. A Fleet sent out against them. The Cosacks win Tzarnojar. The Russian
Fleet yields to the Cosaks. The great Insolency and boldness of the Mobile of
Astrachan. The valor of the Waywod or Governor. Advised to abscond or absent
himself, which is put in practice.
THese Tidings coming to Astrachan, was the occasion of no small murmurings and
Jealousies among the Townsmen, none knowing who was friend and who was Enemy,
or in whom they might rely on, or repose any trust; insomuch that many
discontented persons began to make Factions and breath Rebellion, though not so
openly as that the Government could take advantage to suppress it. The VVaywod
Prosorofski considering that the Commonalty were very much incensed, and that
some mutinous Enterprise was a hatching, he assembles the Lords and Council of
Astrachan, to consult with their Judgments what was best to be done in those
imminent Dangers and Juncture of Affairs, and what course they should take to
sedate those Animosities and Heats, which ill-affected persons endeavored to
raise and foment among the Townsmen and Plebeians; as also what manner of
Defense to use against the approaching Enemy. As to the former they concluded,
that there was no better way to remedy it, than to conduct themselves warily in
the latter, and first obstruct the growing Power of the Rebels, which Perils
being removed it might not then be doubted but that the Commons would be the
better and sooner pacified. Upon this Resolution several worthy Gentlemen
presented their Service to go as private Soldiers upon that sudden and urging
Expedition, not daring any more to put the lest Confidence in the Strelitzers.

On the 10 of April 1670 the Bojar Petrofski dispatched 800 Horse under the
Conduct of Col. Levonti Bogdanof, whereof 400 were Russians, the rest Nagayans,
to furnish the City Stariza, (lying about 80 German miles from Astrachan) with
Ammunition and necessary Provision, and to strengthen that Place with those
Men, which lies upon the River Don or Tanais, where the Cosacks have their
Residence. This River was of old supposed to run into the VVolga, as some
Geographers have been pleased to write, but later experience has fairly
contradicted that opinion, for their Boats which are no more than trunks of
trees hollowed, they are fain to drag and trail a days Journey over Land before
they find the VVolga, at the nearest distance those Rivers ly to each other,
where when they are come they ty heavy Balks on each side to keep them above
Water, and to give them a due balance and poize in their floating.

Stariza taken in by the Cosacks.
On the 28 came an Express to Astrachan from Col. Bogdanof, with news that the
Cosacks had already taken in Stariza, and had killed 1200 Moscovian
Strelitzers, who were but newly come thither before the Siege, this Relation
was given the Colonel by a Captive Cosack. The VVaywod also got intelligence
how that the Field-Tartars were in great discord among themselves, and that
their Factions were so far advanced, that they were become open Hostility, and
their Power wasted by intestine strife; upon which Colonel Bogdanof was
marched on to Czornojar, which is an Imperial Town, about 50 German miles from
Astrachan. The said Captive Cosack was so tortured on the Rack, that the most
hard-hearted Russians then present had compassion of him, yet nothing could be
forced from him but what he made voluntary confession of, before he came to the
Rack.

By this time the Emperor had got full intelligence of the Tumult of the
Cosacks, and of Radzins purpose, together with his barbarous massacres already
committed upon his Subjects, and that he continually depopulated his Country,
he gave order to levy new Forces, in place of the Old, which were to be sent
upon this Expedition, as also as many Stroegs as could on a sudden be put in
Equippage, for which end the Deputies of the Towns upon the Wolga did their
utmost to complete a Fleet of 40 Sail. Upon each Stroeg was only one great Gun,
but other Ammunition as much as was necessary for so many men as the Stroegh
was capable or fit to carry. Aboard the said Fleet were 2600 Russian
Strelitzers, and 500 volunteers of Astratay under the Conduct of Simeum
Ivanowitz Elbof a Kneez, who was for the time being made Commander in chief.
These men were of the Regiment of Ivan Rusinski a Polander, but baptized a
Russian Proselyte, whose Lieutenant was one James VVonderham, a Scottish
Gentleman. The other Commanders were Capt. Paul Rudolph a German. Capt. Robert
Heut an Englishman, and Nicholas Schaack who was our Lieutenant, being made a
Captain by the Russians. Besides two other German Lieutenants and two Ensigns
of that Nation, who were also Russian Proselytes. The rest were Moscovians and
Polonians.

On the 25 of May being Whitsunday, the Fleet left Astrachan, and the Cosack
who was tortured almost to death hanged up in their sight. In the mean while
the Citizens and Commons began to buzz and murmr against the Deputy and the
Officers, and grew so bold that they reviled him when he rode through the Town,
he not daring to suppress them for fear of a greater irruption of that
rebellious Fire, which lay still unsmothered, till he understood the success of
Simeum Ivanowitz, MAY. 1670.
whose happy arrival the Deputy and all peaceably minded persons earnestly
longed for: the City being now in a very weak condition and low, since the
Levying of those that were sent out with Simeum Ivanowitz, and consequently the
Mobile the bolder. But on the 4 of June, by a Gentleman who had made his
Escape, they had notice of the Affairs of Tzornojar, that on the same day that
the Knees Elboof made his appearance the Town was taken in, and that the
Governor and Officers were all massacred and their Bodies thrown into the
River: and further, what was more deplorable, the Private Soldatesque of Knees
Elboof had murdered all their Officers in the Fleet, declared themselves for
the Cosacks, and surrendered all the Shipping into the Hands of Stenko Radzin
the grand Belweather, or Ringleader of the Rebels; although immediately before
their coming at Tzornojar they had unanimously sworn, to live and die with their
Leaders. The Report of these things, although the Governor indeavored to smother
as much as was possible, gave the Rabble greater Occasion to mutiny than they
had before; yea, so far they were induced, that they publicly reproached the
Superiority that they durst not look out of their doors, or windows, much less
walk the streets to consult together of means to remedy the distemper of
affairs, to defend themselves against the Hostility abroad, and to suppress
intestin Jarrs at home, for it was no rare thing now to see the Rabble assemble
togethers in heaps, and before the Doors of the Magistrates to cry out with
infamous and bitter Railings, Now, now, the times begin to alter, it will be
our turn next to Lord it, you villains come out and show your selves to the
World, etc.

The Governor in the mean while lost no courage on his part, and the Gentry
and Officers still continued under hopes of Assistance from the Field Army, and
new succor and Recruits from Moscou. The Deputy therefore caused all the
Ordnance to be visited and laden by the German Gunners, and gave orders to
furnish themselves with necessary Ammunition. However we could very well
remark, that were the Officers never so sedulous, they were never able both to
defend themselves from such a Power without, and be secure for Mutiny within,
of which many Reasons were given to the VVaywode, and he as often forewarned by
diverse prudent Persons. The VVaywod Prosorofski would willingly have had us in
the Town-service, but being we were taken on for the Ships use, JUNE. 1670.
we judged it best to stay where we were, the more for that we knew the Cosacks
were more severe against Foreign Auxiliaries, than the Moscovians if once made
Captives.

In the mean while we heard continual News of the approaching of the Cosacks,
to attacque Astrachan, which had it is inward state been in all things
conformable to the Muniments of that Town, they needed not fear 100000
undisciplined men as are the Cosacks, for to say nothing of the Ramparts and
Fortifications of the Walls, there lay about four hundred and sixty great brass
Guns in the Battlements, besides, those of the Citadel. Every day we expected
new troubles, and commotions, insomuch that we thought it not fit to stay there
any longer, lest we should be massacred in the Uproar, but no one of us durst
speak their minds, or be the first mover of such means to save our lives, for
that it might seem to stink too much of Rebellion, nor could we know how it
might be resented. However it came so far that Captain Butler began also to
dread some ill might befall us if we did not consult our Safety betimes; he
therefore upon a time called us all together, and uttered his mind in these, or
the like words. Gentlemen, I doubt not but that you a^e all sensible of the
present danger which hangs over our Heads, and that there is not much hope left
to hazard our Persons any longer here, the Sum of what I have to say is briefly
to advise and request of you all to pack up what you have into the Shallop, and
that we forthwith betake our selves to the Persian Coast, and take what GOD in
in his bountiful Providence is pleased to allott us. He ordered us further to
get all in a readiness to be aboard before the Gates were shut, for that he was
not resolved to wait one quarter of an hour for any Person: in the mean while
we made a quick dispatch, and in a moment had got our best Goods aboard, and
all what we thought worth our while to bring along. Our Captain advised us not
to take 2 of our Company with us, Brak and Trappen, because they had wives and
children, and consequently would both be a cumber for us, and uneasiness for
themselves on so dangerous a Voyage: but I having compassion with my neighbor
Brak, I made him come aboard with his Wife and Child; but Trappen was not
willing to leave Astrachan, unless he had been better furnished with Money than
he was, or something else in lieu thereof. We were 15 Men, besides a Woman and
a Child in the Shallop where we still waited for the Captain and two other
Persons whose Goods we had with us in the Boat. After a long expectation we saw
no Captain come, it growing late in the Evening, and our Men impatient of delay
would needs thrust off from the Wall, but Lambert Helt the Master restrained us
all he could, saying, That it was what we could not answer, etc. Thus we staid
waiting till the Gates were to, still expecting their coming, but midnight
already come and no tidings of them we began to be in a hundred Fears: some
were of Opinion that the Captain was gone in a Knote or some other small Vessel
with the other two Gentlemen that were with him, or that he was taken and
secured: others were jealous that the Wife of Trappe^ had betrayed us. Thus in
great fear we lay all the time, not knowing what course to take, well knowing
that if the Russes had understood our Purpose, it would have cost us our lives,
nor had we dared to stay so long had not our Shallop lay on the other side of
the Ship from the Town-ward, and therefore out of sight: Nor could we be easily
induced to believe that they would mistrust our venturing our lives in the Sea
with such a Boat. Thus we resolved by the grace of GOD to thwart the Caspian
Mere and so for the Persian Coast, and rather trust to the divine Providence of
Heaven, than confide in the uncertain Mercies of unreasonable Men.

CHAP. XVI. They fall down the Wolga, and miss their Course. Then touch at
Oetzjoege. The strange manner of fishing of the Bieloege. The great plenty of
Cavear. They meet with great difficulty to gain the Caspian Sea; which at last
they get. A description of the Island Satyry Boggere, Tall Reeds grow all along
the Coast. A dreadful Tempest. The Golden Bay. Their meeting with a Tartarian
Bark. A description of Terki. The Beginning of the Circas-Tartars; Their
Persons and Complexions described. Their Habit and Way of Living. Of their
Women, their Habit, Humors and Inclinations. Their Idolatry.
ON the 22 of June about midnight we put off and rowed down the River and ran
into a Creek, which we still took for the Wolga, till afterward we found the
contrary. We saw here and there some Cottages of the Nagayan-Tartars, but had
not the Courage to go and Steur vangst inde Rivier de WOSGA A. Waght ^raysen
aen weder sydts des Wolga. B. Het Pael-were^. C. De Caspische Zee.


visit them lest we should be taken and sold for Slaves. The Country here
about is very pleasant, mostly meadow ground, and plentiful of Camels,
Dromedaries, Horses, Sheep and Goats, which wander to the belly in grass: There
are also some small Woods in which we saw many wild Swine with their Pigs
playing together and masting. Here we were in a great strait not knowing what
to do, for we strayed from one Lake to another, and almost ready to eat one
another up for vexation. In the mean while the Clouds began to rise, very thick
at South-east which we thought did presage storm, as at last it broke out into
a Thunder, wherefore we were forced to put in at a reedy Island, so long as the
Weather continued so boystrous. When the storm was over and the Sky began to
clear up, we betook our selves to the Water and directed our course to the
Southward, where beating along the Coast we discovered a small Cnoots, or
Tartarian Boat which came directly against us and asked whither we intended; we
told them, For the Caspian Sea. They then again replied that we were far out of
our way, and if we went but a little further that we would be in danger of being
taken by the Crim-Tartars and made Slaves. Hereupon some of our Company prayed
them that they would pilot us down to the mouth of the River, which they
promised to do, and agreed with us for a Ducat. We took one of those Tartars
aboard the Shallop, and kept company a while with the rest. After a few hours
sailing we got Oetsjoege, which is the chief place where the Fish Biloege is
taken, whereof Cavear is made, being far greater than a Sturgeon, but of the
same kind. The Wolga is here all laid in with Stakes, after the manner you see
in the Plate, these Stakes are set in rows, wide at the Entrance so that they
can drive in the Fish, which when once in they chase to the other end, where it
runs up to a narrow angle, so that she can neither get forward, nor yet turn
about, but is easily taken. When they have caught her they take out the Rows,
which weighs ordinarily 300 or 400 lb. but the rest of the Fish they commonly
throw away, although sometimes they pickle it, and send it to Moscovy where it
is held in reasonable good esteem. The length of one of those Biloeges is from
26 to 30 foot if come to its full growth. Cavear is used all over Russia and
Moscovia instead of Butter during their Lent, which as I have before remarked,
comes 4 times a year, and is likewise sent into all parts of Europe, so that
this Fishing is hard followed by the Russes and Tartars who finding such a good
vent of their commodity make a considerable advantage of it: And so many are
the Stake^ works here that a company of 15 or 20 Boats will take sometimes 2 3
or 4 hundred Fish on a day, for no sooner have they done at o^ place but they
find chase in another.

When we were come to this Place, The Tartars would not convoyes any further,
saying, If you were but sensible of the difficult passage (...) get the Sea,
you would keep you where you are; but, added they, if you (...) resolve to go,
when you are at Oetsjoege you may set your course directly forwa^ till you come
at the Sea. This we were forced to take in good part, an^ pay them for their
pains. The money we conditioned for satisfie^ them very well, but at parting
they told us, that they were afraid (...) would not easily get through,
whereas they knew no better but there was a stri^ watch held on each side the
Wolga. This last startled us not a little however we resolved unanimously hap
hazard to venture through let what would follow, adjudging it equally safe to
run that peri^ or to suffer the Calamities we were liable to, and had in some
regar^ deserved: and in that resolution continued sailing till we found the
Stakes or Pale-work so close in the Mouth of the River, that the^ was only a
narrow Passage to go through. About the end of the sai^ passage we saw a
Redoubt, which at a distance seemed to be ver^ strongly fortified, which mainly
increased our fears, but greatly t^ our good luck we found no Watch but only a
few Fishers, who ha^ no Authority, or warrant to examine, us, insomuch that we
steere^ boldly through; but considering our Bread was almost brought to a^ end,
for we were brought to an Allowance of an ounce per diem, w^ therefore turned
back and prayed the Fishermen to supply us for our Moneys; but they told us
they had hardly enough to suffice themselves, which very much disheartened us,
however they supplied us with Fish as much as we had need of to serve us over
the Caspian Mere.

On the 14 we set out and left the Wolga, which there leaves it sel^ divided
into several streams or Heads like the Nile (as before) making so many several
Islands, which are low and full of Reeds, except only the Island Satyri
Boggore, which is surrounded on every side with high Cliffs. Upon this Island
we saw some Watch-houses which Stenko Radzin (even now remembered) had caused to
be built, to view the approachment of his Enemies. However it was not intent
his intent or design (in building of these Watch-houses) only to be forewarned
of any danger, but to prey upon the Persian Merchant men, who were bound for
Astrachan. From hence to the Circas-Mountains we often sounded and found it
never more, or seldom less than 12 foot Water. All along the Coast we saw
abundance of Wildgeese Pelicans and other Fowl which now and then we bestowed a
little powder upon. The strand was all grown over with Reeds, which grow to an
incredible height, and the Water there we found deeper than off at Sea, in
so much that it were very commodious, in a storm for any small vessel to shelter
themselves, dropping anchor a little without, for the Reeds break of the Winds
and the impetuous beatings of the Water. In the afternoon toward the Evening
it began to thunder and rain very hard, the Wind was very high at South and by
East, and our Course lay South and by West. The Water all the time beat over
the Gunhil, and two men forced to heave out with their Backlers, though hardly
to any purpose, for notwithstanding all the pains they took the Shallop was
still full, the Tempest continuing so till 5 in the next morning, at what time
it began to grow very calm and moderate, yet not so but that we were driven
with a fine fresh Gale. The Water here is fresh and potable, and affoards all
manner of Fish, that usually breed in fresh Rivers, Pike, Carps, Breams, etc.
Besides Sturgeons, Seals and other creatures that will endure both.

On the 15 we lost the sight of Land, and came about midday into the Bay
Kieselarke, which is otherwise called the Golden Bay the sand whereof shines as
fire, and is therefore by some called Kiselarsche Kolthoeh, which is no other
than Golden Bay. My curiosity was often to taste the Water; sometimes I found it
last of Sulfur, sometimes of Saltpeter, and sometimes of an od bitter taste,
whence I collected that this came from the property of the Ground and bottom.
The River Kiselar is a Branch, or an Arm of the Bustro, rising about 8 Dutch
Leagues above Terki, and runs parallel with the VVolga about 65 leagues, so
disbanding its floods into the Caspian Sea. But now we were in a more desperate
Condition than ever, partly for that our Shallop was so laden that we were not
a foot above Water, and on the other hand wanted bread, for we had not above 6
or 7 pound among all the Company. The Wind began to grow high and boystrous,
and toward the Evening we had a very rough Sea, every billow rising Mountains
high, insomuch that with continual pumping and laving we had much ado to keep
the Shallop above Water, working some times 4 or 5 together, and by taking
turns relieved those that were weary every hour with fresh men. The next
morning we could see no land, but let all be left to the mercy of GOD.

On the 16 we had a stiff gale, and sailed before the Wind, which furthered us
so, that by noon we descried Land: and soon after got sight of a
Dagestan-Tartar's Barque, which we made up to, but when we came near it, it was
run upon a Bank, and deserted of the Men, which upon our approaching them,
jumped over board. We perceiving that it was only for us that they left their
Vessel; called out to them, and willed them freely to return and that we meant
no harm; upon which they came back, and we prayed them to furnish us with some
bread for our Money, but they told us that they had not enough for their own
Voyage however they gave us 6 little Loaves, for which they would have no money,
as also dried Pears and Plumbs which we thank fully received. This said Bark
was laden with Bales of Silk and bound for Astrachan, which when we understood
we gave them a Caution, and told them that we verily believed that by that time
Astrachan was in hand of the Cosacks, and consequently we could not judge it
safe for them to proceed on their Journey thither. They thanked us for our
Advice, and directed their Course for Terky, that being also a good Market. We
agreed among our selves to follow the like course, with intent, at least, to
supply our want of Provision, not knowing whether the Town was taken in by the
Cosacks, or that it was still under the Emperor. About 9 in the Evening we
anchored before the Town, and immediately upon our anchorage saw 10 or 12
Soldiers come rowing toward us, but when they came nigh saw that we were well
armed, offered not to do any violent Act, but only asked us, Who we were? and,
From whence we came? We answered, That we were Hollanders, belonging to his
Majesty's great Ship at Astrachan, and were come thither to sound the Bay and
Haven. Ho! Ho! said they, are you those men? You must come before the Lord
Deputy: hereupon we made answer, That it was then too late, but the next
Morning betimes we would wait upon his Excellency. With this answer they seemed
to be satisfied but we thought it not safe for us to tarry there long, but
before creek of day we loosed, and set our course S. and by W.

Terky is situate in 43 degr. and 27 min. about an [ English] league from the
strand. It has been 3 times surveyed and laid out. A Description of Terky.
The first time by the Russes themselves; the second time by one Cornelius
Claasz a Dutch Ingenieur, about the year 1636, who also strengthened the said
Town with Walls and Bulwarks after the modern way of Fortification: and in the
year 1670 it was surveyed and fortified anew by Colonel Baily, an English
Gentleman, with huge strong Bulwarks, and and a wide and deep Mote,
encompassing it quite round. The City is seated in a Champan Country without
either Wood or Hill so far as one can view. The River is also called Terky by
the Moscovians, but by the Inhabitants Timenky. The Banks lying upon the Sea
are all grown over with Canes, and rough. Terky is a place of great Trust,
being the Kay or Barricado of the Czars Dominions, for it lies on the Frontiers
of the Russian Territories, and for that end has always a Garrison of 2000
Strelitzers.

All the night it blew very hard, and in the morning we saw land on each side.
The Island which lay on the Larboard side we called Meynders Island, because he
was the first that discovered it. We steered directly through the Islands, and
when we were about 20 leagues within the Bay, we discovered high land, which we
afterward knew to be the famous Caucasus and Ararat, which also border and
extend to the Circas Hills, and sailing a little further we found that we were
near the Quicksands, so that we were fain to tack about, and bear up to the
Channel, where coming we sounded and found it 2 fathom, and a good sandy
ground. Being just got through the straits or narrow Channel, we looked about
and discovered a great Bark making up toward us with all the Sail they could;
which afterward we understood was sent by order of the Governor of Terki, to
pursue us, having 62 Soldiers, and all well armed aboard, with a charge from
the Governor to give us no quarter, but to hack us in pieces, and to bring
back the Shallop and Goods to Terky. We seeing them in a full pursuit thought
it no time to dally, but labored as hard as we could, till we got the Island
Sierlan where we came to Anchor, and the Bark seemed to give over their chase.

On the 18 ditto, betimes in the morning we set Sail, and endeavored to gain
the High land, which before the Evening came, on we did putting in at a River,
and were assured that we were not within the Jurisdiction of the Czar, which is
bounded by the Timenki.

Bounds of the Circas Tartars. Their Persons,
The Circas Dominion begins at the Timenki, and is bounded from Nagaya by the
Step; and from the Dagestan-Tartars by the River Bustro. The Country is very
fertile, producing good store both of Fruit and Grain, and is also good
Pasture-ground. The men are very corpulent and withal robust, have broad-faces
but not square like the Calmucs, Complexions.
or Crims; they are of a swarthy yellow complexion, and shave their Heads and
Beards after a strange manner: Cross over the head they make a bare stroke, and
yet let a tuft grow in the Crown, and on each side it hangs down in two great
bushes, which sometimes they let hang loose, and sometimes plate. They wear
gray Felt-coats with a mantle of the same, and Habits.
which is rough without; this they hang slovenly about the neck made fast with
a great button, that they can turn it which way they list, and make it serve
for a Buckler against the Wind. They sometimes wear Bonnets, made of cloth,
which they fold into a square figure, that they look like Jesuits Caps when
they wear them. They are a surly ill-natured people and blockish, not fit to
converse with, but yet more friendly than the Calmucs. They seldom appear
abroad without their Horses, upon which they seem as if they were planted.
Their Arms are a kind of Musket, but the Longbow is with them more in use,
which they can handle with great dexterity.

Their Women in regard of their complexion seem almost as if they were of
another Nation, being in reality very fair and lovely, their skin as white as
the fairest people of Europe, and their countenance angelical; which I have
often wondered at, when I compared them with the Men. They are also well
proportioned in their Bodies and of a middle stature. Their Eiebrows are
jet-black, as also their Hair which hangs down in seven or 8 curled locks on
each side the Head. They cover not their Faces, like most of the Women in the
bordedering Nations. Their Head-attire is a double black Hood, lined with
Cotton and made fast under the Chin: above that they wear a Velvet or satin
Quoif, and are very nice in setting of it. The Widows are distinguished by
wearing a Cows-bladder behind their head, fullblown, and covered over with
Silk, or some fine Stuff, so that at a distance one would think that they had 2
Heads a piece. In Winter they wear Furs, but in Summer are so impatient of
heat, that they only wear a loose Shirt of red, green or blue, and that open
from the Collar to the Navel. Those of better fashion do usually wear two Coats
and a pair of Drawers coming down to the Calf of the Leg, and sometimes to the
ancles. They are as curious in setting of their Breasts as the English or French
Ladies, although they never accustom themselves to painting. They are very
familiar and free in conversation and will not refuse to let a stranger kiss
them: although in presence of their Husbands who are never jealous without reason.
To confess the Truth I was very much caressed by them, being often beckned at
under color of viewing my Habit, which to them seemed very strange. To be
brief their Women are as curious in their Accoutrements and adorning of the
Body, as they are complete persons by nature. They are very ambitious and
emulating in ornaments, and are well tricked up with Chains, Bracelets, Rings
and other fine things, and those both of Gold, Silver, Pearl, Coral, etc. which
they become exceeding well. As I have already said, they are very friendly and
familiar with strangers, as appeared by their community with us, when as some
of our men began to tickle and play with them, which they took all in good
part, but HE that offered to be bolder paid severely for it. The Men, although the
Alchoran do dispense with Polygamy, yet they rest contented with one wife,
whether because they think it too chargeable, or otherwise unreasonable I
cannot affirm. They are Mahometans by profession, but in reality mere Heathens;
for although they speak much of one only eternal God the Author of their being,
and Administrator of the World, yet they deny him in their Idolatry and
Devil-worship. They have neither Priests, Churches, nor Writ, but at certain
times and places present themselves with their Offerings. The greatest day
wherein they pay these Religious duties is on the Festival of St. Elias which
happened on that very time when we were there, which we essayed to see
solemnized, but were not permitted. All I could observe was only the
Sacrificing of a Hee-goat, which after they had cut off his Genitals, offered
the sore and boiled the hinder-part, which themselves always eat, hanging the
Hide upon a Stake, which is done with a few Ceremonies and Singing. These
Solemnities are also done as often as any of their Friends are deceased, whose
corpse they commit very decently to the Earth but not without a great howling
and a noise; those also that follow him tear and mangle their Bodies after an
unusual manner.

CHAP. XVII. They Author and his Company err in their Course. They meet with a
Cosac-Bark. A great Tempest. The Beginning and Limits of the Dagestan-Tartars;
Their Posture or Frame of Body, Habit and Way of Living. They are great
Plagiaries. The Barrenness of the Dagestan Mountains. Another great Tempest.
The Shallop run astrand and is spied by the Tartars, who plunder them. The
strange way of electing the Dagestan Kings. They are assailed by another
Company who ravish the Woman in presence of her Husband, and convert them all
to Slaves. The Author tortured to detect his Companions, which he manfully
endures. They are brought before the Osmyn, and chained.
ON the 19 ditto, we set sail and directed our course toward the Island
Tzetzien, which we sailed past, and had Tzierlan to the leeward; having very
misty weather all the while, which dured 24 hours or more.

The next morning it cleared up, and we got sight of the high Circas Mountains,
which we aimed at, if possible to come nearer the shore, and so to coast it all
along, after we had labored and lay beating in the Wind about 3 or 4 hours we
saw a long neck of Land, which we took for an Island, and endeavoring to sail
through a narrow passage we found our selves in a Quicksand, so that we were
fain to tack about, having sailed the whole day in vain, and at the dawning of
the day we came into the Channel which was a good sandy ground and fit for
Anchorage. Here we met with a Bark having about 60 or 70 Men on board, who
called to us and prayed us to help them afloat, pretending they were aground,
and fast among the sands, which some of our Company would have done, but the
major part were for the Negative, and so oversway'd the rest that were willing;
for we saw the Vessel jogg too and again very lightly, that we easily suspected
some bad design, as afterward it appeared, for when they saw us wind about,
they made all the Sail they could and pursued us, till finding that we were
very well armed they gave over their chase. The men aboard were Cosacks, and as
we believed of Radzins Folk.

Finding that they left us we consulted which way to steer, and resolved to let
drive before the Wind. We sounded and found 4 fathom, and came in a short time
close by Zierlan, which we found to ly in 43 degr. 7 min. From hence we saw the
famous Ararat, mounting his head far above the Caucasus, which was nearer us.
The Land of the Island Zierlan is all covered with shells, which seem to be
washed over, with high Floods and Inundations, whence I presume none will
Inhabit it. About evening we put off, and after an hours failing sounded and
found we had 6 fathom and a sandy ground. When night came we were surprised
with a great Tempest, and the Sea rose mountains high, insomuch that we
expected every moment to go to bottom, and so we were thrown to and again on
the tops of the billows. In the morning it began to clear up and the Winds
abated something, so that we made a little sail, and endeavored to steer
toward the High-lands on the Circas coast. After much labor in beating
through the Waves, and danger of our lives we got that height. We sailed by a
Tartarian City Seated near the Water between two Hills, and by the way met with
a Moscovian Boes where the Men aboard had acquaintance with us, having lay with
their Vessel aboard our Ship at Astrachan. The said Men invited us all to
dinner, of Fresh Mutton and Rice, which they first parboiled, and afterward
stewed with Butter, of which we made a hearty meal. After we had taken our
leaves of them, we steered away by the Coast, and saw many pleasant Valleys and
a fruitful Country. When the Evening came on, and we seeing it good weather
resolved that night to take our rest, which we had not done for 3 nights
together, and to that end dropped anchor.

On the 20 we came within 15 Leagues of Derbent, The Dagestan-Tartars. Their
Form, Habit and Way of living.
which is the land of the Dagestan Tartars, who are so called for that they
inhabit the hilly Country, the word Dag in their tongue signifying a Mountain.
That part of the Country which lies toward the Sea is dry and heathy, but
within land very fruitful, as afterward to our sorrow we found it. The men are
very robust and able of Body, of a deep swarthy complexion, and terrible to
look at. Their Habit is much at one with the Circas-Tartars. Their shoes are
only made of an Horses hide undrest and of one piece, drawn together above the
foot with Thongs. Their Arms are only Bow Arrows and a Scimmatar, although some
have also Spears and Lances: when they ride out, or go upon any expedition,
they put themselves in Harnass, to wit, a Helmet and a Target. They are great
Men-stealers, not sticking if they find oppo^tunity to sell their own
Relations, or Children of their nearest Friends, which they bring to the Turks
and Persians. They are very bold, and not easily daunted at any foreign Power,
trusting to the steep cragg^ and Mountains which are to others inaccessible.
They are Mahometans by profession, but sorry Zealots for their Religion. The
Women feed and keep cattle, but their men go out a Robbing. These Mountains are
very barren and sandy except where it is chalky.

The next day we weighed anchor and came before the Tartari^ town Boynak, which
when we had just passed by, it began to blow very hard, from the Sea ward, we
having then about 16 fathom Water In the mean time the Sea began to grow very
rough and hollow that we were forced to run the Shallop immediately a strand
for fear of overturning; being then but 5 leagues from Derbent, which was the
nearest Land. Directly before the coast lay a long Rif or Bank and round about
us was rocks, which we by the grace of GOD escaped, tho very narrowly; for
indeavoring to get our selves afloa^ again we ran into a Circle of Rocks about
3 or 4 foot under Water, and had much labor to get clear. Having now wrought
our selves out we gave our selves over to the mercy of Heaven, letting the Boat
drive what way it would, till at last by a great Sea we were thrown upon the
strand, without either loss of men or Goods, every man packing up what they
thought fit to carry along with them. The Goods which belonged to Capt. Butler
and Mr. Termund we buried in the Sand, thinking to send for them upon occasion
by the Persians. But most unhappy proved this our landing here, for no sooner
were we come ashore but we were espied by the Tartars, who came and delved up
the Goods we had so hidden, and carried it away upon their Horses to a little
Village hard by, and brought the news of such an accidental Booty to Aly
Sultan, their Prince, who came on Horse back with a guard of Troopers to seek
us. Although by day we hid our selves in the Woods, and by night went forward on
our Journey.

Having remained one night in the Woods where we took our rest, Our Company
consulted what was best to do, whether to march forward on our journey or to
tarry; It was advised by the major part to go, but I was rather desirous to
tarry 3 or 4 days longer, till the heat of the pursuit was over, that so
thinking when the Tartars should have sought for us a while in vain, they would
give us over for lost. However they were very forward to be going, and rejected
my Council. In the mean while C. Brak slept with his wife and child at a little
distance from us, and the rest of the Company would that we should leave them
there, because that the Woman and Child were but a cumber to us. So soon as I
understood their intent was to leave them so, I insisted on the contrary, with
words to this effect. Pray Gentlemen remember your selves; to what end should
you do such an unworthy act, and leave those poor souls behind us who have
neither Money nor means to subsist, and must in all apparency perish in a
strange place? and then what guilt must we have upon our Consciences? But know
this if you indeed resolve, to go and leav'em it is also my resolution to cry
out and make our Fates equal. When they saw me so zealous and in a hot passion,
they were contented to take them with us. I was the more concerned at it, for
his Fathers sake, who when we left our Native Country showed us all imaginable
Friendship, and therefore indeared him the more to me. About half a day we
marched with Muskets and other heavy Armor upon our shoulders, besides our
baggage, along the sides of the Mountains, till at last we came into a Valley
where we were espied by a Company of Troopers, being about 15 or 16. These made
up toward us, and drove harder and harder, till coming near at hand, we began
to consult about the point of Safety, yet could not come to an unanimous
Resolution till it was too late: some were for Defense, others for yielding,
which Advice was thought best, and approved on by the major part; for that we
thought if the kind Heavens had given us the Field for that time, yet we were
sure that some must loose their lives, and that they might in the mean time be
seconded by another fresh Party, who when all was done would take the remainder
and use us the more unkindly for our obstinacy. They surrender themselves,
We therefore upon their approachment freely surrendered our selves into their
hands and implored their Mercy after the best manner, and with all the signs we
could. When they had got us into their Power, they drove us into the
Jurisdiction of the Scemkals, for we were then within the Confines of the
Osmin. When they had brought us within their own limits, they allighted from
their horses and plundered us, yet not with that rigorous usage we feared, for
having stripped us of our upper Garment they let us go, taking only what we had
with us that was thought to be of any value. They took from me a Parcel of rich
Silk, which I had bought of the Rebels at Astrachan, but my gold Chain which I
had fastened in the inside of my Garter they did not find. When they had thus
pillaged us, they directed us which way to go for our Safety.

Dagestan is a Country subject to diverse Princes and Lords who are
independently Sovereign, but the most principal Provinces are Scemkal and
Osmin, already mentioned: and of those two, the former is the more eminent, the
Government whereof is not hereditary, A strange manner of electing a Prince.
but by lot, which is after this manner. The High Priest first appoints a day
of Election, to which several of the Princes, or Myrses (as they term them) are
assembled, these being set all in order round about him, he throws up a little
Apple, but whether of Gold, or Gilded, I cannot be positiv: upon this they all
grabble to catch it, and he that getts it is chosen for their Prince, although, he
can favor any he has a mind to, by casting it that way. Which may also serve
for an Emblem to represent Elections in other places, where Policy seems to be
more refined.

They are assailed and plundered a second time.
By that time we had traveled an hour, we were aware of another Troop of Horse;
greater than the former, who fell suddenly upon us, stripped us to the shirts,
and ravished the wife of my Countreyman Brak, before our Eyes, and left her
naked. My shirt and Drawers which were left me I gave to the Woman, on whom I
had more compassion than on my self. They take their leaves of each other and
depart.
Upon this deplorable accident we took our leaves of each other and departed,
being naked and unfit to assist each other any more, going two or three in a
company together. Else Pieterson and Mr. Tolk chused to go with me, and by that
time we had travailled 2 or 3 hours further we were set upon by another Company
of Horse, The Author and two more taken and made Slaves.
belonging to the Osmin. These took us, tied our hands behind our back, made us
fast to their Horses Tails, and so to trot after them through Thistles and
Thorns backwards, so that the Horse men driving on apace sometimes dragged us
forward, for it was not possible that we should keep pace with them. After they
had brought us a good way, they untied me and binding me fast to a Tree, shot
me with their Arrows, which they had broken off and made stumped on purpose to
urge me to discover the rest of our Company. But when they could not move me to
detect them they continued shooting, that I often wished that they would have
dispatched me, and rid me of that misery. The marks and pits remain still in my
Body, as I have shown them to many hundreds since my arrival at home. These
Torments I endured with incredible patience, not willing to detect my
Countrymen, Torments, I say, that none without experience could be able to
imagine how great. When they insisted hard that I should tell them which way
they went, I told them that they went toward the Hilly Country, although I was
certain on the contrary for they had determined to go along the River, that
they might have their shelter in the Woods. After they had used us so inhumanly
and out of hopes of getting any thing from us, they took me and Else Pletersz,
tied us leg to leg with a small Iron Chain, and so brought us up to the
Prince Osmin, often threatening that they would tear us limb from limb,
sustaining that Opinion of us that we were of Stephen Radzin's Company, and
sent out as Emmissaries on his behalf, and therefore were resolved that his
Insolences should be lay to our charge. When I understood that their Opinion
and Intentions were such, I was in a great consternation, not that I was
afraid of Death (for that was what I chiefly longed for, at that time) but
that we were liable to such a bad Censure, and could not explain our selves so
well, as to satisfy them to the contrary: and besides all that to be kept alive
and suffer so many Tortures as they threatened us, to detect what we were
utterly ignorant of, and unable to satisfy them in.

When we came to the Princes Palace, they led us through the Guards that stood on
each side with naked Scimmatars in their hands; these we expected to be our
Executioners, to hew us in pieces, although afterward we understood it was the
manner there, when captives are brought before the Prince. So soon as my
Companion saw this woeful sight he turned his head about, and stared upon me
with a very frightfull look, which I believe was the first time, and the
occasion of a Frenzy, which he has been often since possessed with, and I
believe (if he be alive) continues with him till this day. Being come before
the Prince we threw our selves down at his feet; he thereupon asked us, Whence
we came, and to what end we were come thither? We answered, Dutch, and fled
from Astrachan, to avoid the Cosacks, who upon our departure were about to lay
siege to that City, and now come to implore your Highnesses gracious
Protection. All this I hear very well (quoth the Prince) but I am certain that
you are your selves Cosacs, and of that Rout which not long ago depopulated my
Country and made Havoc of my Subjects, and now the Villain, your Master having
taken in Astrachan has sent you as Spies and Explorators to visit my Towns. Our
reply was, Sir, we know nothing of the Designs of the Cosacs, but served as
Mariners in a Ship, which some of our Contrymen have built for the Emperor
of Moscovia. When the Prince heard that, he was some what appeased, hearing us
with more attention, and that we might the better be understood, he called for
some Russian Slaves, who assured him that we were no Cosaks but real Dutch, for
that we had nothing of the Cosac-Dialect. Upon this the Prince turned about,
and told us our Life was granted us. This news was very welcome to us, but had
been more welcome if we had with one been set at liberty for we were chained
severally and sent away to Mahemet Sultan, the Princes Son, whose Residing
place was near mount Ararath.

CHAP. XVIII. The Captives take their leaves of each other. The great Orchard
near Tzurbag. Their Arrival at Urwan. Situation of Mount Ararat. An accidental
meeting with some Carmelito Friars. The Author insisted upon to undertake a
Cure of a Rupture, which with much persuasion, he promises to do. His ascent up
the Mountain Ararat, to the Hermites Cell who was his Patient, which he
performs in 5 days time. He undertakes and Cures the Rupture. The Copy of an
Attestation given him by the said Hermit in barbarous Latin. His return down.
ON the 21 dito, my Companion and I took our leaves of each other, but not
without great sadness, for so soon as we were brought out, and understood that
we were to go two several ways, I observed Tears run down his cheeks, which
also moved me to weep, for that we were out of hopes ever to see one another
face again in this World, neither that our Wives or Friends should ever hear
from us or that we ever were like to be redeemed by our Friends or Country men
being in a remote Land. Having thus taken our last Farewell of each other, I
was set upon a Mule, and committed to the Charge of some Slaves and Renegados,
who were to bring me to the Court of Prince Mahomet, being about 3 [ Dutch]
miles from Urwan.

About Evening we came to a Village called Tzurbag seated upon a high Mountain,
where we took up our lodging for that night. While we stayed here there came
abundance of Women to see me, who wondered that I wore such long hair, for the
Inhabitants of these Countries (being Mahometans) always shave their Heads bare.

On the 22 betimes in the morning we set forward, and went through a great
Grove of Fruit Trees, where we saw abundance of wild Swine masting of the
shaken Fruit. These Fruit trees do not grow naturally of themselves here, for
they have an Ordinance among them in that Country, That none, of whether Sex
it be, shall marry, till they can prove that they have planted a Hundred Trees
with their own Hands, so that they begin when they are Children to plant; which
having been observed for some Ages, is the reason that this Wood is grown so
wide. There are diverse sorts of Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Cherries, Figgs,
Almonds, Wallnuts and others, and that in such abundance that the hundredth part
is not consumed or used, for none are prohibited to pluck and carry away. There
is also very fair Meadow and Arable Ground, the Fields full of Corn, affoarding
many delicate and rich Plants, both for Kitchen use, and Medicinal. Cattle is
there both good and plentiful, far surpassing ours in Europe for fatness,
especially Kine and Sheep; Goats and Swine, both wild and tame, run together in
innumerable Flocks, but incredible is the Plenty of Hens and Pigeons which are
brought in and sold for trifles.

On the 30th we arrived at Urwan, or Ervan, a City situated under Mount Ararat,
in the Country of the Medes, about 65 Leagues from the Caspian Sea. The Town
is not very wide, but sufficiently munited with strong walls of stone, being
about the greatness of Alcmaar in North-Holland. There are in it some Persian
Mosquees, and Churches, as also a Cloister of Carmelite Friars. They use no
kind of Commerce, or Merchandise, save that of Slaves, which the Dagestan
Tartars come to buy there, and are there so cheap that a lusty well-bodied
youngman is ordinarily sold for ten Crowns, as some of our Company were sold
for the same price. The City Urwan is mostly inhabited by the poorer sort of
Armenians; but Mount Ararat, by those of the Romish Faith, and other Christians.

Mount Ararat is seated just in the parting of Armenia from Media, and is
reckoned under the rank of the Dagestan and Caspian Mountains. The Armenians
call it Messina, and the Persians Agri: It is much higher than either Caucasus,
or the famous Taurus, or any other Mountain in all Media, Armenia or Persia, so
far as one can view. It is a blew, and dark-colored Rock. I have found there a
kind of a dark yellow Mineral, very ponderous, and sparkling; but could never
learn what metal it would have produced if melted, nor that of a sparkling
Sand and Dust, which I also found here, although I brought a proof of each,
which I lost, when we were taken at Sea by the English and plundered, as
herafter shall be said at large. This Mountain is for the most part barren, and
without Earth, and what may be further said by way of Description, the Reader
will find in the Relation of my Ascent toward the Top of it.

My Masters purpose was to sell me here, but I could easily perceive, that they
had no great mind to buy me. The same evening two Carmelite Friars came to me,
and asked, If I was not a Surgeon, or, if I had any Judgment that way? I
replied, No: but not satisfied with the Answer I gave them, they applied
themselves to my Patron, asking him the same Question; the one of them telling
him, that a Friend of his had a Rupture, and if I could perform the Cure, they
would give him 50 Crowns. My Master hearing such a tinkling sum of Money
promised, pressed very hard upon me to undertake the Work, promising upon
Condition that I effected the Cure, he would declare me Franc. Hereat I was in
a great strait, on the one hand incited by the sweet hopes of Freedom, and on
the other daunted when I thought what a severe penalty I was liable to from the
hands of those cruel men, if I should chance to miscarry However I took
courage, and consented to take the Patient in hand trusting in the good Grace
of GOD, and hoping for a lucky success which also would have come to pass, by
the death of one of us three Thus I undertook the Journey, and was seven days
before I came to the Hermites Cell, travailing every day 5 Miles, JUL. 1670.
which we reckoned for a good days journey, the more, in regard that the higher
we came, the steeper we found the Hill. At every 5 Miles end we ^und a
Hermitage, where we were supplied with a Peasant and an Ass, to carry our
Provision, and Wood for Fuel, because that about the middle of the Mountain it
is so extreme cold, that Ice of half a nights freezing, will bear man and
horse. In our Journey upwards, we passed through three sorts of clouds. The
first were thick, misty and dark. The second were cold and like snow, although
it was then perfect summer below in the Valleys, and so warm that the Grapes
were very early ripe. The third sort were so cold, that we could hardly endure
any longer, and thought verily that we should have grown stiff, and not able to
proceed on our Journey. But having now travailed 4 days, and had passed through
the highest and coldest clouds, we found the Air very temperate and tolerable.
On the 7 of that Month, we arrived at the Hermites house, which was hewn out
of a Rock, the Weather being there so moderate and gentle as man can imagine,
or heart can wish; neither more hot than might very well be endured, nor yet
more cold than was expetible and congruous to humane constitution. The sun
enlivened us with thwarting beams, which were again refracted, with the
refreshing gales of Wind; the Wind correcting the Sun, the Sun the Wind. The
Hermit told me he had lived there 25 years, and never had seen the weather any
otherwise. But on the top of the Hill, it was yet more calm, where as none can
remember that the Air there did ever change, or was subject either to Wind or
Rain, which is presumed to be the reason that the Ark has endured so long
without being rotten.

Going into the Hermites Cell, I took a view of the Rupture, which I saw was
shut forth about the bulk of a henns-egg; and with one asked him, How long he
had had it? he answered, A Month: which gave me good encouragement, since I
was sure that the Fissure was fresh, and therefore the Cure with greater
facility to be effected.

Thus I undertook the work, and taking 200 fresh Hen-eggs I boiled them hard,
and made thereof an Unguent. I made also a Truss, and anointed him 4 times a
day with the Ointment causing him to ly still for a fortnight together, which
done I let him rise up to see how he was, and found that it was sufficiently
bettered: for the Rupture which he with his own hands had endeavored to stop,
by thrusting it in, and as often broke out, was now stayed, and he told me that
he could every day perceiv that it grew better. I gave him advice to keep
himself a whole year in the Truss, and continue anointing himself after the
manner I did myself, which he also promised to observe. When I took my leav of
him, he gave me a piece of hard wood, of a dark-red color, with a Cross, and a
silver Chain which he wore about his neck, as also a Stone, which he told me he
had taken from under the Ark; These Relicts he adjured me to be very careful
of, saying the real value and esteem thereof would be such, that if ever I came
to Rome, and bestowed them on St. Peter's Church that they would reward me with
a Gift which should serve me for a maintenance so long as I lived. The Wood and
the Cross I brought with me, but the stone, with some sparkling Oar were taken
from me when the English took our Ship. The Hermit was born at Rome, and of
very good Parentage, his Father being one of the most eminent Citizens there,
who upon his Deathbed charged his Son, To retire himself from the Society of
Men and betake himself to the Mountain Ararat, there to spend his days in a
Heremitical Life. The Son in obedience to this his Father's Will, took upon him
this Journey and manner of Life, where he had then been 25 years, living there
in great Tranquillity and with more contentment than he could do in the World
of Rome. Besides those Relicts already mentioned he gave me a Testimonial in
Writing, to evidence to the Curious my being there, which [ after a Monkish
Elegancy] runs thus: The Heremites Attestation given to J. Struys.
POstquam non potui intermittere ad petitionem Johannis Jansonii, precabatur, ut
Testimonium ipsi darem scriptum, quod super-nominatus Joannes Jansonius fuerit
apud me in monte Sancto Ararath, circiter triginta quinque miliarium sursum
eundo; ubi praenominatus Joannes me sanavit ab una magna ruptura; propterea
ipsi maximas gratias ago, propter magnam diligentiam suam quam mihi praestitit:
and ipsi pro hac benevolentia donavi unam Crucem quod fuit frustum ligni de
vera Archa Noe, ubi in persona intus fui, and illud de quo ista crux est facta,
propriis meis manibus ab una camera scidi. Ubi ego Joanni Janson. perfectius
veritatem narravi quommodo illa Archa est facta: Super hoc ipsi lapidem etiam
dedi, quem ipsemet manibus meis decerp^ si infra Archam, ubi Archa quiescit.
Hoc omne fateor esse verum, tam verum, quam vere ego in ista mea sancta
eremitica habitatione de facto vivo.

Datum in monte Ararat, die 22 Iulii 1670. DOMINICUS ALEXANDER, Romanus.




True it is the Autograph is but barbarous stuff, void of the true Latin
Idiotisms, yet we thought good to give it you as it is, rather than to put it
in a style more proper, or give it a better elegancy. It may be thus verbally
Paraphrased: Inasmuch as John Johnson [Struys] desired me, I could not refuse
to give him a Testimonial, how that he the said l. l. was with me upon the Holy
mount Ararat, about 35 miles high, where the said John cured me of a grievous
Rupture, and acknowledge my self greatly obliged to him, for his Care and
Diligence in the same. And further to manifest my thankfullness toward him, I
have given him a Cross, being of the wood of the ^eal Ark of Noah, which I have
cut out of a Chamber of the the said Ark with my own hands, having been there
personally my self: as I have verbally demonstrated to the said John I. after
what manner the said Ark is made. Besides this I have given him a Stone, which
with my own hand I have pulled from under the Ark, being a part of the Rock,
whereon it is supported. All this I testify to be true, and so true as I live
in this my holy Hermitage.

Dated at mount Ararat July 22 1670 DOMINICUS ALEXANDER, Roman.




The same day I took my leave of the Heremite, and set forward on my Journey to
Urwan in the Valley, accompanied as before in my going up with an Ass and his
Driver: He takes his leave of the Heremite.
but the way I found more uneasy to travail in coming down, especially when we
came in the cold clouds, where it was so slippery that I expected every moment
to tumble headlong down. Coming still lower we found it worse, for it rained
hard, which with the unevenness of the Rocks made our way very dangerous. At
last after much labor I got down, and can well assure the Reader that their
Opinion is not true, who suppose this Mount to be innaccessible.

CHAP. XIX. The Author put in Chains again: He is insisted upon to renounce the
Christian Faith and become Mohammedan; Diverse means to that end put in practice
by way of Trial. The great gain of warm Baths. The Author taken out of Chains.
He is sold to a Persian. The Situation of the Caspian Sea. Great Whirlpools in
the Bay of Gilan. A discourse about the Silk-trade. A further Description of
the Caspian Sea, etc.
SO soon as I was arrived at Urwan and entered the House of my Patron Mehemet,
he gave order to secure me with 2 Chains, for he feared that I would make my
escape, by running into the Turkish Jurisdiction. One of these Chains was light
and tolerable, but the other very massy and ponderous, insomuch that to bear
the Chain alone, might seem to be Slavery enough. This Condition brought me
into a deep Melancholy, even to death, not only that I should become a Slave,
but that my Patrons Incredulity should be the occasion of such Affliction to
me, as also that he should so much violate his Word, when having promised to
let me go free again, on condition he received that money upon my effecting the
Cure, which the Heremite caused to be honestly paid; for had I not trusted to
that his promise, I should have prevailed with the Heremite so far as to
purchase my liberty, since the Slave-market is there very low. Besides all this
he continually wrought upon me to renounce Christianity, with many fair
Promises, as, that if I would be Circumcised he would give me, two of the
fairest Damsels in the Country for Wives; but this his proffer I refused
without making much study in framing of an Answer, desiring him rather to
severe my head from my body, than to urge me to what my Conscience would not
dispense with: yet not satisfied with this Reply, he persisted on, and told me
that he would give me so many Acres of Ground, besides Orchards and Slaves: yet
all he could imagine to persuade me to embrace the Turkish Faith, would not
move me so much as to give him the lest hopes: insomuch that for that time he
broke off without giving me any sharp Language. Shortly after he sent 2 fair
Girls, who at first entrance saluted me very friendly, and beginning with a
trifling discourse, they proceeded on to more serious matters, and consequently
proffered themselves to me as Wives, making use of a Russian Slave to be their
Interpreter: and to make their request prove the more effectual, they began to
stroke me, and play a hundred wanton tricks to allure me, which when I
perceived, prayed them to desist and not to trouble me any longer, for it was
against my Conscience to violate the Laws of Christianity, which forbid
Polygamy, having already a Wife by whom I had two Children, and although I were
in the most remote parts of the World, I should not alienate my Love and Troth,
by marrying of another so long as she was alive. To this they made answer, That
I should never see either my own Country or Relations again, and that many
thousands would be glad of what was proffered me, and therefore willed me to
accept of it, lest I should afterward repent when it could not be revoked,
etc. After they had used a few such like Arguments they left me. Hardly were
they got out but my Patron came in, who fell to work again with greater, and
more specious promises than before, as. That if I would become a Musulman [or
True Beleever] he would advance me to the Dignity of a Commander in the Guards.
This perplexed me very much when I saw him so earnest, thinking that if he
could not get his will by fair means, he would proceed to rigor, and being
absolute Lord and Sovereign, as well of the Country, as of my Person, would
force me to embrace the Mohammedan Religion, however I had already stood out so
much Torture, that being a little hardened to it I feared it so much the less:
but gave him a short Answer; to this Effect, Sir, All the fair promises you
have already, and that you may hereafter make shall not have that efficacy with
me, as to make me renounce my Faith, for I had rather dispatch my self, than to
embrace Mahometanism. He hearing me say so did not for that time press me much
more.

On the 9th. dito I continued still in Chains, at what time the young Damsels
that had been with me before, were sent again, who, as they did the last time,
endeavored to persuade me to turn Mohammedan; neither did they desist to use
all manner of Allurements they could devise, to entice me to ly with them, for
so they thought that if I had done that, I must either become Turk, or die a
miserable Death; They further did what they could to put me in mind of my
present misery, and told me that I must never expect to enjoy any better than
what I saw before my eyes; and in the conclusion of all, told me that they
wondered at the Folly and Vanity of the Christians who were so strictly tied to
Monogamy, or only to marry one Wife, when as the Mahometans might have as many
as they listed, or thought themselves capable to maintain.

My Master although he was a Prince yet thought it no dishonor to trade in
Commerce: but the chief thing he had which brought him up the most Revenues,
were the Baths which he kept; having some almost in every City, as well in his
own Jurisdiction as in Persia and other Countries, whereof those were the most
considerable, at Derbent, at Scamachy, and at Ispahan, which brought him in a
vast sum of Money yearly.

The reason why the Baths are there in such esteem, and so much frequented by
persons of all Ranks and Degrees, is not only their affected Cleanliness, in
which they surpass all others: but as well through Superstition: for that after
the use of their Wives, they are to bath, being till then reputed unclean, and
may not enter the Mosques: and this both sexes are enjoined to upon such Cases
by the Alcoran. A man among them may not ly with his wife from Conception to
her Delivery: which is probably instituted as a Praecept in the Alchoran to
make those Countries more populous; for so one Man is capable of generating
many Children in one year. The Baths are frequented from Break of day to the
Setting of the Sun. From morning till noon the Men bath, and from noon till
night the Women, so taking it by Turns.

On the 10th. came my Patron to visit me and asked me how I did, and if I had
taken good Courage: I answered him that I had no great occasion to thank him
for my Welfare, since he did all he could to make me miserable, and contrary to
that Honesty and Truth, which the Turks boasted of, he had shown me an odd
example: Withal telling him that he had little reason to chain me so fast, and
make my Slavery the greater when as he had promised me my Freedom, upon the
receipt of the Money which was paid him. Upon this he seemed to be a little
moved to compassion and commanded that the greater Chain should be taken off:
Now when I observed that my reasoning had a little prevalency with him I pursued
on in my Argument, with these, or the like Words, Sir, Is it not sufficient
that I am your Slave? why then must I be kept in Chains, when as others have
their liberty? If it be so that you fear I should go from you, Know this, That
you can not keep me longer than I list: for I can at once part with my Life and
take leav of this miserable Bondage, which if you persist to use me so
inhumanly I am resolved to do. This I could perceiv wrought in him no small
change, for he was naturally very covetous, and would have lost the price of a
Slave. Besides that, it is a Maxim of their Law, that if any person do any way
murder himself, the House is to be accursed and pulled down to the Ground. My
Patron considering what the Issue of this might be, although I had not the lest
thoughts to lay violent hands upon my self. he therefore to prevent the worst
sold me to one Hadsy Mahomet Sala, Mr I. Struys sold to a Persian.
a Persian for 25 Abbas, that was about 30 Shillings sterling. which is but a
small sum in comparison to the ordinary Market price of Argiers, and other
places in Barbary. My new Patron spoke the Russian Tongue very well, by which
means we came to understand one another the better: for he used me more kindly
than the other, and would often bid me have courage, saying, he would go with
me to Ispahan where there were many English, Dutch and other Europeans, and
probably those that would buy me off his hands, and so set me at Liberty again,
which gave me no small encouragement to do my utmost to please him.

On the 12 dito, I went with my new Master to Derbent, and sailed with him
several times over the Caspian Sea: his principal dealing being in Crap, which
with several other Roots used in Dying, grow there in great abundance. He had
also a small Bark of his own, wherein he transported his own Commodities: This
said Vessel always lay in a Bay about half a League from the City, and thither
his Slaves always brought the Wares; for about Derbent it is very rocky and
unsafe for Vessels to lie at Anchor, in case of Storm or tempestuous Weather.
But in the said Bay is very good anchorage, at 6, 7 and 8 Fathom Water, and a
clay ground with Shells. The Coast from Baynak to Masanderan is altogether
sandy, and here and there low land, where appear the Tops of the Dagestan
Hills: between those two Coasts it is all a long very good anchorage, there
being many fair Roads able to receive Ships of a greater burden than are
usually built for this Sea; there are also many fair Towns, built for the most
part at the mouths of Rivers, and have many Vessels and Shipping belonging to
them, as well for Traffic and Transportation of Merchandises, as for the
Fishing trade: for this Sea is very plentiful of Fish, and brings up the King
of Persia an incredible sum of Money yearly, receiving from some as Toll, and
from others as Contribution. In the Bay of Gilan are 2 great Whirl-pools, Great
VVhirl-pools- in the Bay of Gilan.
for which the Persians are very fearful in sailing from their own Coasts to
Gilan. The Water in these Whirpools is hurried about with an incredible
violence and makes such a noise, that if the Weather be still, they may be
heard at 5 or 6 leagues distant. It is my opinion that these are the Passages
whereby this great Lake has a subterranean communication with the Euxin, or some
other Sea, for it is well known that it receivs 84 huge Rivers, besides the
Wolga, which is reputed the 3d River of the World for greatness, and hither do
all the Floods of the Persian and Tartarian Rivers hasten, as it were to their
Center, with an admirable celerity, so that when we sailed we always made a
calculation how far we would be carried off in thwarting the stream, and so
bore up toward the Coast, as well for shortning our Course, as to avoid the
Whirpools, where if any Vessel be brought she must inevitably perish. The best
and most commodious Shipping for this Sea, is a Flat-bottom, from 80 to a
hundred Tuns.

Upon a time it happened that my Master and I fell into a discourse about
Trading and Commerce, making a parallel between their way of merchandising and
ours, where among other Words, I told him That If I were once again at Liberty,
I could make a good Advantage, and did not doubt but that in a short time I
should return with a Ship full of Hollands Commodities: upon which he asked me,
If I was so rich then? I answered No; But if I came safe into my own country
some or other would entrust me with a Cargo for those parts, being now well
acquainted with the Convenience of the Caspian Sea. My Patron hearing, that
thought that I might probably be some way instrumental to do him service and
that night discoursed some Armenians about me who dealt in Silk: upon which they
desired to see me. My Master having appointed them a day, I went along with
him, where one of the most eminent asked me if I could speak Italian, and if I
was of Amsterdam, or if I knew such a Merchant there? I answered him in
Italian, That I was of Amsterdam, but did not know the Gentleman he named, yet
was acquainted with several there who dealt in Silk. He then entered into a
discourse which was much after this manner: That the only way to Trade with
Holland, was to bring over, Lead, Quicksilver, Cloth, Serges, Says and all
kinds of Low Country Commodities and Manufactures, which would be very
marketable at Derbent, Scamachy and Ardobil and might produce good profit, so
that all the Staple of Silk might be brought to Holland. and, That all Goods
whatever might be more conveniently transported over the Caspian Sea, and so up
the Wolga, bringing it down to Archangel, and so for Holland: which would not
prove so tedious by far, as to bring it over Land to Smyrna, where by the way
so much Danger and so many Duties were met withal; and then from Smyrna to run
the Hazard of the Barbary Corsairs through the Mediterranean and the Spanish Sea:
besides unreasonable Duties that are imposed by the Turks, which probably the
Czar of Moscovia would not set so high, to draw a Traffic of such importance
through his Jurisdiction, etc. That Gilan, Scirwan and other adjacent Provinces
bordering upon the Caspian Sea, could deliver upwards of 50000 Bales of Silk
every year. Bocharen also affoards precious Furrs and the East Country good
plenty of Segrine-Leather, Saffron, Rhubarb and other precious Druggs. This was
the sum of all the Discourse we had for that time, but not much hopes were then
given me of gaining my Freedom, by assisting them in a Trade to Europe.

A further Description of the Caspian Sea.
The Caspian Sea may more properly be termed a Lake, were it not that its
Greatness and Saltness gave it the name of the latter, for it is environed on
every side with the Main Continent, and receives 85 great Rivers (as has been
said before) which nevertheless do not make it swell any higher upon
extraordinary Rains and Tempest, which the more confirms what I have already
mentioned about the two famous Whirlpools. What concerns the Breadth and
Greatness of the Caspian Sea, as also its' Situation, Bays, Rivers, Creeks,
Islands, Towns and their distance of Bearing, they are sufficiently noted in
the Card hereto annexed, which I have with great diligence composed, partly by
my own experience and partly by the help of some Armenian Mariners, who were
well acquainted herewith. Its length which is reckoned from Wolga to Astrabath,
North and South is computed to be 129 Leagues, and from Tarku to the River
Jemla which is accounted the Breadth, being East and West, is about 60 Leagues
For 6, 7, 8 and 9 Leagues from the Coast, the Water is sometime fresh and
sometime brakkish, and from 12 to 50 fathom Anchor ground, but the Sea is within
fresh and out of sounding. It is also called the Hyrcan and the Salt Sea. It
has many Boughts, Inlets, Creeks and Angles: the Bay of Gilan tends above 38
Leagues inwards, taking its beginning at the Cape of Scabaran and reaches to
Sengar Hasam. This Sea is environed mostly on the East and North with a sandy
and barren ground, having also many Quarries of Marble and Alabastre. On the
East side of this Sea is a Noble River, not much inferior to the Wolga, which
river parts the Calmuc-from the Gwin-Tartars but the Country on each side
being inhabited with a wild People, using among themselves no kind of Traffic,
and therefore unsafe for others to adventure themselves. My Master Mahomet Sala
once sailing past the mouth of this River, I pressed him hard to sail up to
view the Convenience and take an account of the Quality of the Country. But he
told me, he had a greater esteem for his Life, Ship and Goods, than to satisfy
my curiosity about a busine^ of so mean importance.

This Sea affoards great plenty of all kinds of Fish, and is farmed of the King
of Persia from April to September, for a vast sum of Money and that for a
certain Distance from the Coast which is set off with Stakes, within which
bounds none are to fish upon pain of Death, but without every one has the
permission to fish; yet without Fish is very rare except in some little Shoals
here, and there, and those only at some Seasons, which are uncertain. After the
Farm is expired it is also free within the Stakes for every one to fish. Here
is an incredible plenty of Salmon, as also Carps, Breams, Sturgeon and other
Fish, held with us in great esteem, and those in general both larger and fatter
than those taken on the Coast of Holland, or any other Sea or Water in Europe
that I know. Carps when come to their full growth are sometimes above 4 foot
long, but those are not so delicate as when they are less: Here also many
strange Fishes by us unknown, and I beleev most of them proper only to this
Sea. Amongst those strange kinds is one, which by reason of the disproportion
of his Head with his Body our Countreyment at Astrachan call, Dickkop [
Thickpate] But by the Persians, Nachay, that is, Devourer. This Fish is of a
more than ordinary strength and sometimes will overturn a small Boat with a
stroke of his Tail.

CHAP. XX. A Description of Derbent: it is Walls. The Sultans Court. Very old
Ruins. Diverse Watch-towers. Multiplicity of Sepulchrets without Derbent. Their
Slave-Market. The Author sold again. His Patron married with a Polish Woman and
runs into Danger of his Life. The Intention of his Patroness in running away
from her Husband and taking the Author with her. Two of Mr. Struys's Companions
come to Derbent. How they made their escape from the Tartars. The great
Inclination of the Sultan of Derbent to the Hollanders. A Device put in
practice to set one of the Authors Companions at Liberty The Prince takes the
Wife of Brak for his own. Brak makes his escape.
DErbent the first City under the Jurisdiction of the King of Persia on the
Caspian Sea, Description of Derbent.
lies in 41 degr. 50 min. northerly Latitude. This City lies longwise East and
West from the Sea side to the Land, and is according to computation about 2 [
English] miles long. One side thereof lies so near to the Sea that the Waves
beat against the Walls, and in a Storm or tempestuous Weather the Surges rise
over the Walls. This is also reckoned as a Barrier against the Irruption of the
Tartars and other Savages, being the only place on all that Coast for many
miles together, where they can come ashore, for the Shore is there naturally
secured with a steep Bank and wholly inaccessible. Wherefore this City is not
improperly called Derbent, which in their Language imports as much as The
Kingdoms Key, Der signifying a Key, and Bent a Kingdom, or Country: and so the
City Gammeron on the Indian Coast is called Bender, which is the same Word with
transposition of the Syllables, and a little variation of the Dialect.

This Town is very strongly munited with a Stone-Wall, and as some say, was
built by Alexander the Great, who had here his Residence for some time, although
there does not any Building remain of his, save only the Wall on the South
side, and the Fortress: but all the Fortifications on the North were built by
the famous Nauschirwan, King of the Medes; having no other Foundation than a
solid Rock. The Walls both on the North and the South side are so broad that
Horses and Wagons may ride all along, and the Stones are of a hard rock,
brought hither from a Hill not far distant from the Town, being all equally 6
foot Square. On the Wall of Alexander [for it still bears his name] is an
oblong Stone having an ancient Inscription in old Syriac and Arabic Characters,
which none now a days can read.

Derbent how divided.
The City Derbent is divided into 3 parts, The uppermost Ward or Quarter, stands
on a rising Ground and has a Fortress furnished with Brass-Cannon; and at that
time when I was there and since the Uproar of the Cosacs it has bin Strengthened
with a Garrison of 1000, or 1200 Soldiers, and in this Quarter is the Sultans
Court. The Middle Ward is inhabited by Persians, but the Buildings go mostly to
decay. The Lowest Ward is about 2000 paces long, but this part is only tilled
and used for Gardens; and as they say has been heretofore inhabited by Greeks,
bearing still the name of Schaher Iunan or, City of the Greeks.

Old Ruins about Derbent.
Above Derbent appear the Ruins of a Wall which reached from thence to the
Necropont, or Euxin Sea: which has been a work of an incredible Charge and
Labor. In some places the said Wall appears very plain, and is about four Foot
thick. Round about this City are also diverse stone Redoubts, whereof Four are
furnished with Ammunition and a Garrison of Soldiers suitable to the Occasion
of the Times. In the Country round about are also the Ruins of many strong
Castles, insomuch that it plainly appears in what esteem this Place has bin
with the Median and Persian Monarchs in times past. Walck Towers about Derbent.
Not far from this City are also some Watch-towers of Wood, which are raised
exceeding high so that they can with ease descry the approachment of an Enemy
in time of War. On that side of the Town which faces the Country are many
Sepulchrets, or Tombs, some of an oblong form, and others semicircular, being in
breadth about a man's length and hollowed, so that a Man may easily ly in them.
In this great Sepulcher was in times past a famous Battle fought, between
Cassan King of the Medes, and the Dagestan Tartars, where the former had a
notable overthrow, with the loss of several Thousand men, and the principal
Heroes and Leaders were buried in those Tombs. Between this place and the Sea is
also another Plat of Ground, environed with a high wall, wherein are 40 Tombs,
under which are so many Persian and Median Princes interred and made sacred to
Memory. Upon the Walls are several Flags pitched, and by each an old Man to beg
an Alms of such as out of Devotion and a Religious Zeal come to visit this
place, as it is throughout all Persia held very meritorious to visit the
Sepulchers and Graves of the Deceased. This Superstition besides that of
Bathing is all the Ceremonies and Rules which their Religion prescribes the
Women, who receiv their Directions and are injoined by their Parents and
Husbands what to do, being secluded out of the Mosquees.

Within Derbent live no Christians but altogether Mahometans, except a few Jews
who boast themselves to be descended from the house of Benjamin: these commonly
follow base and dishonorable Traffic, as buying of Prize-goods and Booty taken
at Sea, which the Dagestan Tartars bring thither to market: Great market for
Slaves.
The rest of the Inhabitants likewise trade in buying and selling of Slaves
that being the main and almost only Merchandise they deal in, which they buy of
the Dagestan Plagiaries and send all over Persia, making an incredible gain
thereof. Those that are brought hither for Slaves are very unhappy, for they
are no more looked upon than an unreasonable Animal or Bruit: and when they are
about buying, they pull of their Clothes and grope them all over as if it were
a Swine or a Calf. Besides their low esteem they have for Slaves as to their
Persons they are very unkind and void of Mercy, so that were it not for the
Loss of so much money very few of those wretched caitiffs would die a natural
Death; Those people being by nature very prone to Anger, and besides that too
jealous to live upon Earth, thinking that if a Slave do but smile or cast a
friendly look toward one of their Wives that something extraordinary must be in
the case; although I had never reason to complain of my Patron for any such thing:
but one that lived in the neighborhood was much addicted to that inquietude
and restless humor. The bed where I lay was upon the Top of the house for
coolness sake, and could very well see into my neighbors Court, or Garden,
where his Wives walked and played together being undrest. The man saw me
several times and I him; but he not knowing how to prevent it, went and told my
Master that I hurled Stones among his Wives, which was not true, for
considering what circumstances I was under and sensible of the Condition of a
Slave in those Places, it had been a Token of the greatest imprudence in the
World to hazard my self so far as to offend such men who were both void of
Reason and had my Life in their hands. My Master told him he did not beleev
that I would do any such thing, Well, replies the other, take your Slave away,
or, I shall bring him down for you. Upon this my Patron warned me to take heed
of looking down any more, not knowing what might come of it. I was very curious
to know what course the Infidel would take in hand, to fetch me down, and
accordingly went down to the old Place, where I saw several long Hand-guns
ready levelled and cocked, laying out at the Window, which made me in all have
to turn about and out of the way, but was no sooner turned before I heard him
fire, although it did not the mischief he hoped and expected. The Inhabitants, as
was said before, are in this place something currish-natured, but the Persians
in general do not use their Slaves so unkindly, as the Turks, which I could
well observe the time I was on the Galleys, nor yet so inhumanly as they do at
Argiers, Tripoli, Tunis, Salee, and other maritim Towns in Barbary, according
to the universal report given by those that fall into the hand of these cruel
Men; for here when they do use them so hard, it is more to make them renounce
their Faith and become Mahometans, than innate Cruelty. Most proud they are and
lofty, boasting in their honorable descent and Pedigrees from their ancient
Nobility, famous in History, and renowned from the Monarchy of the Medes. The
Soldiery, which they call Kissil-basschen, are very unruly, and take the lest
word that one can speak for an affront, yea, such is the aw they have gained of
the People, that they dare not speak without great reverence; sure I am they
have taught me silence, since they are accustomed to be the Interpreters of
other Men's Words, and are as apt to misconstrue what is said, whence
consequently they fall to blows.

On the 30th. of July my Patron brought me again to Market, The Author sold
again.
where he sold me to one Hadzi Biram Ali, A very rich Merchant in Jewels. The
same Hadzi Biram had 9 Wives, 5 at Derbent, and 4 at Scamachy. The Chief of
these 9 was a Polish Gentlewoman by birth, and a Christian, but her Father was
an Amsterdammer, by name John Flusius, who had a Command of Horse under
Casimire K. of Poland, and married there a Gentlewoman of that Country by whom
he had 4 Children. Upon a time, when these People lived in the Country, it
happened that the Tartars made an irruption into Poland, and among many others
carried away my said Patroness, being then a Damosel of 12 years old, and sold
her for a Slave. She was a Gentlewoman of a very fair complexion, and a well
proportioned Body at that time, for which reason alone (I suppose) my Patron
bought her and made her his Wife, promoting her shortly after above the rest.

It was my Masters custom to bath himself once a day in the Sea, His Patron in
danger of his Life.
which the Inhabitants of those Parts do account very wholesome, and his custom
was always to take me with him to hold his Horse till he had don. It happened
that one time he went a little farther in than was usual, and lighting
accidentally in a Whirl-pool he was forcibly overturned and not able to recover
himself. I seeing him then immerge made all the have I could to get him out:
and coming to the Place could not get a sight of him for it was as I supposed
in a Quicksand: but at last, by accident I felt his head with my Foot, which I
endeavored to take hold of with my hand, and at last got him out, brought him
to the Land and lay him over a Stone, till abundance of water came gushing out
of his Mouth, but no appearance of Life was left in him, when I thought he was
rid of the most part of the Water, I set him upon the Horse and got up my self
behind him, in the mean while he continued bleeding at the Nose and Ears, and
so weak that I had much ado to hold him upright upon the Horse After he came
home he was put to bed, which he kept for 14 days together before he recovered
his Strength. It was no small cause of Joy to me that things fell so well out,
as that he lived to declare the true cause of this dismal accident: whereas if
he had died, 't would certainly have cost me my Life, among those brutish,
furious and unreasonable People, especially in consideration of of the
Condition I was in, not only a Stranger both to their Religion and Manners as
well as their Country and Persons, but likewise a Slave, for whose Death and
Slaughter a man is no more accountable than for the slender Value and Market
price; whilst on the contrary it fell out that I got the Credit of saving his
Life, and his Benevolence ever after for an act of such merit, having run the
jeopardy of my own Person. So much kindness he professed for me, that he
promised to take me with him to Ispahan, where he said he would bestow me upon
some of my own Nation.

This Motion liked me exceeding well, but my chief Patroness who spoke very
good Low Dutch advised me to the Contrary, saying, My Husband, your Lord, it is
true goes for Ispahan, but from thence he intends to go on a Pilgrimage to
Meccha, and bestow 200000 Gil. on the Sepulcher of Mahomet, for which Gift he
and his Son Hadzy Kan, will be canonized and registered among the Saints, for a
perpetual memory of themselves and Honor of their Posterity, and now you are not
sensible what Danger hangs over your head in regard of your Religion. This
said; she told me if I would vow Silence she would impart me a Secret, which
perhaps would be of more importance than that, and without doubt I should judge
it more worthy of Acceptance. I promised her I would not detect her Council, be
what it would; but for accepting it desired her not to enjoin me till I had
heard and well considered of it. To this she replies. See if you can prevail
with your Patron to excuse you on this Journey, or if you can counterfeit with
Dexterity, feign your self sick: To which if he gives his assent, we will trip
off together, after he has been a few weeks upon his Journey, and being you are
well acquainted with the Caspian Sea we, will take our Bark with us. I have
means enough to Maintain us in any part of the World so long as we live, I have
at present in my Custody a Casket of Jewels worth 300000 gild at lest, besides
a sum of 10000 Ducats in Gold. I prithee then let us not lose this opportunity
but away with our own Bark; and I hope that we shall in 8 or 10 days be in
Russia, from whence we can go forward to Holland, and if your wife be not alive
we shall marry, if not I shall seek up my Relations at Amsterdam, supposing my
Fathers Brother may be still alive. To this I replied, Most gracious and worthy
Madam, what you propose is very well, and what I could freely embrace and would
willingly undertake to manage, But Madam, are you not sensible that Astrachan
is at present under hands of the Cosacs, and the Caspian Sea full of Pirates,
how then may we promise our selves a safe Arrival in Russia? Well, quoth she, Do
you think that Astrachan will be still in tenure of the Rebels? no, without
doubt, we shall speedily hear that the Czar will come down with a great Army
and destroy that Vermin. etc, Hereupon she showed me an incredible Treasure of
Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies and other Precious Stones.

These Proposals I must confess gave me work enough to study upon day night,
and certainly had not Astrachan then bin in the hand of the Cosacs I had taken
it upon me, not doubting, but to have good success, being able enough to pilot
a Vessel from thence to the Wolga, for I was very well acquainted with the
Coasts, but because of the before mentioned difficuly was fain to refuse her
offer. I could observe that the Lady was some way disaffected to her husband,
which I presumed was some certain Jealousy; for my Patron had bought not long
before 2 Georgian Girls for Slaves, the one of 11, and the other of 12 years
old, with whom he lay by Turns, which was no small trouble to his Wife, who was
her self not above 26 years of Age, and therefore very unwilling to be a Widow
with a living husband.

On the 22 came two of our Ships-company to Derbent, to wit, Cornelius de
Vries, the Gunner, and Peter Arentsz of Schevelingen. These had been taken in
Boynak, near the Scemkal, and had betaken themselves to flight, being followed
by some Tartars to the Gate of Derbent; where they were rescued by a Soldier,
who spoke the Russian Tongue very well, which Soldier seeing them so hotly
pursued, and the Tartars close at their heels, interposed himself between them,
and asked ours, Who they were? who repled, They were Dutch, and had Letters for
the Sultan. Whereupon the Soldier turning to the Tartars bade them see what
they did, for that those men had Letters for the Sultan: and so they got free
from the Tartars, but were suddenly carried before the Sultan, who so soon as
they were admitted asked them, What Countrymen they were? They answered
Hollanders. Then he asked for the Letters which he was informed they had for
him, upon which they fell down upon their knees humbly begging Forgiveness,
saying, That we have said, how that we had Letters for the Sultan, Great and
Mighty Prince, we cannot deny, for most true it is; but that was only an
Invention to secure and release our Persons from the Tartars, that pursued us
to within the Persian Jurisdiction: Wherefore, Great Sir, vouchsafe to have
Compassion upon us, for we are those very people that fled from Astrachan upon
the approaching of the Cosacs, and have been unfortunately Stranded on the
Dagestan Coast, where we were plundered, beat and made Slaves by the
Inhabitants, and since continued in miserable Servitude under the Scemkal, and
therefore have made bold to seek Protection under your Highness. They told him
moreover how that they had been 3 days and 2 nights by the Way; Traveling only
by night and hiding themselves by day, lest they should be detected, and
retaken, as they had surely been at the Gate, if the Soldier had not shown them
such a a Favor. The Sultan freely pardoned them and sent them to a House where
he had ordered they should have abode and maintenance, till they were otherwise
provided; for this Prince, has ever been favorable to our Nation. But these
two fearing that their Living so would cost them too dear, and that one time or
another they must pay for all, they removed into a Carwansera, for so they call
an Inn or Tavern, where they took no care for Diet, being well supplied by the
continual concourse of people that came thither, as well Indians as Persians.
The Sultan also promised to write to the King about the Redemption of the rest
of the Captiv Slaves, and as much as in him lay to further the same. Certain it
is he did as kindly for our Country men as might be expected from him, when as
the Brother of the Scemkal came to demand them as Fugitivs, and he refused to
let them go, for that they were now in Derbent, and that the King had
understood how unkindly they had dealt with those that were his Allies, and
with those with whom his Subjects had a great correspondence, as to matter of
Commerce: Insomuch that Aly, the Tartar, returned without obtaining what he
came for, and the Slaves they had still were for this reason more severely used
than before, and kept with more strictness, since by that they were sensible,
that if they could but make their escape to Derbent they were protected.

So soon as I understood that P. Arents and De Vries were arrived at Derbent I
prayed my Patron to let me go to visit them, which he granted. So soon as I
came to them, I begun to enquire of their manner of Escaping, and of their
present Condidition, which they related from the beginning to the end of all.
My Patron was also curious to see them and came himself in person: Upon which I
did bethink my self of a Stratagem to redeem my Companion Else Pietersz, who was
still at Boynak. I told my Master then that I had still a Son in the Hands of
Prince Osmin, and looking toward the Gunner I gave him a wink with the Eye,
that he should assert it, which when my Patron asked him he did: he therefore
sent to redeem him with intention to keep us both, but the Party sent, who was
a Russian and a Renegado, brought us news that he was gone within Land, which
sadly troubled me: For, had I got him to Derbent I could have brought him to
Ispahan where there was more apparency and likelihood of obtaining Liberty than
among the obscure Tartars.

Meanwhile I went daily to visit the Gunner and Peter Arentsz, and once finding
them very heartless and Melancholic I did all I could to comfort them. How,
said I, can you be so sad being free, and I who am a Slave still keep a good
heart? Be not so dejected, for the Persians will some time or other take you
with their Caravans to Ispahan, and so you may get to Gameron, and thence be
transported for the Indies, by which means you will be brought home, etc. They
told me also that the rest of the Company were at liberty and without Chains,
that they had also resolved to flee together, but judged themselves as well
unsafe at Derbent, which they had intended for their Asylum, saying, That they
should come thither soon enough, when they should be sold at the Slave-Market;
and certainly they were not much over-burthened, for the greatest Task they had
was only to hew wood for Fuel and other uses in the Princes House: and if my
companion and I had but had the same opportunity they had to be unchain'd we
should not have dallied long about a Resolution, whether to stay or betake our
selves to flight, for it was not above 12 [ English[ miles from Derbent. We
often contrived to break or file the Chain in sunder, but the Links were so
massy that we durst not attempt lest we should not perform it at one time. They
were also taken by the Dagestan-Tartars, which are reputed the more merciful,
but we by the Calmucs, the one being under the Osmin and the other under the
Scemkal. C. Brak was sold by the Scemkal for three years, after the expiration
of which time his Patron was to have him again: His Wife whom the Prince had
ravished, was also taken from him and made use by the said Prince for a
Concubine, being attired in Princely Habit, and had much favor shown her. Brak
therefore intending to make his escape, intimated his Design to his Wife; who
would by no means assent to the matter, because of her Child, and told him
further that if he did offer to go that she would detect the matter to the
Prince. To this he replied, that inasmuch as she was taken from him they were
never like to come together again, and that he probably for that reason should
be carried farther within Land, where he should be out of all hopes of ever
being redeemed; whereas on the contrary if ever he came to Derbent that there
he should not only himself be free, but also seek a mean to get her redeemed,
yet all this was but in vain, for she would not hear of it; insomuch that he
was fain to run away without her knowledge; but what then became of him, and
whether he was retaken by some others, or is dead, I could never yet be so
happy as to know. As to his Flight, we were well assured, for his Patron sent
to us at Derbent to enquire after him, but had a very unwelcom Answer: and the
Sultan, to hearing that such a Person was come to seek for them, gave order to
apprehend him, and so continued him Captiv till he proved that he only came to
seek one that he had bought for ready Money, and was not of Intention to meddle
with any body else; upon which the Sultan, ordered him enlargement.

CHAP. XXI. The great difficulty of getting Wood without Derbent. The Author
and his company assailed by Robbers two several times. The kind nature of his
Patron. They travel to Scamachy. The Hill Barmach. The Pit of Naphtha. Arrival
at Scamachy. A Description of that City. A great Earthquake at Scamachy.
Abundance of men misfortunatly killed. The Author meets with 2 Franciscan
Friars: A rehearsal of some part of their Discourse: their Zeal to get him out
of the Service of a Mohammedan. Advice given him by his Patron. He comes first
into the Service of the Polish Ambassador.
ON the 29 were sent out about 50 Slaves together with some other free persons
to hew Wood in the Country, amongst which my Patron sent me also. We took our
way over the Mountains, having with us two Carts, with 5 Oxen, 2 Asses and a
Horse, we had also several Renegados with us. All the Company went into the
Wood, and fell to work leaving me alone to look to the Carts and Provision.
After they had been about 3 hours at work, I espied a Troop of about 300 Men
coming toward us, and thinking by the have they made toward us, that they
were Robbers, I therefore called out to them in the Wood, to give them Notice
that they might keep together. When I saw them come within Bow-shot of me I ran
away as fast as I could drive, which they seeing me, sent a Shaft or two, but
they did not hit me. Having entered the Wood I met our Company coming out who at
first stoutly resisted, but finding that the Robbers fell on with a greater
violence, and exceeded us both for Arms and Number of Men, they thought good to
retreat with as much have as they could. We left here 12 dead, amongst which
was a Polish Renegado; besides these that were killed we had 20 wounded, and
lost all our Baggage, with Carts, Oxen, Asses, etc. and were fain to return so
home. For this reason is it very perilous to hew wood or to pass those
mountains upon any other Occasion, being the Rendevouz of the Banditti and
Tartars, who notwithstanding all the Endeavors which the King does, by sending
of Troops down to expel them, cannot be driven out, for when they perceiv that
any Forces are sent out against them, they run into Caves and holes in the
Hills and Woods: They are also very well disciplined and as well armed, the
greatest part thereof consisting in deserting Soldiers. And by reason those of
Derbent must have all their Fuel and Timber from this Place, and the work put
upon the Slaves, it happens that every year a great number of those miserable
sort of men are either dispatched or wounded.

The next day I was sent up into the Country to a place where my Patron kept
his Cattle, which I was to look after and drive them up and down where I found
the best Pasturage. The Author taken and carried away by Robbers.
When the Sun was gone down and I driving the Cattle to their House, I met 3
Robbers, who took three Cows away with them, and tied my hands behind my back,
so drawing me along; yet it was not long before we met with 8 Gentlemen of
Derbent, some whereof knew me, being frequently at my Masters house. These
therefore released me and retook the Beasts, so that I came safe home: for
which kindness my Master gave them a Present, I suppose, of more value than
what I was sold for to him. Unspeakable was the kindness of my Patron that he
had for me, for although my Work was a little servile and Slavish, yet my Bed and
Table was Lordly; and whatsoever I did whether well or ill, he always took it
in good part, and would after that time, never suffer me to go abroad to do any
work, saying, that he believed that I was born under some malevolent Planet. To
be brief I found my daily Task so easy, and my usage so comfortable, that were
it not for the name of a Slave and that to a Mohammedan, I could not have lived
better abroad in any Place of the World, having little or no care upon my head.

Their Journey to Scamachy.
About this time my Patron made preparation to take a Journey for Scamachy,
there to repair his Houses which were thrown down with an Earthquake in the
year 1667. On the first of September we were ready and set forward with a
Caravan of 1800 Horses, and a great number of Camels, Dromedaries, Asses and
other Beasts of Carriage, having in Company several Thousands of Men. The first
day we passed over three Rivers, to wit Kurgani, Kostar, and Sambur; whereof
the second is the greatest, running through the Mountains of Elbur. This River
divides it self into 5 branches, or arms, broad but shallow, and runs over a
stony Ground. The next day we travailed 8 [ Dutch] miles further and came to
Koctep a large village, where we took our rest for that night. SEPT. 1670.
By the way we saw a goodly Tomb erected to the memory of a Persian Saint, The
Inhabitants of this Town and the Country about it are called Padar in their
Language. They are much addicted to stealth and Robbery, so that we were fain
to keep a narrow watch over them the time we lay in the Town, which was not
above 8 hours. Their Houses are but little, built square and covered on the Top
with Earth, not exceeding 6 or 7 foot high above ground, but are as deep below,
as they are high.

On the 3 of the same month we set forward and travailed through many great
villages, amongst which was a very fair one called Nisabath, or Naysabath,
which I guess lies about 41 degr. and a quart. It is seated in a very pleasant
Country of Old Media, now called Surwan, or Schirwan. This is the Place where
some time agon the Holsteyn Ambassadors suffered Shipwreck. At night we set
down at Muskar, being a Town without Walls, or any other Fortification but
seems to have bin in times past a place of trust, as well from its Situation,
as the Ruins of the Walls and Bulwarks which yet appear. By the way we saw
abundance of Robbers in the Woods, but they knowing us to be too strong would
not adventure the Attempt.

On the 4 we broke up, and that day came to Scabaran a little City, where the
whitest and best Rice in all Persia is brought to market, and grows in the
Country round about. It is also in such plenty that the Hundred weight is sold
for 13 Ochbas, [being about 4 Shil. 2 Pence Sterling. or a halfpenny per Pound.]
The Walls of this City are now demolished so that it is no more than an open
village. The only Remarkable I found here was the Ruins of the Ovens, wherein
they averr Alexander the Great had Bread baked for his Army.

On the 5th. we came to the mountain Par -- or Barmach, which lies close to the
Sea, and is very famous for it is many veins of Which is also called Median Oil
and Babilonish Bitumen, of the nature of Marl, which when once set on fire,
will burn more vigorously if water be poured upon it, but is quenched with
Earth, Dust, or any other thing that is dry. This oil is very good to preserv
any metal from Rust; and as Ammianus says, the Persians were went to anoint
their shafts therewith.
Naphte. The word Barmach is an Appellativ word and betokens in their Language
a Finger, so called from it is similitude to a Finger pointing out. Above at Top
it is very cold, and has snow on the North side all the year long: at top there
grows some grass but not much, and that all hung with Iceicles. On this Hill
appear the Ruins of some Watch-Towers, and below have been several Fortlets to
check the Tartars, and secure the Medians from the Invasion of the Scythian
Robbers. Amidst those Ruins, is a huge deep Pit dug and laid in with stone.
Naphta, otherwise called Petroleum or Perhaps from the Greek words (...) Oil,
and (...) a Rock.
Petrelaeum is an Oil coming naturally out of the veins of the Rock, which
veins do run through the whole stones, as in Marble. There are 40 Pits dug as
Receptacles to hold the said Oil, being conveyed thither by several Pipes, or
Conduits; But there are three of those whence it naturally flows or springs,
where you may see it buble up like boiling pitch. Of this Oil there be two
sorts; the one tending to a brown or black, which has a very strong smell, but
the other which is white is of a lovely smell when fresh, and held in far more
esteem than the other.

On the 6 dito we set forward again, and went over very high Hills, coming at
night to Bachal a village seated in a low but fruitful Valley. Here grows much
Rice, and that very good, it being a marshy Ground, where that Grain likes
best; Barley also grows there in good plenty. The Inhabitants have an excellent
way of making Cakes, the main stuff thereof being Honey and Oil: whereof for
the rareness and novelties sake my Master bought certain to use on our Journey.

On the 7 dito we left Bachal, and after a good Days Journey came into Cothany,
which is a very pleasant Place: and here we took up our Lodging. This Village
lies in a low Valley which is full of Woods of Hasles and other small Trees, in
which Woods are the greatest plenty of Hares that ever I have seen in all my
Life.

On the 8 dito we arrived at the famous Scamachy, called also Sumahi, and
Samachy. It is a very famous Mart, and lies in 40 degr. 30 min. In the Province
of Schirwan, or Media. It is handsomely seated in a Valley, so that one cannot
see it till he be within Cannon Shot of the Town. The distance between Derbent
and Scamachy is computed a Weeks Journey, excluding Sunday, to wit, following
the Highway which is crooked and Winding, for by reason of Hills and Rivers
they are fain to travel far about, or otherwise one might go it in 2 days:
there is also another way which Passengers take when they go not with the
Caravan; the Caravan would also go that way, but the Tolls about the Mountains
of Lahatz are very great, and oftentimes long a clearing, so that they rather
choose to go the other way. In former times this was a Town of some
consideration as to matter of strength; but in the Wars of Abas, the Scach, or
King of Persia against the Turks, it was by him dismantled and made an open
village, which was ever by him a Maxim of Military Policy, by reason the Turks
were wont to retire into fortified Places under pretext of Refuge, and after a
few Months proving strong and numerous would surrender up the Town to their
own Nation in time of War, or upon an Uproar: Scamachy described.
so that all the Walls toward the South were demolished and only those on the
North-side left standing, which will not much avail upon such sudden Occasions.

The Northern Quarter is far less than the Southern, and the Mote so shallow
together with the mean condition of the Walls, that one may enter in as they
please in many Places, notwithstanding their due shutting of the Gates, that
are in number 5. The Streets are all through the Town very narrow and the
Buildings low, made up of Clay, Planks and Twigs daubed over. In the
South-quarter is a spacious Marketplace which they call a Bogan, having round
about it several rich Shops in Galleries and Piazzas, wherein are seen many
rich Merchandises and Manufactories, as Silks, Cot^ons, Furrs, Cloth of Gold
and Silver, Tapestry, etc. Near this place are also two great Warehouses having
several Portics or Alleys, where all Merchants-strangers buy and sell several
sorts of Merchandises. The one of these is called Scach Carwansera, or, the
Emperors Lodgings, whither Russians for the most part have recourse, and
barter their Tin, Copper, Sables and other Commodities: the other is called
Lesgi Carwansera, i. e. The Tartars Lodgings; and hither repair mostly the
Dagestan and other Tartars, whose Trade consists chiefly in Men and Children,
stole either from their own Nation or the Russians, as also in Horses: hither
also repair many Jews who deal mostly in Bedding and Cottons. This Town upon my
arrival there was altogether new built, although about 3 years before it lay on
heaps. This place is very subject to Earth quakes and in the space of one year
were 3 great ones, but that in the year 1667 was the greatest that has been
known or heard of in any Age. It continued for the space of 3 months, but not
with that terror and Ambassador to buy me of my Patron. This gave a delicate
sound in my Ear, being the only thing I desired to hear of; and coming home
began to supplicate my Master that he would vouchsafe to sell me into the Hands
of the Polish Ambassador, at which he seemed to be a little altered, and said,
John, consider with your self the nature of your request: have you found such
hard usage the time you have been with me? Why then would you go from me? Go
rather with me to Ispahan, where, since you have once saved my life and in all
things else proved faithful, I will bestow you upon some of your own Nation
without Redemption Money: or any thing else in stead of you, where you shall be
assuredly free. But I still remembered the words of my Patroness Altine, and had
no great stomach to go for Ispahan with him: However with many thanks declined
his Offer, praying him rather if he had the Kindness for me he professed, that
he would please to let me have my request herein; for I longed mainly to be
among Christians. Well, said he, since you will go, you shall, but be assured
you shall not find better usage than you have here, although it were with a
Christian, [forsooth]. As for this Bochdan the Polish Minister, he is not so
good a Christian as you think, but a light vain Georgian, whom the King of
Poland has dispatched to the Sophy, to treat about a War with the Turks, but
such is his deportment here, and remissness in the Affairs of the King his
Master, that he will in all probability be called in question about it. All
this did not a whit daunt me from my Resolution, for I gave him a certain
allowance as to the Character he had given him; or, although he had been such a
Person there was more hopes of my coming home through Moscovia, sooner than through
India, and so from Batavia. This Bochdan as I have been since informed had
formerly a Command of Horse under the King of Poland, and was so well
acquainted with the Humor of the King, that he was employed on this Embassage,
but much envied by the Polanders. The next day I was sold and delivered up to
the Ambassador for 150 Abas, being the sum Hadsy Biram had paid for me to the
Prince. Upon my taking leav of my Master, he wished me happiness, and withone
told me that he was sensible the King of Poland had Money enough to redeem a
Christian, otherwise he would have taken nothing for me.

And now was none more happy than my self in imagination, not thinking
otherwise than suddenly to have my Freedom. On the 1 of November I was sent for
by the Ambassador, where being introduced into the Parlor, he speedily bad me
sit down, and fell to asking many Questions about my Nation, and my coming to
be a Slave. I told him all from the Beginning to the End. He then called for a
Bowl of Wine, and bade me drink. Whilst I sat there, were two young Georgian
Girls brought to the Door, who being stole by the Dagestan Tartars, of handsome
Bodies, and tolerable Beauties as also the Ambassadors own Country Women he
had compassion of them and bought them for the value of 100 Crowns. These he
kept for Warming Pans, and would upon Occasion, when he made any Feast, cause
them to dance: nor did they much seem to be concerned at the loss of those
heavy burdens called Maidenheads, although the Art is to know where they first
got rid of them.

CHAP. XXII. The Hatred and Churlishness of the Ambassador against the Polish
Gentry. A Polish Gentleman murdered in his bed. The pitiful case and condition
of the Polanders, who were in the Retinue of the Legate. The Ambassadors
Greediness. He endeavors to turn Mohammedan, The Authors intention to make his
escape. Captain Butler and others of his old acquaintance come to Scamachi,
where they do what they can for the Captivs. The Ambassadors Brother goes for
Ispahan, where he desires to be admitted as a Mohammedan; but is not received,
William the Masters Mate of the Ship Eagle comes to Scamachi. A great
Earthquake. Consecration of Water among the Armenian Christians. A great
concourse of People, and remarkable Ceremonies.
ON the 2 of November came the Sister of the Ambassador, and his Brother with a
great Retinue and Pomp: their Reception was with an Extravagant Banquet, which
dured several days. So long as this Junketting lasted, was such Gluttony,
Drunkness and Prodigality, yea such beastliness shown, that I almost abhorred
the name of a Christian, when on the other side I saw the Mahometans point at
them, who are themselves very abstemious and temperate. Yet this only was to
gratify the Georgians and Persians, for he demeaned himself very churlishly
toward the Polish Gentry who were sent to grace his Person as a Retinue.
Scarce were they ever admitted into his presence, and besides that pinched in
their allowance as well in Diet as Habit, NOV. 1670.
and at last having spent the Money they brought with them out of Poland, were
reduced to such poverty, that they went up and down like Beggars, being ashamed
to com into honest Company? for besides their costly Attire which he always
kept locked up, he would not allow them a sufficiency of Linen to keep them
clean. If any offered to complain he threatened to sell them for Slaves, which
tended to the great detriment of those his Domestics, and Dishonor of the King
and Crown of Poland. This bred in the Polish Gentry such dissaffection that
they resolved oftentimes to have revenge; but as those who know themselves
conscious of such ill demeanor are ever in fear of their Persons, so he who
knew himself guilty of such wicked doings, had always a certain number of his
own Nation to secure and guard him. However they once finding opportunity, and
being already com to the very Catastroph of Patience, began to hew him with
their Scymiters and Axes, as he should go out of his Dining Room, The
Ambassador hacked almost to death.
where they chopped and mangled him so that he lay for dead upon the Floor, in
the Portic, having received 17 grievous Wounds, and lost three Fingers of his
Right hand: yet by the great diligence and skill of his Surgeon who was then
at hand, he was restored to his former Health and Sanity. This outrage as it
could not but engender bad blood, so it rendered the Ambassador much more
despightfull than before, and that very night to be revenged, sent a Georgian
Soldier to Paniegros, a Polish Gentleman, who was as Assistent in this
Embassage, and equally empowered to treat with the Ministers of State at the
Persian Court, and therefore reckoned by the other as an obstruction in the
Promotion of his Interest, as well as his being ready to represent the Occasion
of these Tumults to the King, in such manner as might tend to his disadvantage:
yet it ought to be understood of this Gentleman, that he neither gave
encouragement, nor knew any thing of that extravagant Action. Panicgros, ^
Polish Gentleman murdered on his bed.
The Georgian having obtained entrance, ran to his Bedside and there most
inhumanly murdered him whilst asleep. This Paniegros was a Gentleman of a
brave conduct, and withal of a meek temper, having purchased the Love even of
those that seemed to be his Lot-enemies for his prudent and civil deportment,
He had lived for some years together at Amsterdam, and spoke very good
Nether-dutch. The rest of the Polish Nation, were taken and secured, some
whereof were fast in Chains. Nor with this did the Ambassador hold up, but
daily revenged himself of the Poles, The Prince of Scamachi makes peace.
which he used as Slaves; and the more to over aw them listed several
Georgians-Soldiers to guard his Body. The Prince of Scamachy now sensible of
the Differences and sad disorder of affairs, took upon himself the Office of a
Mediator and adjousted the matter so well, that the imprisoned Parties were set
again at liberty: yet were no better used than before as to their Sus-and
Maintenance, whereas one Man might easily eat the Allowance he gave for 8. He
on the Contrary continued a Junketting with those of his own Nation, that an Ox
a day would not have been too much, if it were not for variety and change of
Diet. He bought 13 Kine which he sent out into the Field, and set me to look
after them, but finding my self at a loss for Victuals, I assumed the liberty
to tell his Excellency that he must please to send me something to eat in the
Field. His answer was: If you will have any thing, steal a cow from the
Persians, and help your self so. But that Commission I took occasion to let
alone, being sensible that my masters Order would not excuse me. Thus I
suffered more hunger than in all my life, and sore against my will intimated
the matter to my former Patron Hadsi Biram, who gave me this reply, I told you
of it beforehand, what a villain that Georgian is, That he was but a Christian
in show, and far too base to be a Musulman. And certainly the Gentleman had
good reason on his side: for this Ambassador well knowing what Beer was brewed
for him at the Court in Warsaw, dispatches his Brother to the King at Ispahan,
to supplicate that they might both be circumcised, pretending that now knowing
better things than he had hitherto don, therefore could not have Peace or Rest
in Conscience, but continual Horror and Inquietude, if he were not admitted as
a member in Mahometanism. But they had such ample and clear Information at
Court of his Life and Behavior; that they easily perceived upon what account
he did it, and consequently declined his Request. Shortly after he also
received a Mandate from Ispahan to depart immediately for Poland, which was
acceptable news for the Polish Gentry, hoping at once to be rid of that Slavery
and Misery they suffered. After my old Patron had discoursed me a little about
this affair, took his leav of me, saying, John, I am very sorry for your
condition, prithee therefore com twice a day to my house and eat, or at what
time you are hungry. I shall give my wife order, upon my Absence to give you
Victuals. The sweetest music, I must confess, I heard in Persia; and certainly
he who was a Mohammedan, surpassed my Georgian Master far in Charity, who had
rather feed Dogs he kept for his pleasure, than Christian-strangers, although his
own Domestics.

It Is true this Offer was very acceptable, but all my fear was, that Hadsi
would not tarry long at Scamachy, so that I should again be at a loss, and
therefore I determined with my self to run away; as then I met with an
opportunity to go for Smyrna with a great Caravan, which was a preparing and
almost ready to set forward. I had already bespoke my self to go with an
Armenian who was to set forward 6 days before the general Departure with the
great Caravan, but what reason I met with to the contrary shall be shortly told.

November. 4. I went out of the Town to see if I could speak with an Ambassador
who was dispatched from Ispahan to Moscou, and to request of him to represent
our Condition to the Czar, but I could not get to speech of him. He had with
him 4 Tygres and Leopards for a present to the Great Duke.

On the 11 to my great Astonishment and Joy I saw our Captain Butler, together
with Cornelius the Gunner, J. van Termund, Christian Brand, Lewis Fabritius and
Peter Arentsz coming into Scamachy; upon which in all have I ran to bid them
welcome and salute them, although the Captain showed himself much displeased at us,
for that we (as he alleged) went away without his leav and order, and not
waiting for him: to which I replied, Captain you cannot forget what your Order
was, That we should not stay so much as a quarter of an hour for any one, after
the Gates were shut, but if any transgression of your Order must be imputed to
us, it must be this that we stayed till midnight for you, and not hearing any
thing of you, we concluded that you were either killed in the Tumult, or had
made your escape some other way; we then not holding it safe for us to make any
longer delay, thought it more prudence to put off than to stay till it was day
light, etc. With these and other reasons I gave him he seemed to be satisfied,
and promised to do all that lay in his power to procure our Redemption, as from
that time forward he labored very much to do. And this was the reason, that my
intended Journey for Smyrna, was not undertaken thinking this to be a more
hopeful and a more secure way to get free: for this happened just the same day
I had purposed to set forward with the Armenian, and so after 2 or 3 days
Journey to wait for the great Caravan. Our Captain applies himself to the Chan
of Scamachy to intercede for the Captivs, but all he could do might not avail,
for there was no Audience lent him, It seemed as if the Sultan of Derbent had
hardened his temper, for in presence of the Dutch and others that had taken the
Mediation upon them; whereas on the contrary they had ever been good Friends
with the Calmuc and Osmin, frequently sending and receiving mutual Presents
from each other.

When the Captain saw there was no hopes to procure our Redemption at Scamachy,
he purposes to go for Ispahan, and address himself to the King; the more for
that the Commissioners of the East India Company might assist him. He therefore
took up several Abas of an Armenian, for which he must have paid 25 per Cent
more at Ispahan: he left I. van Termund at Scamachy for security.

On the 18 Christian Brand by the intercession of I. van Termund, was taken to
board in the Polish Ambassadors House, giving good security for the same at
Scamachy.

Mean while the Brother of the said Ambassador went a second time to Court, for
to get the consent of the Scach in changing of his Religion, but the result was
as unwelcom to him as the former, with an express order to depart immediately
for Poland, and to give a reason of his delay. This news as it was very
unacceptable to him, for that he was sensible how affairs would be represented
at Warsaw, there being a Courier dispatched off from the Scach to the K. of
Poland; so was it also very welcome and acceptable news for the oppressed
Gentlemen in his Retinue. Nor did this outwardly appear at the Persian Court,
for upon such occasions they never acquaint any Foreign Minister with any
dislike, but intimate it by their own at the Court from whence they are sent in
such Quality, whence they expect Satisfaction. This when Bochdan understood he
studied all means to avoid going back to Warsaw, and asked me if I thought that
the East India Company, or their Directors there, would consent to let him
imbarque there for Holland? My reply was that I did not beleev it would be
granted, and told him several Praecedents for it, as also the improbability of
the thing since their Interest was so great in Commerce with Persia; as that
they would not do any thing to quit it: However if he would go clandestinly and
occasion a Rumor as if he were gone for Moscou, or some where in Tartary, he
might imbarque himself as a private Person. This I said in hopes to come that
way home my self. Yet he was various in his Intentions, sometimes taking a
resolution to go for Smyrna, and sometimes for Constantinople, or elsewhere.
However during the time he was at Scamachy, he Lorded it so bravely, that the
Chan durst not check him in any extravagancy he committed: for it seems that
the said Chan had taken up a considerable Sum of the Ambassador upon Interest
and not being able to pay was fain to rest contented. But the Ambassador
willing to get in his Money and the Chan not in a Capacity to pay it upon
demand, the Ambassador sent his Brother to Ispahan to make complaint to the
Schach, which when the Chan had understood, sent a Post after him, who
entreated him to return back, upon promise of Payment, and full Solution both
of Stock and Interest.

On the 21 came a Persian to Scamachy with William Barentsz Klopper our
Chief-Mate, who had been taken by the Tartars and severely used all the time.
The said Persian offered him to the Polish Ambassador who on the 30th. bought
him. The Scemkal had first sold him to a Persian of Bachu for 150 Abas. This
new Patron set him to keep Cattle, in a Pasture, between Derbent and Scamachy,
where upon our Journey to Scamachy I saw, but knew him not. He had a very
churlish fellow to his Patron, and therefore attempting several times to run
away was still caught again, and beat most severely: and now being redeemed
came unexpectedly out of the Frying Pan into the Fire.

Upon the first day of January 1671, on which day we usually in our own
Country wish one another Happiness: we were aware of a mighty and most
dreadful Earthquake, which had in a moment laid some hundreds of Houses in
Rubbish; most terrible was it to see so many Souls swallowed up in the Earth
alive and as lamentable to see some crushed to pieces and others half dead,
some so fast closed up between Walls that they could not be got out. And others
wanting their Legs; Arms and other Members, nor was there any but sustained
some loss one way or other. When it ceased every one hoped that all was done,
but the next day at night the Earth began again to tremble and shake, insomuch
that all was in a consternation, but none sustained any considerable loss that
I could hear of.

Ceremonies used by the Christians in Consecration of Water.
Upon the 6 dito, it frose very hard insomuch that the River was to. Upon this
were the Ceremonies of the Consecration of Water solemnized by the Armenian
Christians, in presence of the Chan, his Son, our Ambassador, the Poslanick, or
an Armenian Courier, who was dispatched for Moscou, and then at Scamachy, all
the Persian Nobility and Armenian Christians from all Villages round about, and
from afar in the Country, who came with Crosses, Flags and Bells, singing
Hymns all the way till they came over the Puley Ambery (a Bridge so called)
where they sat down. On the morning very early the Bishop came out with great
Pomp and sung Mass, after which an Oration was made suiting the Day, being
Epiphany, which he performed with great Zeal and Pains. After that was a Feast
which they call Chalse Schuran, or Dipping of the Cross.

These Ceremonies were performed as follows: On each side the River were placed
the Chans Guards, and all the Soldiery, to prevent any Tumult or abuse of the
Armenians, who pay dear enough for the same. After the Chan had taken his place
in a Tent expressly provided for that Prince, and the Watch set in good order,
the Bishop went to beg permission, before which obtained he dare not begin. So
soon as the Token was given, some of the Armenians ran naked into the Water,
and cut up the Ice with Bills; the Bishop all the while continues reading and
the Common people sing. After this they begin to play upon Bells and Cymbals,
then the Bishop stepping softly to the River side, pours in Oil and Water. Then
he took a little Silver Cross, set with Diamonds and other precious Stones,
which he dipped 3 times in the Water. This done he took a staff [or Crosier] and
stretched it several ways over the River, pronouncing several Benedictions.
Immediately upon this all the People ran together, and strove who should be
first at the River to drink and wash their Faces. This was observantly don of
all sorts of People, young and old, Men and Women. Last of all several youths
uncloathed themselves, jumped into the River and swam to and again, diving
several times together, as if it had been in the midst of Summer. The Bishop
departing homewards, was accompanied with several Damsels playing upon
Instruments and singing all the way before him. JAN. 1671.
On the other part there were several Persian Whores and Prostitutes who came
to seek their Game, singing and dancing after a very lascivious fashion. In
short it concluded as the Orgia or Bacchanalia in the time of Gentilism, which
were celebrated by the Thyades, or Priests of Bacchus, with the Persians, who
made use of this season as a Fair, whither repaired many Juglers, Pedlers,
Stage Players, and other Vagabonds; but the Armenians, did not either in Eating
or Drinking exceed the Limits of Moderation.

CHAP. XXIII. The Ambassadors Sister goes to Tafflis, and with her the Polish
Surgeon. The Corpse of an Indian burned with a Christian she-slave. The Woman
having taken in a Potion to provoke sleep, is also cast into the furnace. Two
Men murdered at Scamachi, and a tumult thereupon. Strange Ceremonies about the
Dead. The Chans son is presented with a Kolotan, or Robe of Favor, and one of
the Kings Wives. A man struck dead with staves. A fearful Earthquake. The Chan
also receives a Robe of Favor, and a Wife. Pompous Solemnities at the delivery
of the same. He receives the Princess. New Tidings from Russia. The Ambassador
commanded by the King of Persia to return for Poland; who makes his excuse, The
miserable Estate of the Polish Gentry. Theft committed in the Ambassadors
Palace. A man tortured that was innocent. The Polish Surgeon fortunatly
married at Tafflis. Another Corpse of an Indian burned with a living Woman. The
great kindness of Hadsy Biram to the Author. His bad entertainment with the
Ambassador.
ON the 9th. departed the Sister of Bochdan the Polish Ambassador for Tafflis
with 7 Camels and conducted with some Georgian Soldiers. The City Tafflis is
distant from Scamachy, about 8 Leagues. The next day her Brother, with the
Ambassadors Surgeon called Adam departed also. This Surgeon was a
Polonian by Birth, and had been sent for by the Prince of Tafflis, who
entreated the Ambassador to let him come; promising him a sufficient Salary,
besides, his Diet, Appartments at Court, 4 Slaves of whether sex he liked, and
to provide him a Wife of his own choosing and Religion, the Prince being himself
a Roman Catholic. The Surgeon with whom I was very intimate would often
consult the Matter with me, and ask what advice I could give him. I always
council'd him, Not to neglect such a golden Opportunity, telling him further
what he had to expect if he should continue with such a Varlet as Bochdan was,
who was both greedy and ungrateful for the best service any one could do him,
although it were supererogatory. That if the Ambassador should return for Poland,
as 'twas a matter very dubious, he would still be in statu quo, and must if he
stayed here never hope for any advancement by him who was become loathsome to the
worst of men. He thanked me for my advice, and resolved to do as I had
council'd him; and soon after departed, as is said. Right sorry I was when he
left us, being ever kind to me and other Slaves, although I was by duty enjoined
to wish and rejoice at his Welfare, for his extraordinary Civilities. The
Prince of Tafflis began first to be taken with him upon his noble cure
performed on the Ambassador, when he was struck down by the Poles, as was said
before.

The Corpse of a rich Indian burned with a Woman Slave.
On the 15 died at Scamachy, one Tzouke a very rich Indian, whose Corpse his
Brother after their manner desired to burn, which by a very long and
importunate intercession of the Prince was granted, he paying for the same
about.1300 Crowns. The Indian having obtained this Grant the next day bought a
Christian Woman, which he burned with the Corpse. The Body and the Woman were
carried together without into the Field where they had made up a great Staple
of Wood and a place within for the Corpse. The Priests give the Woman a Potion
and with an Engine throw her into the Fire.
The Indian Priests gave the Woman a Potion to provoke sleep and then set her
upon an Engine like a Crane or Whip, made on purpose letting her so fall into
the Fire. In the mean time the Bonzi poured a great Vessel of Turpentine Oil
upon the Wood and so set it on fire, and then gave the Engine a turn, upon
which the Woman fell into the fire. It Is true the Woman seemed by virtue of
that Potion to be fallen into a Cataphor, or Dead-sleep, yet I heard her shriek
out several times till the Drums, Pipes, Trumpets and other Wind-Music began to
play, which was so loud and altisonant, that I could not hear any longer, although
I got a place near the Pile which was erected for these Ceremonies. Such
practice was also in use among the Idolaters of Palaestina, who offered their
Children to Moloch. When the Fire had consumed all, the Ashes were thrown into
the River.

On the 21 was a great noise in Town about 2 Men that were murdered, and the
Homicides unknown. The Widows, JAN. 1670.
Children and Friends of the Partys murdered brought the Dead Bodies to the
Gates of the Princes Palace as demanding Justice, Two Men murdered.
and Punishment for the Delinquency. About two hours they sat by the Bodies
with their Heads, and Right Arms bare, as a token that those were their Allies
and Friends, and kissed the Corpses several times for they repute those that
are so murdered indisputably Saints in Heaven. Hither flocked also Women from
all parts and Countries round about, esteeming it a work of merit. The Persons
murdered were but ordinary People, and Citizens of the meanest sort, so that
the Chan, did not use much diligence in hunting out the Malefactors, for
without Money Justice is rarely don. After the Corpse had laid here about 2
hours, as was said, they were by Order of the Chan carried away upon Barrows
and interred in the Field, with some few Ceremonies. Every night were set up
several Torches, and by day went Hundreds of Women to perform the usual
Solemnities and superstitious Rites at their Tombs. The Ceremonies are as vain
as foolish which they do about the Dead; at their first coming there they bow
down three times at the Grave, and as often kiss it, adorning the Place round
about with Flags of several Colors which they make fast to sticks.

On the 27 was a general Exultation expressed at Scamachy, with Beating of
Drums, Sounding of Trumpets and variety of Wind-Music, for that the Chans Son
had a Robe of Favor bestowed upon him, and one of the Kings Wives; which were
sent him for a Present as a Mark of Loyalty: and indeed the latter is never don
but upon the score of an exceeding high Favor; and although they have the names
of the Kings Wives, yet it mostly happens that they are pure Virgins, it being
a thing impossible that he should make use of so many as are daily brought to
him from all parts of his wide Dominions, which are always the most select
Beauties; however the Grandees of Persia, are less contented when they find
them Maids, than otherwise, and for that reason do as duly conceal it, as
others who find the contrary on private Occasions; For, say they, it is a Greater
Honor to fish in the Kings Pond, than in one of their own: Nor are the Women
altogether sad at such disposals, since they live, as it were, FEB. 1671.
in the State of Widdow-hood for some years together, the number of them being
so great.

A fellow Cau'd to Death.
On the 1 of Febr. was a Man beat to death with Canes by order of the Chan, none
understanding the reason why. The Execution was don by the Domestics of the
Palace, for they have no Ordinary Executioner: These tied him Hand and Foot,
which don, they fell a caning him with Sticks, or Ciplins, having a great knot
at the End: no member was spared in his whole, for having threshed him a while
on his Back, they began with his Sides, and afterward his Belly, Thighs, Legs,
Arms, etc. which kind of Death must needs be a greater Torment than Breaking
upon the Wheel, which we hold too cruel and inhuman, although in use in most
Countries in Europe.

Another great Earthquake at Scamachy.
The same day toward night we had another formidable Earthquake, and out of
the Caves was heard a most hideous roaring and yelling before it began, so that
none durst sleep or come near any house; however it lasted not very long, but
ceased with the destruction of a few Houses, which were buried in their Rubbish.

The Chan sent for to receive some noble Presents.
The next day came an Express to Scamachi from the Court at Ispahan, with
Instructions for the Chan to com to Court, and as he and many more believed to
suffer the direful effects of the Kings displesure; yet the Courier privately
assured him on the contrary, as that it was to receiv some Royal Present.
Betimes in the morning on the next day the Chan set out for Kallikklefthan,
which is a Pleasant Dwelling belonging to the King, and about half a [ Dutch]
league distant from Scamachy, being accompanied with his own Son, the Calenter,
all the Nobility and Courtiers, as also our Lord, the Polish Ambassador, and
the Poslanic of Armenia. The Chan himself was mounted on a stately Arabian
Horse, richly Capparison'd, the Mounchet or Saddle-Cloth richly embroydered and
set with Pearls and Precious Stones; the Chaplets, Bitts, and Buckles were of
pure and solid Gold, and all the rest of the Accoutrements suitably rich and
splendid. The young Prince was equally well mounted with his Father, on a Horse
bespread with very rich Trappings, and a noble Harnass. The rest of the Retinue
likewise appeared with as much Pomp and Stateliness, every one agreeable to his
Quality. After this Cavalcade follow a great Train of Citizens, every one in
his best Garb. When he came near the place he sent out an Usher to acquaint the
Envoye with his coming, who then went out to meet him, sending a Gentleman
before him with the Robe, himself following after leading a stately Horse, on
which the Lady was mounted which the King had sent him, guarded with a Circle
of Noblemen all mounted on horseback, and a gallant Troop of Cavalry, armed
with long Carbines, Bows and Arrows. So soon as the Chan saw them approach, he
allighted from his Horse, as did also the young Prince his Son, and all the
Retinue, walking softly on foot till they came close together, at what time the
Envoye [or Wakenutz] reached forth his hand and delivered the Chan a Box of
Gold, which he received with demonstration of respect and in humble manner
after the Persian fashion. This don, he delivered him the Robe, which the Chan
received with some Ceremonies customary among the Grandees, and forthwith drew
it on. Last of all the Envoye brought up the Bride as she sat on Horseback and
delivered her to the Chan, who very reverently bowed, laying one hand on his
breast and the other on the Bridle, close by the Bitts: upon which the Lady
held forth her Hand, which the Chan kissed, and so mounting on his Horse closed
up with her, and taking leav of the Envoye rode away, presenting the Envoye
with some Gifts, which he sent back to Kaliklefthan. By the way they were met
with innumerable companies of People from all parts, who came as nigh as they
well durst or were permitted to see the Bride, who was as richly attired as
could be expected of a Princess; but after the Persian custom her Face
covered, so that one could not see whether she was fair, or otherwise. Before
they came at Scamachy, the Chan allighted, as also the Lady, who was set in a
Chair of State and so carried by certain Persons thereto appointed into the
Town, the Chan going on the one side and his Son on the other, In the mean
while the Kettle-drums beat, and the Trumpets sounded that the Mountains
echoed, and all the People shouted with continual exclamations for Joy; for it
is always the manner with the Kings of Persia, to conceal the message, to all,
save him who has the Instructions, who either remunerates them with such Gifts
as the King is pleased to send, or else to bring their Head along with him; so
that a Prince so sent for takes his leav of all his Friends and Relations,
before he sets forward to know the Kings Pleasure at the Hands of his Legate:
for the Errand is dispatched with such speed that they have not time to dispose
or consult affairs. These extreme Mesures create great Loyalty and Obedience in
the Greatest Officiated Personages; who are careful to please and fearful to
displease their Sovereign Lord: neither is it one of the lest Machines to bring
vast Sums and an inexhaustible Tresure into the Kings Coffers, for they
aemulate who should bring the greatest and most acceptable Presents: as also to
such as they understand to be the chief Minions and Favorites in Court.

The Chan having entered the City apparrelled in his Robe, which was of Cloth of
Gold, he was saluted with the Ordnance, and several Volleys of small Shot; The
People also of all degrees and ranks continued playing and junketting the
greatest part of the night.

New Intelligence from Russia.
On the 3 dito, Lewis Fabritius rode post to Derbent in order to his Journey for
Moscou, upon the first good and certain news he could have from Russia: for
there was a strong report that the Czar had a great Army in Camp and having
beat the Rebels in open Field was ready to lay siege to Astrachan; as also
that one of a high Command and next to Radzin, was taken and put to a shameful
and ignominihus Death.

A Conflict between a Polish Gentleman and a Renegado.
On the 10 dito one Slabitsky a Polish Gentleman, went to Court, where he
casually met with the Chans Trumpeter, who was a Polander, and a Renegado,
where reprehending the Trumpeter for renouncing the Christian Faith, and
becoming a Proselyte in Persia, he grated a little too hard upon the Renegado's
Conscience, so that he after a few hot words drew his Scymiter and ran upon the
Gentleman, who was not remiss in doing the like; yet having bad success in his
aim, the Renegado hacked and wounded him so, that his Life was despaired of.

The Ambassador receives a Mandat to depart.
On the 18 came an Express to my Patron, the Polish Envoye, from the Court at
Ispahan, with the same Mandate, that he should forthwith go for Poland: But he
excused himself, alleging that the Caspian Sea, was full of Cosac Pirates,
and that the Tartar Countries were also very unsafe, since he must go through the
Osmins Territories, who had more than once badly entreated the Polish
Ministers, who were to pass that way: These were indeed likely, but not the
real reasons why he deferred his Repatriation, but, as was said before, the
danger he was in, of loosing his Head when called in question about his ill
deportment in Persia. The Gentlemen in his Retinue finding this Procrastination
of his Journey to Warsaw did but increase their Misery, were almost in despair,
willing rather to beg all the way home, or get into service with the Caravans.
Amonst the rest one Pable Witsky, a youth of 19 years of Age, departs for
Smyrna with the Caravan. This young Gentleman having shown us more than
ordinary favor, I thought my self obliged to do what lay in my Power to
retaliate his kindness, and therefore gave him Letters to the Dutch Consul at
Smyrna and to some eminent Merchants of our Nation, desiring if he should
chance to be necessitated or at a loss for Money they would please to assist
him, he having upon his departure no more than 20 Crowns. I gave them also a
full Demonstration of what he had done for the Dutch Slaves, as also an account
of his Worth in respect of his Race and Descent, he being of one of the noblest
Families in the Country, and was able to remitt what they thought good to
disburse for him.

On the 19 dito were 6 Silver Plates stolen out of our Masters House which put
all into a disorder, he being so passionate that naught could appease him; and
suspecting one Man for the Theft, he caused him to be tortured in the presence
of all the Family, although he was innocent as to the Fact. First he was beat with
sticks on the soles of his Feet which he nevertheless manfully stood out: when
this was done they held his Feet close to the Fire, which made him yell and
roar out, that the Hair of my Head stood on end; and in as much as he could not
any longer endure the Torment, he confessed what he was not guilty of, as
afterward appeared; although when he was taken away he denied all: and thus the
poor man merely because he was a Pole so used that he could neither stand nor
go, nor was allowed a sufficient care to restore him to his former Sanity, nor
had any thing by way of satisfaction, as an acknowledgment of a wrong.

About this time came news from Tefflis about the Surgeon who had done that
operation on the Ambassador, how that the Prince having understood that he was
arrived sent for him, and after many Caresses and in order to his Promise, sent
for one of the most eminent Merchants in the City, who had one only Daughter.
The Prince then makes the Overture, telling him that young Gentleman was one
with whom he had entrusted his Life, and asked if he would give him his
Daughter in Marriage. The Merchant was at first surprised, hardly ready enough
to give consent that a stranger he had never heard of in his Life should have
his only Daughter; and yet durst not well deny him, for those Princes rule with
an Arbitrary Power; and although out of some show of Courtesy they seem to request
a thing of their Subjects, yet when occasion servs they command at their
discretion: nor dare the Subject either murmr or oppose them in the least,
for fear of parting with their sweet Lives, and loss of Estate which is taken
from their Posterity. The Father gives consent but thought her too young for
the nuptial Bed, she not exceeding 12 years of Age, and therefore prayed the
Marriage might be put off till she was 2 years elder; however the Contract was
signed in presence of the Prince, with Condition that she came to die without
Issue that her Estate should devolve upon him. In fine he was there in very
great reputation and gave the Merchant reason to be well satisfied with his
Person; who showed him all Possible Favor and Friendship.

On the 26 dito our Patron, the Ambassador, got intelligence of the Party that
had stole his Plate, being discovered by a Goldsmith that had bought it; for
Notice was given to all the Goldsmiths in Scamachy, that if any one bought it,
he should have his Money again, and a Reward to boot. Yet this Delinquent had
more favor shown him than the Party who was put to the torment before, tho
innocent of the Fact; for this received only a few blows on the Foot, and was
declared free. He was a Polander, not in service of the Ambassador, but only a
Parasite who frequented the House.

On the first of March was another Indian Corpse burned with a Live-Woman, after
the same manner as was said before; only the Wood was poured over with Naphte,
in place of Turpentine Oil.

On the 2 dito, Hadsy Biram my former Master sent for me to come to him, where
he intimated how that he intended so soon as he possibly could to go for
Ispahan, and asked me if I would go with him. I answered, Sir, I would be glad
that I might be so happy, but the greatest difficulty will be to escape out of
the Hands of my Patron: for at first he would hardly trust me over the
Threshold without one to watch me, but in time gave me my Liberty to go where I
would: MAR. 1671.
yet finding me for his bad usage desirous to be out of his hands, watches me
more narrowly than he did at first. Upon this he expressed how sorry he was
that he had sold me to the Ambassador, as indeed for my own part I had great
reason to be: whereas by the first I had plenty of all that was necessary and
was without any Oversight, but with the last suffered perpetually Hunger,
Railing and Blows, and forced to lie all Winter on the hard and cold Floor
without any Coverlet to keep me from cold, so that it was an evident token of
GODS Goodness that I came off with health and soundness of Body. All the Winter
long I was not permitted to come in the Kitchen, much less at the Stove, so
that I had no way to warm my self, unless when I found some pieces of wood among
the Rubbish which I lay together and made a Fire of; but what was worst I durst
not for my life complain, however with the approachment of the acceptable
Summer season I was eased of that one hardship.

CHAP. XXIV. The manner of Celebrating New Years day among the Persians. Advice
from Boynak: from Derbent. Fireballs fall from the Sky. Five Hundred beautiful
Damsels sought up for the Scach, or Sophy of Persia. A quaint mean by which a
Merchant saves his Daughter. The Author writes to Smyrna. A Chieftain of the
Cosaks brought into Scamachy; and is compelled to carry 3 of his Companions
Heads in a Bag to Ispahan, where he is upon promise of detecting something of
weight set at Liberty. A Persian murdered by a drunken Georgian. The murderer
executed by the Brother of the murdered Party. A Horrible Self murder
committed by several Persons at a Wedding. A great Feast celebrated in memory
of Hosseyn, the 3d Son of Ali. A terrible Earthquake. The Chans Son dies and
is interred.
ON the 10 of March being the Vernal Aequinoctial begins their Year. This day
is celebrated with Shooting, Playing, Celebration of New Years day.
Feasting and Music. The Solemnity began with the Firing of two great Guns, and
several Volleys of Muskets and lesser Firearms. All the night they played upon
Trumpets, Cornets, Flutes and other Wind-music, besides 15 Kettle-drums. This
day the Persians call Naurus, and wish one another a happy New year, as is
customary among us on the 1 of January. The Chan as also all the Nobles and
Citizens kept open Table for several days together, whilst nothing was talked
of but Visits and Banquets. My Patron professing Christianity was excused from
these Expenses, holding out, that he being a Christian could not safely
maintain Mohammedan Superstition. This was a happy time for our Gentlemen, who
now with Authority went a mumping among the Persians, nor did I think it good
to dine with Duke Humphrey, so long as I had such an honest Hadsi Biram to
address my self to, whither I went and was very kindly entertained.

On the 21 we received a Letter from one of our Company, who was a Slave in
Scemkal, although there was no name set to it, at which we wondered; yet did
believe it was Anthony Munster the Diamond-cutter. The Contents was, That he
understood how that there were 2 Dutch Surgeons at Scamachy, whom he
entreated to redeem him, and he would order the Money to be paid at Moscou. The
Letter was delivered to us by order of the Chan, but we had not the Power to do
any thing for him; yet understood not long after, that the said Munster was
carried to Ispahan as Captiv, or Slave.

On the 25 we got a Letter from Meyndert Meyndertsz one of our Company, which
was directed to my Patron Bochdan: the Contents thereof being much at one with
the former; yet he gave no other account of his fast Residence, than that he
was a Slave and lived not far from Derbent, where being a Smith by his Trade he
made Weapons for his Master. He was afterward bought by a Persian of Bacchu,
and since redeemed by I. van Termund.

The next day happened a Fray between 2 Georgians, the Ambassadors Countrymen,
who hacked and hewed so long with their Scymiters till they had hardly a free
hand-breadth in their Bodies that was not wounded, nor could our Ambassador
part them, notwithstanding all the means he could use, whereas every one has
the Freedom to right himself in such cases.

On the 31 at night we had another great Earthquake, accompanied with fearful
Flashes of Lightning and Thunder: On this day was also seen at Scamachy and
other places in Persia huge Balls of Fire, which seemed to be hurled down from
Heaven, with such Force as if the Bands of the World would be dissolved: this
being the most dreadful sight that ever I have seen in my life. The Flame
thereof was bluish like Sulphur when it burns.

The next day we got Tidings by way of Terky, that Astrachan was retaken by the
Great Dukes Forces, and, that several Thousands of the Rebels were executed;
News from Astrachan.
but hearing those news so often related and afterward found them to be but
false Rumors, supposed to be dispersed by some Persons whose Interest had
dependence thereon, we could not so easily be induced to take this upon Credit,
and therefore, acquiesced in the Indifferency of the matter till we had a
Confirmation.

On the 2 of April came an Order from Ispahan, An Order to levy 500 Wenfor the
Scach.
to make a General Muster of Girls, from 2 years of Age upward, out of which
the Beauties select were to be chosen out for the King of Persia. This Muster
passed throughout the whole Kingdom, not respecting either Nation or Religion.
The Commissioners had Order from the King, to complete the number of 500 of the
best featured, complexioned and shaped Virgins that were to be found in all the
whole Muster. The manner of it is thus; Some time before, the King issues a
Mandate, which is published through every Province of his Realm and Dominions,
That all the young Maids from 2 to 17 years [ if there be any of that age]
shall be drawn up to their respectiv Metropolitans, or Chief Towns (as these in
Media, were brought to Scamachy) where the Kings Commissioners shall make
choice on the Kings behalf. This Mandate is duly and with all reverence obeyed
by the Parents of such Children, who, if they have but one Child are obliged
upon pain of Death to bring her to the Place appointed, where the said
Commissioners are to view and censure them if they be worthy to be culled out
for the Kings use. Deplorable it was to see the dejected Countenance of the
Parents, who brought their Children where they must take their last leaves of
them, never thinking to see them again; and as remarkable it was to consider
the various tempers. and differing humors of the People, whereas some who having
a great love and esteem for their Children, would attire them in the ougliest
Garb, and use what Arts they could to make them seem deformed and misshapen;
whilst on the contrary others thinking it a Honor, and being either
overburthened with their Children, or void of that tenderness, which by nature
all are enjoined to have over their Issue, would use every mean they could
conceiv to render them hand^m, and spend their utmost mite for Ornaments to add
a Grace to their corporal qualifications, APRIL. 1671.
that so they might be rendered as an Emphasis among the rest.

A Merchant looses his Daughter to find her.
When this Muster was certified and published, which is but a short warning, I
knew a very rich Merchant whose greatest solace and imaginary happiness was in
one only Daughter, who was already marriageable, and courted by a young
Gentleman of no slender Fortune; but the Father whether he thought her a Match,
in regard of her Dowry, Beauty, Wit and other Accomplishments, fitter for a
greater Personage, or that the youth had some Property which he the said
Merchant took dislike at, I cannot determine; yet certainly he courted her long
before he could gain the will and consent of the old Man, which till these
Summons came he quite despaired of. But no sooner did the old Gentleman hear of
the Mandate but he sent for the Youth, and not only gave him his Daughter for
his Bride but made him in Post-hast to bed with her, that so he might
juramentally declare she was no Virgin. The Youngman did not desire many
Months to deliberate the business, but suddenly accepted of his Offer, and so
anticipated the King. Yet this did not altogether excuse them, for it was not
so universally known but that some Pick-thank Neighbor thinking that the
Gentleman concealed his Daughter to escape the Censure, went and informed the
Commissioners, that such a Virgin was not brought to the Test, being a great
Beauty and well bodied. The Commissioners immediately send out a Private Summons
to the Old Gentleman to bring his Daughter into the Chans Antichambre where
they held the Rendez-vous; the Old Gentleman makes his Appearance with his Son
in Law and Daughter, together with some Persons of Quality to make use of in
case Evidence were required where being come, he presents his Daughter, and
prayed them to take his Son too, for he was the Person that had her
Maidenhead, which was the only thing the King desired; In fine he declared the
matter so circumstantially that she was dismissd.

When the last Muster is made, those that are elected are set in Boxes, made
not much unlike a Sedan, and carried on Camels, every Camel carrying two, which
hang on each side like Higlers Baskets: and the Morning appointed for their
Departure they sound a Trumpet, upon which all the Caravan comes together in
order to their setting forth, appearing like a mighty Army. Those that are com
to maturity are shut up alone, and such as are little have Nurses appointed to
attend them.

All this while I saw little hopes of ever enjoying my Freedom, so that I began
to despair of Redemption. After I had consulted all means, I concluded it my
best way to dispatch Letters to some of my own Nation, and accordingly sent one
to the Dutch Consul at Smyrna, and another to the Sieur Molives at Leghorn,
humbly entreating them to send them forward for Holland, with one acquainting
them that I was in Slavery at Scamachy, and could not send any Letter with
safety and convenience through Moscovia, which was the reason of my being so
importunate, as to direct them that way.

On the 9th. we had very tempestuous Weather, high and impetuous Winds, mixed
with Thunder and Lightning, so that all shaked again. On this day went all the
Woman to the Sepulchers of their deceased Friends, to perform the customary
Rites.

The next day was a great Festival, or Holy day among them, which was
solemnized with Beating of Kettle-drums, sound of Trumpets, and Playing on all
sorts of loud Wind-Music.

On the 11th. was one of Radzins chief Officers brought into Scamachy, being
with 3 more of the Cosac Commanders sent upon an Embassage to Boulat a Prince
of the Circas-Tartars, to desire his Assistance of some Auxiliaries, promising
not only to spare his Subjects, but also to give him a considerable Reward. The
Prince having understood the sum of their Instructions, caused immediately Three
of those to be beheaded, and their Bodies to be thrown to the Eagles and
Ravens. The Heads he caused to be embalmed and put in a Bag, which he compelled
the Fourth to carry to Ispahan and present the King. His one Hand and his Neck
was nailed to a Wooden Collar made like a [Y] with 2 Branches, between which
his Head was supported, so that he continually looked upwards. This Cosac, or
rather Renegado, for he was a Russ born, I knew very well at Astrachan. He was
mounted on a bay Horse, and attired in a Garment of yellow Silk, and
notwithstanding the unexpected severe Usage he met with did not seem by his
Countenance to be at all concerned. The Cosac gets his Enlargement.


When he was brought into Ispahan, was put into close Prison and laden with
massy Fetters and Manicles, but shortly after got his enlargement promising to
impart some weighty and important affair to the King. MAY. 1671.


I have already made mention, how that about 2 years before, Radzin had
dispatched 7 Ambassadors to the Court at Ispahan, desiring a Supply of Men and
Ammunition, as also to enter into a League with the King: but by reason the
Cosacs had plundered Astrabath, Ferrebath and Lenkeran, and committed many
insolent Outrages within his Majesty's Territories, and that Radzin was not by
any acknowledged as a Sovereign Prince, his Ambassadors found a very unkind
Reception at Court, and meeting with some menacing Sentences in their
Instructions, the King caused their Heads to be severed from their Bodies,
reserving only one to bring back the Tidings, who was upon his delivery of the
Message ordered by Radzin himself to be chopped into Gobbets, as may be read
more at large in Page 192, 193. So that I held it strange that Stephen Radzin
would assume the freedom to send any more Legates, without other Ground of
Hope, that they should have better success than the former had.

A Persian Saint murdered.
On the 25 was a Persian of reputed Sanctity murdered by a Georgian after a
very base degenerate manner. The Murderer was forthwith apprehended and
brought before the Prince, where he was accused of the Fact, and consequently
delivered to the nearest Allies of the Patient to use at their discretion, as
is customary in Persia; for rarely it happens that either the King, Prince,
Deputy or the Civil Magistracy take notice of such delinquencies, but turn
over the Malefactor to the aggrieved Parties, who if they be Poor oftentimes
sell their Vengeance for Money, after which the Law is silent: but here the
Delinquent had not that Fortune, for, the Brother of the Murdered Party had
neither Poverty nor Mercy, but so soon as permission was granted him, he caused
two Men to hold him down till he had stabbed him with the same Weapon, saying,
Get thee hence, thou drunken Dog, to the Devil to whom thou belongest; for the
Georgian was a drunken Fellow, and executed in the same fit of Drunkness
wherein he had so far mistaken himself, so that the Murder, Complaint and
Execution were all done in the space of three Hours.

A Tragical Passage at a wedding.
On the 3 of May fell out a doleful Tragedy at a Wedding, where when all the
Company were in the midst of their mirth, and the Bridegroom in a gay and
jolly humor was suddenly struck at the Heart, as if he had taken in something
that was a vigorous and speedy poison, and immediately fell down and died in
the arms of his Bride. Immediately upon this all was in a lamentable case: The
Bridegrooms Mother was so impatient and concerned that she took a Knife and
ripped up her own Belly, that all her Bowels gushed out, and she fell to the
Ground. The Sister seeing this, ran out of Doors as one distracted, tearing her
Hair and rending her Flesh, that many wondered to think how a young Woman of
that tenderness could so mangle and abuse her Body, and at last ran up to the
top of a steep Rock, whence she threw her self praecipitantly: so that this
fair Morning had a foul Evening, and these Nuptial Solemnities which began with
a Comedy, concluded with a deep Tragoedy.

On the 9th. was a solemn Procession made at Scamachy which is yearly
celebrated in Memory of St. Hosseyn the second Son of Aly, and the Grand
Expounder of the Alcoran, who was stoned to death, or, as some ascertain shot
with Darts or Arrows. This Feast they call Asschur, which in their Language
signifies Ten, for that Hosseyn when he went from Medina to Kufu was 10 days
pursued by his Enemies, so that this Feast continues 10 days. This Hosseyn as I
said before was the youngest Son of the great Aly, for whose death they seem
very sorrowful. About the Beginning of this Feast those that are able apparel
themselves in Blew, which is their Mourning, as Black is with us. During these
10 days they never shave their Hair, nor take any Rasour in their Hands,
whereas at other times they make use of it every day. They hold also a very
strict Fast drinking nothing but Water, and all the time howl and make a very
mournful noise, breathing out many fearful curses against the Murderer,
beating themselves continually and with that earnestness till they grow black
and blew. The Boys and Men run continually about the streets with Flags and
Dassels, raging and bawling as if they were either drunk, or besides themselves,
ever crying out O Hosseyn, Hosseyn! Others sit at the Thresholds and in the
Galleries of the Mesquits, or Churches, incessantly crying, O Hosseyn, Hosseyn!
O Hosseyn, Hosseyn! Before every door, and at every Window were planted many
Torches, and not a House how poor soever it was in all Scamachy, without a
great Number of Torches and wax candles set all in Rows, which gave a
wonderful show. No less worthy of sight was the Procession, which was
performed with many Ceremonies; and such was my curiosity that notwithstanding
all the Thumps I got, I still crowded in among them to see all I could. First
of all appeared the Chatib, or High Priest, accompanied with a long rout of
Inferior Clergy; The Chatib, or Mufti, himself was attired in a long blew Robe,
with a white Torse, or Wreath about his Head, and so were all the rest of the
Clergy attired after the same manner, yet different in Pomp and statelyness
according to their several degrees and advancement. The Chatib had in his hand
an Arabian Book, out of which he read the Memorials of the Saint with an
exceeding loud voice; which ended he was silent for a little while, and then
again began all the Priests to sing with a strange melody or rather howling,
for it was but a confused Harmony, ever crying out O Hosseyn! O Hosseyn!
Hosseyn! In short a third part of what I heard was Hosseyn. After these
followed all the Great Personages; and next to them 2 Great Pageants of form,
square, each with a pompous Canopy, these were supported and born by a certain
number of Men, on the one was the Representation of the Prophet being signified
by a Person who had taken in a Potion which made him to sleep for 48 hours
together, lying upon a Bier. Round about the [supposed] Corpse sat 6 little
Boys, who had the Art of weeping ad unguem. Above the Canopy stood two Towers
very pompous and costly, and out of the one a Youth put forth his Head weeping
aloud and dolefully cried out Hosseyn, Hosseyn! O Hosseyn, Hosseyn! On each
side the Pageant ran several young Men all naked, save only about the Middle,
having anointed themselves with Flower and black Naphtha, that they looked more
like Satyrs than Men: in their Hands they had Truncheons, wherewith they
threatened ( quasi vero) to bastonado the Murderer: Others there were who
carried in each hand a Flint or some hard stone, which they smote together,
still howling and weeping aloud, that had it not appeared otherwise by their
wanton Actions when any She-slave came near them I should have taken all for
real and unfeigned sorrow. All this while they jumped and twisted themselves
into many postures; the Air still Ecchoing with Hosseyn, Hosseyn. Besides these
were 6 lusty Men of robust Bodies having each a naked Scymiter in the hand, and
bare-headed: these danced after a very od manner making various Figures, and
always at turning made an effectual Exercise of their Weapons, in such manner
that the Blood which came gushing out of the Wounds on their Heads ran down
their Shoulders with such streams, that no part of their Bodies was free of
Blood; and to those Champions was imputed a great mesure of Sanctity, for that
they had voluntarily shed their Blood for the sake of the great Hosseyn. In one
of their Heads (as I afterward could descry) were more than 20 Wounds.

After this followed the second Pageant which was carried by the like number of
Men. Above it had a Coffin, upon which was a green Turbant, and round about it
were also 6 young Men, each one with an Alchoran in his Hand, wherein they
continually read. After this Pageant there followed another small one, on which
was carried a Vessel, not much unlike a Bathing-Tub, full of Blood, wherein
sat two Children, nothing appearing save only their Heads [perhaps to represent
the 2 Sons of that reputed Martyr] This was carried with a strange noise of
vocal Music, but to me seemingly void of Rule and Judgment. Last of all came
another small Pageant, with a fair blew Silk Covering, and thereon sat a
Youngman who read all the way in a great Book. After these Pageants, or
Brancards, followed 4 Noblemen, each leading a horse of State, richly
capparison'd: The Saddles being of Gold, and beset with Precious Stones. On the
far-side had each Horse a Damaskin Scymiter, and on the near-side a Shield. On
each Saddle was a Turbant, adorned with variety of Gems and unspeakably rich.
This Solemnity was concluded with a grand Retinu of Citizens, who seemingly
surpassed all the rest in Devotion. When the Pageants were come before the Door
of the Deputy they stood still: and the Deputy accompanied with all the Nobles
about the Court, rode out to hear the Chatyb [or Sermon] that the Priest before
mentioned, according to the custom, was to preach, which he did with such Zeal,
as that the Chan [or Deputy] with all that heard him could not refrain from
weeping. Most of the Sermon was a collaudatory Rehearsal of the Sanctity and
Noble Acts of Hosseyn, together with a Historical recitation of his Martyrdom.
When the Chatyb was concluded there came an Image of Straw mounted upon an Ass,
armed with Bow and Arrows: this Figure was to represent the Murderer, who as
he rode through the Preas, every one contemptuously spit upon him, and cursed him
with the most bitter Cursings of Hell, Misery, and what else they could imagine,
for the violent Hands he had laid upon so holy a man.

Another Earthquake.
On the 16 was another Earthquake which for some time raged so, that the
Ambassadors palace was shaken, and all the Dishes and what else was loose
fell; besides several Houses that were near us were hurled down.

A man beat to Death.
On the 17 another Man was Caned to Death by 6 of the Chans Domestics: and on
the same day died the Chans Son, being a Child of 6 months old, and buried the
next day after, with great pomp and station. Death and Funeral of one of the
Chans Children.
The Body was not put in a Coffin, but carried open (after the Persian manner)
upon a Bier, by some of the greatest Personages, some of them going on each
side, supporting a Caerulean Canopy: for Blew with them, as Black with us, is
the Mourning Color. The Chan himself followed the Bier, and next to him his
Son, being about 15 years of Age: after those the Noble Personages and
Courtiers, according to their rank and degree. When they were come to the
Sepulcher, the Body was set down before the Door of the Chapel, or Oratory,
where the Nobility distributed Alms to the Poor, bestowing also very liberally
certain pieces of Gold upon the Priests thereby injoyning them to pour out
their Prayers for the Soul of the Departed, and to have him in perpetual
Remembrance. This don the Body was carried inward, and laid in a new Grave,
upon which was a fair Tomb or Monument of white Marble, with admirable curious
Foliage, and other Ornaments of Sculpture. The Priests received the Body to
interr it with many Ceremonies and Bowing. When all was closed the Chan drew
near to kiss the Tomb, as also his Son, and the rest of the Nobility, and so
after their former rank and order returned back to the Palace.

CHAP. XXV. News from Astrachan. A Persian Woman and Adulteress taken in the
Fact. A Young Gentleman caned to death by Order of the Prince and complaint of
his Father. Another put to the same death. One of the Authors Companions goes
for Ispahan, Hailstones as big as Eggs. The Author and a Venetian entertained
in an Armenian Monastery. A Woman taken in Adultery, for which she is
surrendered up to the Will and Power of her Husband, who fleas her alive, nails
up her Skin upon the Wall, and throws out her Carcass into the street. The
great Jealousy of the Persians. The male Children about the Court gelded. The
great Slave market at Scamachy. The unnatural custom of the Geor-Georgians, The
Ambassador receives a Charge to depart.
ON the 19 dito we had very tempestuous Weather, Tempestuous Weather.
with fearful Flashes of Lightning and Thunder, that I thought the World would
be dissolved, for it was more dreadful than either my Tongue or Pen is
sufficient to express, nor did I ever see the like in all my Life. And the same
day we got Tidings from Astrachan, News from Astrachan.
that the City was of a certainty taken in by the Great Duke, that the Army of
the Cosacs was beat in open Field, and Stephen Radzin, the grand Belwether
taken alive. The Success of the Day next to the Power of the Almighty was
ascribed to the German and Dutch Forces, for which good service they received
considerable Favors from the Czar, and were beyond the Russians themselves
remunerated with several Tokens of Gratitude.

On the 20 was a great Wrestling Match, of 6 expert Wrestlers being strangers,
who quitted themselves in the Game with an admirable Dexterity, doing many noble
Exercises in presence of several Hundred Spectators, who could not behold them
but with great Wonder. When they had performed all, they went about with a
Porceline Dish to desire Money by way of reward.

On the 21 were two of the Ambassadors Gentlemen taken into Custody, and put
into fetters by the Persians, for that they had lay with a Mohammedan Woman. The
Woman her self was shortly after brought and delivered to the Ambassador, to
deal with her according to his Discretion; and if he liked to hew her into
Gobbets, such bein the Desire of her Husband, who declared himself willing to
acquiesce in what was done. But the Ambassador who had been so long at the
Academy of Venus, was such an expert Proficient that he could say his Lesson
with out book as w^ll as his Domestics, take'em one for one: and in short had
such compassion on her that he sent her away a free Remissionary, but not
without reconciling her to her Husband. Soon after the Gentlemen also got
enlargement.

On the 22 a Youngman (according to Sentence passed upon him) was beat to death
with Sticks, being to pass through the Town and at the Corner of every Street to
receiv a certain number of Blows, till at last he dropped down dead. This was
mainly occasioned upon the request of his unnatural and merciless Father, who
was an eminent Gentleman, and Inhabitant of Scamachy. The Crime for which he
was accused was a kind of Satyr, or a Pasquil, which he had written and sent to
the Governor: the main purport whereof was in these Words. How comes it that
your Lordsh, grows such a great Saint all on a sudden? Who has possessed your
mind to alter those long continued Customs of the Persians? And do you not know
what Dishonor it is to all the Musulmans and the whole Kingdom in general? Or
are you indeed become a Christian? etc. This Innovation he meant, was an
Interdiction which the Chan or Governor, had issued 3 days after the
Procession, That none should hew and cut (as was their Custom) with Swords in
the Streets, like as we have spoke more amply in the Feast of Aly. The Father,
some said, durst not but make complaint, lest it should have been imputed to
himself as Misprision, it being well known by others that it was his Son who
sent the Libel. But it may be observed that those who would put the affair in
that Posture, were either prejudiced or biased Persons. But others who were
indifferent looked upon it as an Example of Unmercifulness and Ambition, where
he only did it for Hopes of Favor from the Chan, which be esteemed a Purchase
aequivalent to his sons Life. The next day was another Man beat to Death, by 7
of the Chans Domestics before the Gates of the Palace, but for what I could not
learn.

A Narrativ from Russia.
Upon the 26 we got another Narrativ, which confirmed the former News from
Astrachan; as also, how that Radzin was carried to Moscou. In the mean while
Mr. van Termund makes preparation to go for Ispahan, and with all diligence
makes up a Company, to the end that he might travel more secure, there being
then a great rumor of many Insolences perpetrated by the Wood-rangers: JUNE.
1671.
and on the 29 set forward, taking with him Peter Arentsz of Schevelingen, one
of our Ships-Company, and a Polish Jew, who had been taken by the
Scemkal-Tartars and made his Escape.

On the 30 arose a most hideous Tempest of Wind, Thunder, Great Storms and Hail.
Hail and Lightning; which continued for two days together after which all was
very calm and still and the air very serene. The Hail did much damage to the
Fruit, every Hailstone being of an unusual bigness, some as large as the Egg of
a Hen or Turkey.

On the 6 of June I went with a Venetian (who had bin a Slave in Turkey and run
away) about 15 Miles w^thin Land, where we found an Armenian Friary. The
Monastics received and treated us very kindly, when they understood that we
were Christians, and in Slavery to the Mahometans. They entreated us to tell
them all the passages we had met with abroad, which the Venetian first did, and
afterward desiring me to do the like, I related all in brief, which they took
great delight to hear, especially about the taking in of Astrachan. They
desired us further to tarry with them for some time, which we promised to do,
and accordingly stayed there two nights. All the time they caressed us with all
kindness imaginable, neither sparing for Victuals nor good Drink: professing
themselves sorry that our condition would not allow them the happiness of a
longer enjoyment of our Company. Their manner of Life was very single, without
any Encumbrance of the Mahometans, their Hous-holding regular and gentile, and
the Men among themselves mutually loving one another, and sociable with
strangers, very charitable to all that were in necessity, of what Opinion or
Faith soever they were. Right loath we were to leav them, but not daring to
stay any longer, we took our leaves of them, thanking them for their kindness
and civility they had shown us. In taking our way to Scamachy, we were fain to
climb over some Hills, and one great Mountain flat at Top, upon which was a
Lake, according to our guessing, 3 miles in Circuit. Going along the shore to
our great amazement we found four Bodies of Men that had but newly been
murdered, having their throats cut, we supposed them to be Anglers, seeing
Fishing Canes and other Implements about them. However, we thinking it for two
reasons unsafe for us to stay there any longer, made all the have we could to
get out of the way. This Lake as we afterward understood was very plentiful
of many kinds of delicate Fish, which are sold very dear and highly esteemed of
abroad throughout all that part of the Country, and indeed it was once our
thoughts to make a Trial if we could take any thing, till meeting with these
new murdered Persons, we chused rather to let the Fish remain in their
Element, than by the probable consequence to pay too great a price for our
sport.

On the 9 happened a very Tragical passage at Scamachy, which, notwithstanding
the horrible spectacle I had seen the Day before, made my Heart beat withrn my
Breast, as it did many times after that, when it came into my mind. A Polish
Woman and a Slave was taken by a Persian for his Wife. Whether she had some
private Quarrel with him, or that she was conscious of some misbehaviour to him
I cannot determine, however she came to my Patron the Polish Ambassador, first
making a large Demonstration of her State, and of her Friends and Family in
Poland, she requested that my Lord would vouchsafe her his Protection, till
such time as she could meet with an opportunity to convey her self clandestinly
home into her own Country. My Lord, at the earnest entreaty of some Domestics
who were his Minions, assented: but after she had so privily held her self
about the space of 14 days, her Husband got Intelligence by some Pick-thank or
other, where she was, applies himself immediately to Court, where (after a little
soliciting) he gets an Order to fetch her out, and use her as seemed good to
him. But considering that the Domestics of my Lord were too numerous and a
little unruly, he durst not attempt to make the demand, but went back again to
Court desiring Assistance upon which the Prince sent some of his Officers, who
when our People saw that they were com in a warrantable way, durst not oppose
them, nor had they any convenience to put her out of the way, so that she was
forthwith delivered into the hand of her Husband. The Man having as was said
permission to punish her at his own Discretion had already provided a Wooden
Cross, upon which, with the help of his Servants, he bound her fast, being
mother naked, and with his own hands flayed her whilst yet living. I stood my
self all the while at the Door with a great Company of Men, Women and Children,
and heard her cry out most bitterly. Yet none thought that his cruelty was of
so high a nature till we saw the Carcass, thrown out into the street where it
lay an hour or two, and afterward by his order was dragged into the Fields, to
be devoured of the Eagles, and other Birds of prey: but he not satisfied
herewith took the Skin and nailed it upon the Wall for a Monument and Warning
to his other Wives, which were 12 in number, who never saw it but trembled, as
indeed I my self did, so often as I went by the House, or passed by that way.
It is a plain Proverb, not so common as true, The Old Woman had not sought her
Daughter in the Oven, had she never bin there her self: and so the Men in
Persia, The Ie^lousy of the Persians.
or at lest about these Parts, being generally prone to Venery, and without the
bounds of Continency, harbor and sustain an ill Opinion of their Wives, whom
they will have to be chaste and loyal. This Jealousy is the reason that few who
covet a good name and would be reputed honest go with any part of their bodies
uncovered, save only their Eyes, their Face being muffled up in Silks or
Cotton. Those who go with uncovered Heads, are such as we commonly call
Gamesters, and prostitute. So soon as any one comes in a doors, the Woman runs
into a Chamber and locks her self up that she may not be seen, although the Slaves
have often the Opportunity to violate their Masters Couch notwithstanding all
the Endeavors they use to suppress them. Eunuchs.
But the King and the Great ones of the Realm prevent that by gelding their
Slaves; which they do very effectually, but Modesty forbids me to make further
mention of the Manner. They do it commonly when they are young, buying Children
that are stolen from their Parents, and are therefore in regard of their
bringing up, held in greater value than others, as also because that there is
hardly one in three that both live and like. The price which is set upon them
is one reason why ordinary Persons have them not, and another is because that
if they thrive they grow very fat and lazy, and consequently unfit to do any
service they have occasion for. And by reason that Women-Slaves are somewhat
rare among them, the Merchants and Citizens Wives are mostly attended by Men,
who if they have a sprightly and airy way and Carriage, are sometimes admitted
to enjoy those illicit Pleasures, which in process of time they recompense with
the loss of their Lives.

It happened once that my Patron received a sudden Message from the Prince to
com to Court; upon which he gave me Order to saddle his best Horse: now the
Saddle which he ordered me to set on being richly set with Pearls and Precious
stones, he kept it always, in the Chamber where his Plate was, so that I must
pass through three Chambers to fetch it, but opening the Door of the second
Room I found my Patroness standing naked in the Bath, upon which being in a
great amazement, and fearful that this rash Action might be represented to my
Master, who might make me pay for my Peeping, in all have I retreated and
offered to run out again, which she seeing, cried out, Ho! ho! don't run away,
go through and fulfill your Lords Commands. This she said with a smiling
Countenance, which cured me of the Palsy, that the sight of her had already
struck me into.

The Ambassadors Brother goes to Ispahan.
On the 10th. the Ambassadors Brother departed for Ispahan, to make complaint
against the Chan, about the Money that the Ambassador had upon Interest and
disbursed for him, which he could not get in.

The great Slave-Fair.
On the 11th. of July is a great Fair at Scamachy, upon which day above 500
Slaves were brought to Market, that being their main Traff^ic. Of these Slaves
are of all sorts of People, Men, Women, Children, Christians and Pagans,
Polonians, Russians, Georgians and Circas-Tartars. The Poles and Russes are
commonly stole by the Dagestan-Tartars, as also the Circasses which are
Heathens, for according to the Voice of the Alchoran no Mohammedan [or Musulman]
may be made a Slave, which mainly tends to the Propagation of Turcism. On the
contrary the Circas-Tartars in revenge do steal the Dagestans and sell them to
the Russians. And so the Tartars, although seemingly many Nations, yet doubtless
of old one People, live in constant jarrs and private Hostility, who if they
had but Discretion and Conduct answerable to their Power, were in a capacity to
subdue both Russ -- and Persia. But as for the Georgians they are generally
such as are sold by their own inhuman Parents, and in that out do both Turk and
Pagan who will not make sale, of such as are of their own Opinion or Nation,
much less their own Children, which is a thing so besides Nature, that the most
savage Beasts do abhor it, and will as soon part with their Life as with their
Young. This Fair, which, as I have said, consists most in the Sale of stolen
Booty is a great advantage to Derbent and Scamachy, which of late years seem to
flourish mainly, and for this reason is frequented by many Merchants, where
they ordinarily find all things at an available price. The Slaves being brought
to Market, the Buyer goes about and seeing one he likes, the first thing he
does is to look him in the mouth, as we do Horses, Slaves how bought and tried.
causes him to be stripped, and feels him all over, but especially his Wrists and
Muscles, thence collecting what strength he is of, and what service he is able
to do him. If the Buyer intend to employ him about Messages, he causes him to
run out 10 or 12 Paces, others make them to stand in all Postures, and so value
them according to their Age, soundness of Body and strength. If the Buyer
chance to find any reasonable fault, failing, or blemish in his Slave within
the space of 3 days, he may return him to the seller and receive the value
again; and this advantage has the Buyer also in most other things, or if I am
not mistaken in all save damageable Commodities.

On the 12 the Calenter who is next to the Chan in Power and Office came to our
Ambassador with an Order from the Scach, The Polish Ambassador receivs another
Order to depart.
to bid him make preparation for his Journey, and in all have to depart. But
the Ambassador returned him his wonted reply: That he was at present destitute
of Money, and not able to undertake the Journey, unless the Chan would pay him
what he was owing him, upon the receipt of which he would immediately go,
without more or further delay.

CHAP. XXVI. A dreadful Tempest. Great Balls of Fire fall upon the Earth. A
most fearful Deluge whereby Houses, Men and abundance of Cattle are carried
away. The Chan receivs another Robe of Favor. The Offerings of the Banjans,
for the Fowl and Fish. The Religious Exercise of the Persian Women. The
Author's Discourse with the Chan. The Author meets with one of the Tartars who
had made him Slave. He gets out of the service of the Polish Ambassador. The
great Bounty and Kindness of his Patron Hadzi Biram, and of Altine his
Patroness. One of his Company, made free.
ON the 13 was a violent storm, A great Storm.
with Thunder and Lightning which very much endamaged the Ambassadors House,
and took away the Roof of many other Houses round about. The Air was as if it
had been all Fire, and a Sulphury flame, and sometime were seen great balls like
burning Brimstone falling down. About 8 in the Evening I saw a great massy lump
of Fire, which made the Earth shake again when it fell, and so burst all to
pieces. Formidable, I thought, were the great Ordnance in the Dardanelli when
they were discharged, being reputed the greatest in the World: But there was as
much difference between this and them, as there is between a Mountain and a
Molehill. About 2 hours after fell down 6 more, which were as big as
Hogs-heads, these consumed and wasted a great part of the ground where they
light. This Tempest continued about 48 hours; after which followed a very calm
season.

On the 15 we had news from Ardebil, how that Monsr. Termund with P. Arentsz
his servant were arrived there safe and well, although not without some difficulty
by the way, meeting with some Robbers, but the Konjack telling them that he was
sent to the Schach on an Express, they let him go without further trouble.

A great Deluge.
The next day fell abundance of Rain, that all the whole Face of the Country
round about Scamachy lay under Water, and the streams coming from the Mountains
brought down huge Pieces of Rocks and Stones which came down into the Town and
carried away several Houses with them, as also many People who were on every
side environed with the Floods that they could not help themselves. This
Tempest concluded with fearful Thunderclaps and Lightning, as if the last day
were com.

Many people drowned.
On the 17 the Chan had a Robe of Favor sent him from the King. The Envoye who
brought it being arrived at the Kings House without the City sent notice and
acquainted the Chan with his coming, who according to the Custom set his House
in order and took leav of his Friends, fearing that this was upon a sharper
Errand than the last, the more I suppose, because my Patrons Brother had been
at Ispahan to acquaint the King, that his Brother, the Polish Ambassador had
such a sum of Money due to him from the Chan, and could not for the want
thereof undertake his Journey for Warsaw. The Chan makes preparation to go and
know the Kings Pleasure, being mounted on a stately Arabian Horse, and followed
with a great Retinu of Nobility and Courtiers, all well mounted, as before So
soon as he was com there the Envoye fulfills his Commission and delivers the
Robe, after the same manner and with the same Ceremonies as were before
mentioned: AUG. 1671.
and having taken his leave of the Courier returned into the City with variety
of Wind-Music, Kettledrums and Trumpets.

On the 18 of August we had a great Earthquake which raged a long time
together, in which many Dwelling Houses, Stables and Barns without the Walls on
the East Side of the Town were thrown down, and abundance of Men crushed to
pieces. When the Earthquake was past, it began to rain very hard, and blew
extremely. Superstition of the Banjans.
The same day I had occasion to go without the Walls where walking a little
toward the Fields I saw about 100 Benians performing Sacrifices to the Fowls
and Fish. They lay upon their knees and strowed Rice and Beans upon the Land
and in the River. These Indians will never kill any living Creature, not so
much as Lice, which although they take yet set them down in some place or other to
pasture, and let them shift for themselves. When they see any Person go out a
Birding with a Fowling-piece, Ginns, or other Implements they will give him
Money to go home again; or, if they perceiv any one about to shoot they will be
sure to spoil his Game, by chacing away the Fowl, insomuch, that if the Party
be a Choleric man, they are in danger of their Lives. The like they do with
the Fish, when they see any com to Angle, and trouble the water. When they are
about to make water, or ease themselves they always look about them if there be
no Vermin or any thing that has life upon the Ground, which if there be, they
remove it away very carefully, lest they should do it harm. During the time of
these Festival Days, which happens 8 times a year, they will burn no Candle,
Tapour, or Torch; lest Muskettos, and other Insects that fly about the Flame
should singe their Wings. They have also offered the Chan a considerable sum of
Money that no Beast should be slain during the time of these Feasts, but the
Chan would not listen to any such thing. These people are also very
superstitious in many other things, and withal strict and zealous. They will
not use either Dish or any other Vessel belonging to such as are not of their
own Sect, yet will suffer others to make use of theirs. They abstain from
Flesh, and Fish, and whatsoever had, or may have life, insomuch that they are
as shy of an Egg as of the Bird that lays it. They are very subtle in Traffic,
and in that are said to surpass not only the other Indians, but all other
Nations.

On the 26 was a great Holiday among the Persians, when as all the Women went
to perform their Solemnities at the Graves of their deceased Friends and Allies
upon the Mountains, where they frequently beat their Heads, Kissed the Tombs
and other Ceremonies more, which are all the Religious Duties their Women are
enjoined to, that I could observe: for they never go to the Mosquees, or
Churches, nor ever do they pray at home, but leav all to the Piety of the Men,
who go to prayer 3 times a day, and there appear very devout, to wit at
Morning, at Noon and at Night, invoking the Assistance of the Angels. At their
first Entrance into the Mosquite, they utter these words, This I do in the Name
of the Almighty GOD: which said they utter some short Prayer, that they have by
form praescribed, directing it to certain Angels, that they would vouchsafe to
chase away the Devil, that he may not incommodate them in their Prayer. When
they have made their Address to the Angels, they then apply themselves to GOD,
in these words: Praised be GOD, the Lord of the Last Judgment. Thou O Heavenly
GOD have power to help us, wherefore we adore thee. Help us to find and
continue on the right Way, not on the Way where sinners commit sins, but on
that Way where no Error is. Amen.

The next day being the 27 I presented Hadzi Biram my former Patron with the
Model of a Ship and a Galley which cost me about 3 Months Labor. On the Ship
were 40 Guns, and 10 on the Galley, with 42 Oars, both being complete, as to
Masts, Sails Rigging, Anchors, etc. Hadzi accepted of it kindly, and forthwith
presented it to the Prince as a great Rarity. The Prince was greatly taken with
it, and asked Hadzi Biram, whether I was at Scamachi, which understanding
desired to see me; upon which my Patron sent a Slave to fetch me. I had hopes
that this might work out my Redemption and bring me into Favor, went without
much delay to give Attendance, where being admitted and come within presence I
bowed after the Persian manner, with my Hand upon my Breast. The Prince, seeing
me stand at a distance, bad me com near, which I did. Then he fell to asking me
some Questions as to my Country, and the Occasion of my coming thither, which I
answered. Then he asked me if such Ships ever engaged in Battle, one against
another? To which I replied, That 2 Fleets being between 2 and 300 Sail of the
English and Hollanders, encountered each other, continually firing their Guns,
and then proceeded to Boarding, Sinking, Burning, or Blowing up. He then asked
me, why those two Nations professing one Faith and Religion made War upon each
other. I answered him, that it was for no other reason than the Mahometans made
War against each other, and those two mighty Potentates the Schach of Persia,
and the Ottoman Emperor, professing one and the same Faith in substance. The
Prince turning about to Hadzi Biram, told him that what I said was justly true.
Upon this came in some Great Personage, and giving me the Beck, a Token that I
must withdraw, I went away as much a Slave as I came in.

On the 28 was a great Silver Goblet stole out of our House, but there was such
a narrow scrutiny that the Thief was immediately found out, and after several
blows on the Foot with a Staff, was put in Fetters. He was a Georgian, and the
Ambassadors Townsman.

On the 31 I took a melancholic Walk through the Town, and immediately had a
Rescontre with one of the Tartars that took us and made us Slaves, he being the
very Man that tied me to his Horses Tail, dragging me backwards through Thorns and
Brambles stone-naked. I had no sooner seen him but my Blood began to boil in my
Veins, and my heart beat, still studying what way to be avenged of the Villain.
I dogged him so far till I found a convenient place, and having a good
Truncheon in my Hand, with a knot at the end, as the Persians commonly carry
about with them, with which I lent him such a Dandy-flute on the Forehead,
that he tumbled down like an Ox, upon which not willing to lose my Labor I
pumme'ld so about the Chaps, that Blood came gushing out at his Nose and Ears;
and well it was that I had not my Knife about me, for if I had, I should surely
have sent him to salute his Grandfather: yet my fear was that I had already
sent him on that Errand, for he lay as dead upon the Ground, which I observing,
and dreading the consequence, made all the have I could to get away: However
being seen by some Persians, who it seems had bin Spectators all this while at a
distance, one of them caught me by the Arm and with a surly look, asked me,
saying, What is your meaning, Friend? do you intend to murder a Man at noonday
upon the Street? Hold, hold, you are not to go so, you must be answerable to
the Governor for this Insolency. But to satisfy them, I made answer, That he
was a Dagestan Flagiary or, Manst^aler, and took me being a Free Person to sell
me as a Slave; and with one told them, how inhumanly and with what cruelty he
had used me: I told them also that was a Domestic of the Polish Ambassador:
Hearing this they let m^ go: but coming at the Corner of the Street I met with
10 or 12 o^ his Company, all Tartars, who no sooner understood what was do^ but
they ran all over the Town to seek me, and perceiving my sel^ environed on
every side I ran into a Tobacco house under pretext o^ smoking a Pipe, paying
my usual Penny: and here I lurked till (...) thought the Coast was clear, and
so ran home. But it was not long before I heard a whole Troop of Tartars at the
Gate, who were the same that followed me, bringing the silly Miscreant along
with them, al^ bloody and plaistered with Kennel-dirt, to show him to my Lord.
The Ambassador understanding what was the Matter, called me to him, and
hearing all the whole Passage, said to me, Get you gone, yo^ Loggerhead, why
did you not strike home? then we had not had this clutte^ at the Door. Hence,
hence, I say, and do your business better the next tim^ when it coms to your
turn, go turn me this Rabble from the Door. A hard Task upon my Word, yet
coming below, all the Gentlemen and Servant waited there, longing to hear what
result I had, and understanding, what the Ambassadors Pleasure was, they
resolved unan^mously to furnish themselves with Truncheons and Clubs, and fa^
upon them on a sudden, which we did and thresh'd them manfull back and sides,
for we were 2 to one: The poor Dagestan that wante^ full Satisfaction got a
handsome share in the Fray, and was so thoroughly basted with Oil of Canes that
he who at the first coming to the Door, pretended that he could not go, or
stand, was so well anointed that he knew how to cut a Caper as well as his
Companions Which I also said to a Gentleman that told it to my Lord. He laughe^
heartily, saying, I protest this Hollander is an excellent Surgeon.

The Time drew on when all the Caravans fitted and made preparation for
Ispahan, which I greatly longed for. And to lose no Opportunity that would make
for it, I addressed my self to my Patron humbly begging that I might have my
Liberty, which at last h^ assented to, on Condition I would be accountable to
him for the 150 Abas, which he told me he paid for me, refusing to give it m^
without. However he let me know privately by a third Person, tha^ if I was
desirous to be free that I should give him a certain Present, OCTOBER. 1671.
which was named. Finding now that I had such means of gaining my sweet
Freedom, I applied my self to Monsr. L. Fabritius, of whom I got so much Money
as I thought would serve my Turn. With this Money I bought a good Persian Horse;
but coming to present it, he had no liking to it, so that I was fain to buy
another, which I thought might please him better; yet this he fancied no better
than the former, so that I was fain to look out for another. The Persian
[Jockey] showed me another, and a stately Arabian Gelding, The Author obtains
his Freedom.
for which I was fain to give a greater Sum. As for the other two the Seller
took them again for the same Money, for that is an Established Rule in Persia,
that when ever a Man buys any such Merchandise, to wit, Slaves, or Cattle, he
may return it in 3 days, if it be not for his Turn. This satisfied my Patron
very well and upon my delivering it, told me I might go when I saw convenience.

On the 29th. of October I went about to take my leav of all my Friends and
Benefactors. The many great Favors that were shown me from Hadzi Biram my
former Patron, and the great Civility of his Lady obliged me above the rest to
perform that piece of Duty and manifest my thankfulness to them for their
Bounty. When I came there I found my Patroness Altina at home, the rest being
all gone to bath as they do every day. My Patron himself was also abroad about
his Affairs. My Patroness upon my coming in bad me welcome, having understood
the reason of the Visit: and seeing me stand at a distance, bad me sit down,
saying, her Husband would com home at Noon. Entering into some earnest discourse,
she asked me what my Master, the Ambass. had given me for the service I had don
him, Nothing at all, Madam, said I, but my liberty to famish, which I must
certainly have don, if I had not been supplied by your bountiful Goodness, to
whom I have made bold to have recourse, so often that I was ashamed. Well,
replies the good Gentlewoman, has he given you nothing, as a Corrolary for your
Faithfullness? I shall do it my self, upon condition you tell it to no person
whatsoever; and with that fetched me a costly Jewel, and several pieces of
Money, which far outvalued the Price I was sold for. After a little discourse
she desired me to stay at Scamachy, and so renewed what she had propounded to
me at Derbent, to wit; that we should go together for Moscovia, and so for
Holland; but I weighing the danger of the Cosacs, who still molested the
Caspian Sea, durst not resolv thereupon, but desired her to put that out of her
mind. She perceiving me not at all flexible to embrace her Proposals, grew on a
sudden very Heartless and dejected, and with a deep sigh said, Well, I find my
self in despair of ever coming into Christendom, yet the Will of GOD be don:
and seeing you are resolved to go for Ispahan you would do well to take your
Journey with my Husband, who intends if the season prove good to set forward to
morrow, very early. Incredible was my Joy to hear the news, that my Patron was
to take the Journey so suddenly, who had an entire and unfeigned Love for me,
as I have already shown. About 2 hours after my coming thither came my Patron
himself, who understanding by my Patroness that I was com to take my last leav
of him, bade me sit down, and after a friendly welcome told me if I would go
along with him to Ispahan, he would bear my Charges. I accepted of his kind
Offer, with all telling him, how that I was ashamed of the freedom I had
assumed to my self in being a continual burden and Charge to him: but since it
was an intention of his to heap yet greater favors upon me, I prayed him to
admit 2 more of my Countrymen into our Company, to wit, L. Fabritius and
Christian Brandt, who were redeemed by the East India Company, upon the
Intercession of Monsr. Termund, they bearing their own Charges: He made answer,
John, for your sake it shall be don although there were Twenty of them. When all was
in a readiness I went to give my Patroness the last Adieu, and observed that
Tears stood in her Eyes. William B. Klopper I would fain have had along with
us, but he judged it better to stay with the Polish Legate, thinking to come
that way, and through Moscovia sooner home, than by the Indies, the more because
he found himself unsound of Body, and very unfit to undertake so great a
Journey, and after that so long a Voyage, and pass the Line twice; thus with
Tears we took our Leaves of each other, with order that whosoever did first
arrive at home should give an account of the last Condition he left the rest
in. The same day that we left Scamachi I met with Meynder^ Meyndertsz, who, as
was said in Page 258, being a Smith by his Trade, made Knives and Swords for
his Patron at Bachu, and had continued so long in Slavery, this Place being the
most noted in all the Country for Steel and Iron work, as Neurenburg in
Germany, or Sheffield in England. His Master had tried all means possible both
by Promises and Threats, OCT. 1671.
to make him renounce Christianity and embrace Mahometanism. He was also
redeemed at the Charges of the East India Company, and designed for Gammeron by
way of Ispahan, but he being not altogether provided for the Journey we could
not get him along with us in the same Caravan.

CHAP. XXVII. Their departure out of Scamachi. The Country about Kasily
described and the manner of living of the Inhabitants. A Description of the
River Araxes. The Heath of Mokan, whither all the Banditti and Mutinous Persons
have recourse. Abundance of Tortvises near Balharu. The Poverty, yet contented
Life of the People and Inhabitants there about. The Author set upon by Robbers.
The Carravan Assailed and Plundered. A famous stone Bridge. The sepulcher of
Zeyde Tzeybrail. Arrival at Ardebil. The Situation of that Town. The bitter
Cold. Great and raging Whirl-winds. Extraordinary good Wheat. The great Toll
and Duty paid for Sheep. Seven and Fifty Towns within the Jurisdiction of
Ardebil. A Description of the City, of it is Streets, and of the Street of
Strumpets, who are Poetesses and ordained to compose Hymns of Praise to the
name of the Great Aly. Free Places within the City. The Markets and Shops.
Sumptuous Mezids and Chapels.
ON the 30 dito, by Gods good Conduct we set forward, with the whole Caravan,
which consisted of 2000 Men, or upwards, and about 1000 Camels and Horses of
Carriage. My Master also had 20 Horses of his own in particular laden with
Chestnuts, for a Present to the King of Persia, for one having any Matter, or
Affair at Court never appears before either the Scach, or any subordinat
Prince, empty handed. Our way was over very high and steep hills: amongst which
we found the Sepulcher of a great Persian Saint called Pyr Mardechan, being at
the foot of the Mountains of Faherlu. The Country here about lies waste and
desert, there being neither Inhabitant, nor Provision to be had by the way, so
that we made all the have we could to get the Carawansera. This hard travailing
was not very unwelcom to us, because that the weather was cold, although some of
the Horses being heavy laden and tired were left behind. About the Evening we
came to Kasily where we took up our nights lodging. The Country round about
Casily is altogether barren and dry, except here and there some good pasturage,
so that the manner of Living with the Inhabitants is like that of the Tartars,
moving to and again over the face of the Country with their Wives, Children,
Utensils, Cattle, and what else they have, and when they set down pitch their
Tents all in Rows, which they call Ostak. During our travailing through this
Country we could get little else but Milk to refresh our selves: however my
Patron out of his Bounty would not suffer me to want for any thing, but
imparted to me what he had as well Victuals to eat, as Wine to drink, which
served me for a good Breast Plate against the Cold.

Having staid one night at Kasily, we set forward and about 8 a clock the next
evening came to a fair Village called Tzawaar, or Tzawat, as some call it,
which is so much as to say, a Thorow-fare; because that here is the Passage
which brings over the grand River Araxes, and here every one is to show his
Pasport, out of fear that some Turks should slip over with the Caravan, of whom
the Persian is always jealous, and are constrained to take sharp notice of
every particular Person. At this place is a long Bridge made of Keels, and
thwarted with massy Planks, that are fastened together with great Bolt and
Chains, which for better security is guarded with a good number of Soldiery.
When we were transported over the said River, we took our Nights-rest in the
Open-fields.

A Description of the River Araxes.
The River Araxes takes its head about the high Mountains between Schirwan and
Mokan behind Mount Ararat, running North-east till it finds the River Kur, or
Cyrus, where it disgorgeth it self, about 39 degr. 54 min. Northerly latitude,
where these two Rivers are incorporated. Kur, as it is vulgarly called, rises
in the Mountains of Georgia or Gurgistan. Araxes is reckoned to be one of the
swiftest Rivers in all Asia, very deep and good Water. Araxes also receives
several other noble Rivers, to wit, Carasu, Senki, and Kerni Arpa; About the
Mouth of Carasu it is at the deepest, but about a league from Ordabath it makes
a horrisonant roaring and a most hideous murmur, where it receives the floods
of the famous Mochan, which River, as well as the Araxes, abounds with various
kinds of Fish. The Banks which in most Places mount very high, are all grown
ore with the shrub Gli^yrrhiza, a kind of Liquirice, as also Liquirice of the
common kind, but far thicker than either the Spanish, German, NOV. 1671.
or that which is brought from Moscovia, for I have seen some of it that was
thicker than my Arm.

On the 3 of November we travailed 5 leagues over the Heath of Mochan, and saw
by the way many Hurdles and Boors Cottages, but durst not call at any to
provide our selves with Refreshments, being sensible of the perils, for hither
are all those sent to Exile whom the Scach thinks good to banish, and hither
resort all the Mutineers; so that these like the Banditti in the Alps, render
the way very unsafe and incommodous to travel, sometimes surprising and
assailing the Caravans, when they find themselves of Force enough, or the
Caravan too weak to withstand'em.

On the 4th. dito, we set forward, Multitudes of Tortoises about Baltharu.
and in the way found the River Baltharu, which for Greatness gives place to
all the before named; but, for the Multitudes of Tortoises that are taken here
about, no less famous nor inferior to any other in all the surface of the
Country. All along the Banks we saw holes and caves which those Animals had
made in the Sand, the shore appearing like a Coney-borrough. These Caves have
their mouth or entrance always to the Southward, where they lay their Eggs. On
the Country through which this River softly glides we saw several Cottages or
Tents, as we did the day before, but found the Inhabitants harmless and very
poor, yet merry and jocund, the Children were stark naked, and the Men and
Woman had hardly clothes enough to cover their middle. They received us in very
friendly manner according to their ability, bringing us Milk for our selves, and
Provender for the Camels and Horses, which they sold at a very mean and
inconsiderable Price, considering under what necessity we were then. This day
we travailed 6 [ Dutch] Leagues.

On the 5 we travailed about as far as we did the day before, but were fain to
take up our Lodging under the great Canopy of Heaven, setting down with the
whole Caravan, near some Water-pitts, where we found good pasturage for the
Beasts, considering the season of the year.

The next day we found an end of the Heath Mokan, and had High-land to travail
over, as the Mountains of Bethzyrvan, or Bethzyrum. This day we crossed a small
River (if I well remember) 12 times, having a crooked or serpentine Course,
which the Merchants of Scamachy for their Convenience, had promised a
considerable Sum of Money to some Ingenieurs to to make straight, yet by reason
of many intervening Hills, and those mostly of a hard rock could not be
effected. At night we got the Village Schechmurat, where my Patron sent me out
to fetch some Spring Water: but being about half an [ English] mile without the
Town was assailed by 3 Robbers, who suddenly came running out upon me, having
their Eyes fixed my Armor; so that in all probability, that which I had for my
Defense would have been my Death, if some belonging to the Caravan and sent upon
the same Errand, had not com in time to assist me; for I was almost out of
breath with defending my self, having my Back against the Ruins of an old Wall,
which seemed to be the Relicts of some Watchtower. One of the 3 I had wounded
very sore on the Arm, but the other two breaking in proved too strong for me:
yet when they say the rest com in and close up with them, thought it better to
make use of their Heels than their Hands.

On the 7th. we travailed over very hilly and montanous Ground, encamping that
night in a Valley, which was wast, and destitute of Inhabitants.

On the 8th. we came to a very fair and commodious Caerawansera, built at the
Charges of the Indian Traders, for the convenience of their Caraevans: Here we
intended to remain over night, but beginning to take our Rest, were alarmed
upon a sudden assault of a great Troop of Robbers, who fell upon the Caravan on
every side, and plundered all they came at, that was of any value and portable;
and although we had timely notice to defend our selves, yet they had got a
considerable Booty, and made their escape without the loss of any Person or the
lest damage. We therefore fearing that the encouragement and success they had
met with might embolden them to make up a stronger Troop, and consequently our
tarrying there might be very unsafe, it was unanimously concluded that we
should break up, and being fair Weather, pursue our Journey by travailing the
night, as we did, and about 12 a clock came to Tzanle, which is a beautiful
Town, but not fortified, where it was thought fit that we should stay till the
next morning: Tzanle is a Paradise in regard of it is pleasant Situation; round
about which is nothing to be seen, but Orchards, Gardens and Houses of
Recreation. Here we supplied our selves with all necessarys and refreshments,
which we had for a very mean price.

On the 9th we found very bad travailing way and with great Difficulty, went
over the Mountains of Trizetlu, out of which Mountains arises the River
Carasu, and after it has encompassed many Mountains glides with a soft and
gentle stream through the Valleys, till it finds the great Araxes, into which it
disgorgeth it is self with an incredible noise. Near the Village Samian is a
very famous Bridge, A famous stone Bridge.
all of Stone, computed to be 450 Foot long, and withal very broad. This
Bridge we passed over, and toward night came to Trabedar a Village seated in a
pleasant Landship, where we took up our Nights-lodging, but not our
Nights-rest, for we were horribly tormented with Fleas and Lice, that being (as
in Scotland) the Countrey-Plague, Lice and Fleas.
which I presume comes from the Heat of the Cows-dung, that the Inhabitants dry
and stow up in their Houses, to use for Fuel.

The next day we broke up, and went through the Town Kelchera, which is about half
an hours walking from Ardebil, where is the noble Mausoleum, or Sepulcher of
Zide Tzaybrail, the Father of Scech Sephy. This Tzaybrail was in his life time
a man of a mean and slender Fortune, as well in Substance as Parts, but
Sedredin his Grandchild willing to make him coequal with his Father in the
Calender, caused all his Bones to be gathered together and brought to this
Shrine, which was erected to his perpetual Memory. The same Sedredin, also
built that most sumptuous Meschaich, or Sepulcher within Ardebil, for Scech
Sephy his Father. Certainly those Bones of his Grandfather must have bin very
emphatical and notedly eminent above all the Boors and Pesants Bones that had
lay there a hundred years, that could now, almost reduced to Dust, be
distinguished from the rest: otherwise, thrice happy were his Neighbors who
had kept him company so long a time, for it was hard if some Joint or other was
not canonized with the Anatomy of this Holy Tzerbail. However the Persians very
devoutly pay their Devotions at this sacred Tomb, without much respect to the
Matter. But in what manner those Bones appear I could not see, although I was
shorn after the Persian fashion, and in my conversation with Hadsi Byram my
quondam Master, used more like a Companion than a Servant, much less as a
Slave, and was in general looked upon as an upright Musulman. After we had
rested a little at Kelcheran, we marched forward, and about 2 in the Afternoon
came to Ardebil, Arrival at Ardebil.
where my Master Hadsi Byram took up his Lodging in a Street called Kumbalum,
being a very fair and well-provided Inn.

Ardebil, called also Ardevil, lies in 38 degr, and 50 min. in the Country of
Adrilegizan, being seated in a round Plain, or Valley, environed on each side
with very high Mountains, the greatest where of is called Zebelahu, and much
talked of in Persia for its height. Those Mountains, as they told me, which ly
to the Westward, are all the Summer covered with Snow; but on the other side,
those that lie toward the Country of Kielan, the Air is more moderate and not
altogether so cold. And by reason that these cold seasons do not come gradually
a^ when the Winter Solstice approaches, but casually, and all on a sudden so
that there is no ordinal Vicissitude, nor can be any fast Calculation made, it
renders the Place very unhealthy, especially to Strangers, who are not used to
such sudden Changes. However, I would not be so far misconstr'd, as to signify
that there is no sensible difference between the Summer and Winter, for the
Course of the Sun makes a noted alteration, and yet the Summer Colds seemingly
more penetrating than those in the Winter, for Now the Body is shut, and The^
it is open, at what time they hold it more dangerous, but in the Approachment
of the Winter more tolerable and better to be endured My Patron told me that
some years before he took this Journey about April, taking with him 4 Slaves,
whereof 3 were Strangers and unnacustomed to the aforesaid Changes, died in
this Place, but the other which had been brought up there abouts, ailed nothing
at all.

Strange Whirl-winds.
But above all this are the Whirl-winds which come every day about noon very
remarkable, being as constant as the Suns coming to South* or as the Tides
that are regulated according to the Course of the Moon This said Wind always
rises at 12 a clock, and continues somewhat more than an hour, during which time
it is not safe to hold either Eyes or Mouth open, by reason of the Sand, which
is hurried about with that Violence and Thickness that the Air is darkened; that
very much annoy the Inhabitants, who are not only fain to keep within Doors all
the while it continues, but must take care to cover all that may be damnify'd,
and make every thing fast, which is light or apt to be carried away, and
besides that 3 or four times a year bea^ away all the sand and dust which lies
about the Houses. By reason of this Cold, no Oranges, Lemmons, nor the Useful
Vine will take or like there, only Apples and Pears they have, which were but
just ripe when we were there, and as they say have no Blossoms till May or
June: but without the Mountains it is very warm; and affoards good Plenty of
the abovesaid Fruits. Good Wheat and Bread.
The arable Ground here is very fertile, except where it is suffocated with the
Sand that the Whirl-winds bring about, and Wheat is both good and cheap, for
having order from my Patron to buy some Bread, I had 12 Loavs, weighing each 4
po^ds, for the Value of an [ English] Shilling, and that very white and good
Bread. A great Toll imposed upon Sheep.
In this part of the Country is also very good Pasturage, which is no small
Profit to the Schach, or King, who has imposed a Toll of Four pence half penny
for every Sheep, great and small, that passes the Bridge which by reason of the
vast Flocks and great Inclination of the People to bring up Cattle brings up
yearly an incredible sum of Money. At that time when I was there, were
Commissioners appointed by the King himself, although 2 years before it was farmed
out, and the King coming to understand what large Profits superabounded to the
Farmers, thought good to bring that Remnant into his own Coffers, as a
Corolary. One of those said Commissioners, being an old Acquaintance of my
Patron, told him that when they turned over the Accounts they had found Toll
taken for above 700000 Sheep, between March and September, which amounts to
more then 26000 lb. Sterling. which is considerable for the bare passage only; but
far greater is the Toll which is imposed on every Sheep that is sold. Within
the Jurisdiction of Ardebil lie 57 Villages and Hamlets, and those so close
together, that the Town is easily supplied with plenty of Lactuaries, or what
else the Land affoards.

Ardebil is a very great Town, but not close built, for every eminent House has
a Garden or Orchard behind it. At this day it lies without Walls, Trenches and
other Muniments. It is watered with one small Rivulet, which they call
Baluchlu, taking its first spring from the Mountains of Scamaschu, about 6
miles to the Southward of Ardebil. Before the Town it divides its self into two
Channels, the one running into the Town, and so forward till it finds the
Carasu. This River is sometimes very small, especially in the Summer, but about
March and April when it ordinarily rains very hard, with the Snow and
concurrency of the Water that settles off from the Mountains, swells to an^
incredible bigness. and overruns the Banks, so that against this time they
usually make a Catarract, or Dam, which diverts it from the Town, and upon
negligence, or want of due Repair of the same, the Town is in danger of being
lost, as in the time of Schach Abas the great^ the Dam being not sufficient,
the Waters came with that suddenness from the Mountains, that it made an
irruption and washed away a great part of the Town, the Houses being mostly
built of Clay and a sort o^ Brick. In this unexpected Innundation they record
many Men and Cattle to have been carried away with the violence of the Floods.
I^ Ardebil are 5 Capital Streets, to wit, Derwansche, Tabar, Niardouve^
Kumbolan and Keserkuste: all these were very stately and broad, being planted
with rows of Ash, Teil-or Linden-Trees which is very pleasan^ and cool in hot
weather. Besides these 5 great Streets, are also many fai^ ones, but narrower
and not beplanted with Trees, whereof the chie^ are, Bander chan, Kamankar,
Degme Daglir, and Ursumi Mahele, famous (or to say more properly, infamous) for
Whores, who have here their Residence, and ply all over the Town, and in the
Carawanseras, and are reckoned as a Corporation or Gild. These are all
Poetesses by Occupation, some Composing Elogies and Hymns in the Praise of A^
and Hosseyn, others do make Encomiums, setting out the Noble Deeds of the
Scach, and others dance naked before the Chan. etc. These of all that ever I
have seen in my Life are the most impudent, and sensual, for they perceiving me
to be a Stranger, pestered me as I wen^ along the Streets, and gave me work
enough to keep their Hands ou^ of my Codpiece. Moreover so sensual and beastly
have I observed then to be by their Conversation with young men, who are not
shie, or it the lest ashamed although at noon day in the middle of the Street,
that should not willingly use that immodesty to relate all I have seen. Ther^
are also several Squares and Plains with Piazzas and Galleries round about, in
and under which are very rich shops.

The Place of Refuge.
They have also a Place of Refuge whither Malefactors betake themselves, at the
Entrance whereof is an Oratory or Chapel, in which lie interred the Body of a
reputed Saint. But the Delinquent fearing himself unsafe can easily gain the
great Sanctuary of Scech Sephys Mescaich or Sepulcher whence the King himself
should want the Heart to fetch him out by force. Coming from this Maydan or
Sanctuary, you com to the Basar, or great Market-plain. The Market and Maydan.
On this Plain is reared a very magnificent and sumptuous Building, four
square, in which, as in our Exchanges, are sold all manner of costly Wares and
rich Merchandises, as Cloth of Gold and Silver, Jewels, Precious Stones,
Tapestry, Silks, etc. This Place they call the Kaysery. Behind this you find
three Streets, almost arched over, in which there are many Shops stored with
Wares of less value. The Carawanseras, or Inns, of Ardebil are very numerous,
and those frequented each with a distinct sort of People, as Turks, Tartarians
and Indians, who sojourn to and again, upon the account of Merchandise. In
Ardebil are many fair Metzids, or Temples, whereof one they call Adine
surpasses all the rest, being founded upon the Top of a Hill in the middle of
the Town, and besides that graced with a pompous Tower, which outbraves all the
rest in the City, rearing its Top aloft to an exceeding great Height. This
Temple is thought worthy only to be visited on Fridays, which according to the
Institution of Mahomet is their Sabbath; and from hence it has it is name.
Before this Temple is a Fountain brought by an Aqueduct from a Place about 5 [
English] miles without the City, at the Charges of Muhamed Risa the Rochtaf, or
Chancellor of Persia. The design thereof is that every one willing to visit the
Holy Sepulcher must first wash himself there.

CHAP. XXVIII. Hadzi Byram goes to perform his Religious Duties at the
Sepulcher of Zeyde Tzebrail. The Author begs of his Lord, that he may be
Spectator of the Ceremonies, which at last after many entreaties is granted. A
Description of that noble Mausoleum. Famous Baths in Ardebil. The Sulphurous
Baths whither the Author accompanies his Patron. The manner of using those
Baths. The stupendous and sumptuous Sepulcher of Scach Sephy described. The
great Zeal and Devotion of Hadzi Byram. The Oratory, or House of Prayer, where
(as they say) Schach Sephy prayed and fasted for 40 Days together without
Intermission, using only a Cup of Water every day. Doors covered with Plates of
Gold by Schach Abas. The Library and Repository of the Vtensils for the Kings
Table. The Garden or Yard where the Persian Kings lie interred. The names of
the 12 Kings that lie there buried. The Revenues belonging to this Mesar, or
sepulcher. Some fast Revenues. Ardebil a famous Mart.
UPon the 13 my Patron Hadzi Byram, who was a very zealous devout Mohammedan,
went to perform his Devotion at the H. Sepulcher of Zide Tzaybrail, in
Kelcheran, having first well provided himself with Fasting and the Bath. I
prayed him also that he would please to take me with him, but he positivly
refused, save of this Answer he gave me, John, if you will indeed become a
Musulman I am freer you should go, than stay behind, but it is not lawful to
bring a Christian thither to pollute that most Holy spot of Ground. O Sir,
replied I, why cannot I wash my self as clean as a Musulman? and why should it
be thought that I pollute the Place, since I leav nothing at all behind me but
what I find there? All this would not prevail with him, but rather seemed to
incite him to anger, so that being unwilling to purchase his displesure to
pamper my self with such an unprofitable curiosity, I thought fit for that time
to desist. But the next morning finding him in a pleasant humor I renewed my
request and he assented, tho conditionally, as, First, to keep silence all the
time, since I was not perfect in the Dialect, and so might com to be
discovered; Secondly, not to stare any Person fully in the Face; and Thirdly,
to act for Changeling in case any Body came to question me, Fools and Madmen
being with them reputed Holies, for they are of Opinion that all men have an
equal understanding, and that those, who are either Mad or Foolish employ the
rest of their Senses in a Divine and Celestial Contemplation, or Converse with
Angels.

A Description of the Sepulcher of Zide Tzaybril.
The Grave or Tomb stood in the midst of a spacious Court, and built round;
above all was a round Tower, which was covered with Blew and Green Stone
glazed, which made a most gorgeous show. It was raized high, so that we must
ascend 10 steps before we enter. Being com to the Threshold my Patron made
there certain Prayers, that don he gave the Sign that he would be in, upon
which one of the Hafisans, or Waiters came out, who demanded of him his Sable
and Boots, and of me my Truncheon, which he shut up in a little Chamber: my
Patron then having given him a piece of money in the Hand, and so we both went
in barefoot. The Floor was all laid with Tapestry, the Roof and Walls were
painted Blew, illustrated here and there with Flowers of Gold, which made it
look with a great splendour; the Glass in the Windows was of diverse colors like
as in old Christian Churches, and I presume don by the same Art, which some will
needs say is lost. On the sides were several little Chambers and Appartments,
which always stand open. Here sit several Doctors, who are to instruct Youth
in the Alchoran, as also to read and to sing, that so they may be fit to serve
in that holy Function, and administer at the sacred Tomb. Here and there were
several Chairs whereon lay some pieces of the Alchoran. In the Middle of all
stood the said Tomb, being about a Man's height raised above ground, 6 Foot
long, and proportionably broad. It was of pure Gold and laid in with Flowers
and Foliage of Silver, which was very artificially don. Above the Tomb under a
Canopy of Blew Silk hung 4 Lamps, 2 of Gold, and 2 of Silver, which every night
are lighted by certain Attendants which they call Tzirachtschikan. When my
Patron approached to the Grave the Waiters took off the Covering, which was of
green Velvet, upon which after he had mumpled over certain Prayers bowed
himself, pushed with his head against the Tomb, kissed it, and so stepping
backwards, was met at the door by one of the Hafisans who gave him the
Benediction, and so dismissed him. When he was com to the Carawansera,
concluded this Devotion with a sumptuous and an Epicurean Banquet, with
Drinking, Dancing and Whoring, so that it may easily be perceived that the
extreme and furthest Hope they have, who are the greatest Zelots in Turcism is
only for libidinous Enjoyments, and to obtain their fill of voluptuous Plesures
and sensual Delights in the World to com, as by an implicit Faith they are
induced to believe.

In Ardebil are many excellent Hot-baths, which bring in no small profit to the
Owners; my Master also made frequent use of the same, as well out of a
superstitious Zeal, as for conservation of Health. But about 3 [ Dutch] miles
without Ardebil are certain Hot wells, proceeding from a sulphurous quality of
the Earth; These are exceeding hot, and may not be touched; so that round about
are several Baths and Fountains which are tempered with the hot water being
conveyed thither in Pipes and Conduits. These Baths so tempered are reputed
very good against the Itch, Biles, and other external Grievances and Sores, and
as some have found useful against internal Distempers, as was advised my Patron
by a Doctor at Scamachy to make use of it for a weakness in his joints.

On the 16 my Master set out to go to these Baths and asked me to go with him,
bidding me take a Horse, so that I was as well mounted as he himself: he took
with him 3 Slaves with an Ass to carry clean Linen, Meat, and Wine, with other
Refreshments. A little before we came at those Wells, we smelled a strong smell
of Brimstone, and heard the Water bubble up and boil. We saw also smoke and
vapors that rose in many places from the Water, which made me very faint. The
chiefest of those Wells is called Grandausch, but this my Master thought not
fit for him to use, but went to another called Serdebe, which nevertheless is
reputed the best Water, and was therefore roofed over with a stately Arch, at
the Charges of the Grand Chancellor Tzulpharachan. Among the Slaves that my
Patron had was an old Greek, for whom he had a great kindness, and used him
more like a Brother than a Servant. So soon as he was uncloathed this Greek
rubbed his Body with a Towel, till he was all over red, then he stepped into
the Bath, where for some time he sat to the neck in Water, and then coming out
dried himself, took a draught of very strong Wine, and away again into the
Bath, which having done 2 or 3 times together he clothed himself and rode away
to a Carawansera, where the Day before he had bespoke a warm Bed, in which he
lay him down and stayed over night. The next day betimes in the Morning we rode
back to Ardebil, where he kept his Bed for some days following.

Description of the famous sepulcher of Scach Sephy at Ardebil.
On the 20th. I went with my Patron to see the most noble Sepulcher of Schach
Sephy. My said Patron also prepared himself for this, as he did to visit the
other at Kelcheran, by Fasting and Prayer. This famous Mausoleum erected to the
memory of Scach Sephy, and now the Burying Place of other Persian Kings lies
near the Maydan. Before this pompous Sepulcher stands a fair Gate of rich
Marble, in which is shown an Admirable Skill in Architecture. Within this Port
or Gate hang two Massy Silver Chains athwart each other like Festons: those
they say were bestowed on this Place by the Chan of Meggura, for a Monument of
his Zeal. Having entered this Gate we came into a fair and spacious Court all
paved with square Stones and polished Porphyr; round about on each side were
Arches, as Piazzas, under which were shops of all sorts of Haberdashery Wares
and Toys. After this we went through another Gate far more beautiful than the
former, and within this was a fair Garden, and indeed one of the fairest I had
hitherto seen; It was planted with all manner of Flowers and Herbs that might
delight the Eye and Nose, and all kinds of delicious Fruits to serve the Palate.
Every Man has his freedom to walk and recreate himself, but upon a very strict
penalty not to pluck either Flower or Fruit. I was told how that 5 years before
my being there, a drunken Persian had hewn down a great bough with his
Scymiter, but being taken was immediately beheaded with the same Weapon. In this
Gate hung also another great Silver Chain, which was given by the Chan of
Kentzay. Here they demanded our Weapons, which being delivered, my Patron went
forward to another Gate, which entering he fell down and kissed the Threshold,
withal charging me not to touch it with my Feet, lest I should pollute that
which many thought worthy a long Pilgrimage to com and kiss: he told me also
that it was a favor greater than ordinary, that I being a blind ignorant
Christian and an Infidel should be admitted to pry into so glorious a
Sanctuary. I was heartily content to obey his Will, rather than to deny my
Curiosity, and followed him close at the Heels, lest coming into some Labrynth I
should loose my Life by the Loss of my Master. The next Place we came into was
a stately Gallery, or rather an Antichamber, arched cross wise, and neatly
plaistered. On the right hand as I went in was a great Silver Cock which ran
with Water that was conveyed thither by leaden Pipes from a fair Fountain about
4 [ English] miles without Town. Right over against this is another Apartment
paved with green and blew glazed stones: and on the Floor was spread a very
rich Carpet: in the middle stood two huge Silver Candlesticks about 8 or 9 Foot
high; round about were Seats as in our Chores, wherein sat several Priests all
in white Stoles, who sung all the time, keeping good Harmony, and at the End of
every Versicle bowed all alike, one to another. This Place is called
Tzichillachane, the Chapel or Oratory of the King; so called by reason of the
40 days, which the Persians affirm that Scach Sephy spent here at one time, in
Fasting and Prayer, not using any thing all that time, save only a Cup of Water
once a day. Leaving this place we went into another Gate where a Silver Chain
hung, that was presented by Aly Chan. The Parlour, or Hall into which we now
came was all paved and laid in with a splecked Stone; The Building its self was
round, like a Theater; the Doors were laid over with Silver Plates and had two
great Silver Rings like Wreaths* or Torses. At the Entrance lay a costly and
large Carpet, where we were to pull off our Boots, without which, none is
admitted to go in, no not the King himself, who sometimes to be a Praecedent and
Example of Zeal, pulls off his Boots at the first Gate, but that, (...) seems,
is held to be a Work of Supererogation. From hence we wen^ to another
Magnificent Hall, through a Gallery, the Pavement where of was covered with rich
Tapestry. The Doors of this said Hall we^ covered with Plates of Gold, which
was don at the Charges of the Schach Abas, who had made a vow to do it, in case
he returned hom^ with Triumph, when he went on an Expedition against the
Vsbequ^ in Chorasan, as he did, and vanquished the Rebels. This Hall is n^ so
spacious as beautiful by far, the Roof being no more than 48 Foo^ long, and 30
broad. In the middle hung several Gold and Silver Lamp^ and on each side sat
12 Priests, each having a low Stool before him on which lay so many Parchment
Books, containing several Legend of the Alchoran, which they read and sung by
Turns. Leavin^ this Place we went into another which was separated and
environe^ with Silver Rails, and had 3 Ascents or Steps to go up of solid
Silve^ This is the last and chief Oratory, or House of Prayer, where o^ Patron
prayed with very great Zeal. From hence we ascended into another Place, which
was one Step higher, and separated with mas^ Grate-work all of pure Gold and
wreathed, behind this was t^ Tomb of Schach Sephy, which was of fair Marble,
being about 3 For high, 9 Foot long and 4 broad. It was covered with a Carpet
(...) Crimson Velvet, richly embroidered and laid in with precio^ Stones. Above
hung several Lamps, and on each side 2 huge Candl^ sticks, all of solid Gold:
these are lighted every Evening and bu^ all the Night long. The Door of this
Place is opened for no Secul^ or Temporal Person or Personage, nor for the King
himself. Ne^ this Tomb we saw also the Tombs of Schach Ismael, of Sephys, an^
of some Queens, all which were only supplied with Curtains, an^ void of curious
Work and Ornament. Leaving the Sepulcher w^ went out at a door on the Right
Hand, that led into the Libra^ which was very spacious, yet without any Pillar.
Here are kept all the Ancient Records of Persia, with abundance of Manuscripts
in the Chaldean, Persian, Arabic and Syrian Tongues, the Books were piled up
one above another and most of them adorned with Gold and Silver; whence I
concluded that they were more for show, than for daily use and recourse. In
this said Library were several less Appartments, where were many Porceline
Dishes, Cups and other Utensils, for the Kitchen and Table, which are used when
the King or any other great Personage comes to Eat there, whereas they say it
is not consistent with the Humility they profess, to be served in Gold or
Silver: the more because that the great Schach Sephy himself did eat altogether
out of Wooden Dishes. From hence we went out and came into the Kitchen, the
Doors whereof were covered with Silver Leaves by the aforesaid Schach Abas, and
the Room within very neat and handsome. The Cooks were all the time very still
and quiet, as if it were some Religious Duty they were about, and each one
according to his Office had a place allotted him, to wit, those that roasted
and those that boiled, baked, fried, stewed, etc. each by themselves. The
Cauldrons were set fast in the Walls, and the Water they used was brought some
Miles by an Aqueduct, and let in by Silver Cocks. In this Kitchen is provided
Victuals for more than a Thousand People, one day with another, to wit,
Priests, Pilgrims, and other Poor People which have here their Maintenance.
They eat three times a day, at 6 in the Morning, at 10 before, and 3 in the
afternoon. The two first Meals were given by Schach Sephy, and the last at the
Charges of the present King. Before the Meals do begin, they beat 2
Kettle-drums, which they say their great Prophet Mahomet made use of when he
was in the Camp, and were brought from Medina by Schach Sedredin. They have not
much variety in their Diet, and use mostly Rice and Mutton, which is
distributed very liberally to all the Appendents, who seldom com short but leav
of their Commons.

Coming out of this famous Kitchen, we went into a large Court where were
interred 12 Persian Kings, to wit, 1 Schach Sephy, the Son of Tzaybrail. 2 --
Sedredin the Son of Sephy. 3 -- Tzinid the Son of Sedredin. 4 Sultan Aider the
Son of Tzinid. Whose Skin the Turks dre^ over his Head, whilst alive. 5 Schach
Ayder, the Second. 6 -- Ismael, the Son of Aider. 7 -- Tamas, the Son of
Ismael. 8 -- Ismael the Second, Son of Tamas. 9 -- Muhamed Choddabende, Brother
of Ismael. 10 -- Ismael Myrsa, Sons of Choddabende. 11 -- Hemse Myrsa, Sons of
Choddabende. 12 -- Abas. Sons of Choddabende.
This noble Mausoleum or Place of Sepulture was erected by a ver^ famous
Architect of Medina, with whom Schach Sedredin covenate^ to build it. The
Persians say that he had the Model out of Heaven Above the Door stand these
words in their manner of Rhymin^ which jingles better than in English:
Whosoever is of a pure Heart (...) him enter in and pray to GOD, so shall his
Sins undoubtedly be pardoned. The fir^ Part which the said Sedredin had built
was very magnificent a^ stately, but that which was added to it by Tzinid
appears far mo^ splendid, both in regard of the curious Architecture, in which
A^ seems to sport, and in the Convenience, and Prospect from afar.

Revenues of the Sepulcher.
The Revenues of this Sepulcher are very great, what with t^ large Gifts which
were given by the famous Sedredin at the Inaug^ration thereof, and what by the
Ample Donations that have be^ liberally bestowed by other Kings and Princes
from time to time sin^ it is first Foundation, not only of the Persians
themselves, but al^ of Indians, Tartars and others that are of the Sect of Aly:
which commonly don upon Sickness, Expedition of War, Dangero^ Journeys, and the
like, upon which they make Vows to beauti^ this Holy Structure with some signal
Ornament, or put somthi^ into the Tresury. There are also other Revenues
accrewing to the Place, bequeathed by Testament, as if it were Remitted by
Bills (...) Exchange to the Souls of the Departed, for they reckon, that su^
Gifts will redound to the welfar of their Souls. Nor do such Don^tions solely
consist in Money, but in Cattle, Utensils, Movables an^ Merchandise. The
Cattle so bestowed is committed to Herdsm^ for that end employed, and improved,
except such as is fit for Slaug^ter, other Things are sold and the Money thrown
into the Tresu^ The Pilgrims that Offer any thing here, be it more or less have
a Maniple of Consecrated Annise given them, together with a Certificat, that
they have visited and offered at this Holy Place. This Ticket or Schedule they
call Syaretname, which is kept and shown by the Party, upon Occasion, who is
thereby capable to serve the King in certain Offices suitable to the Value of
what he offered: although the Commissioners sometimes willing to favor any
indigent Person, have the Opportunity to raise their Fortunes by granting them
such a Billet, or setting a greater Value upon upon the Offering; so that there
is Cheating as well in those Sacred Functions, as in Temporal Negotiations.

The fast Revenues of this Meschair that are settled in the Town of Ardevil, is
the Rent of 200 Dwelling Houses, 9 Hamans, The fast Revenues of the Sepulcher.
or Hot-baths, 8 Carawanseras, the Maydan, with all the Buildings and Shops
round about; as also the Kaysery, or Exchange, 100 Shops in the Basar. The Toll
and Impositions of all Merchandises whatever. Of the 57 Villages that are
within the Jurisdiction of Ardebil. 33 accrue to this Sanctuary, and 5 in the
Province of Serab. In the City Tabris it has 100 Dwelling-Houses, and the like
number of the most eminent Shops in all the Town, and 2 Villages within the
Jurisdiction of the same. In Caswin are several Carawanseras and Baths, as also
in Kilan, Astrarath, and Mokan, besides many other Revenues that are settled
upon it in diverse Provinces, which could I have given an account of, would fall
too taedious, and tire the Patience of my Reader; so that it is probable that
this incredible Treasure, which from time to time is accumulated, upon this
(reputed) Sanctuary must needs exceed the Royal Tresury it self, and has
always more ready Money gathered so from a superstitious Zeal, than the King
is able to levy and parallel with all the Impositions within his Realm and
Dominions.

Besides this famous and most pompous Royal Sepulcher; Ardebil flourishes
mainly in Traffic and Merchandise, for hither throng all the Traders of Gistan,
Georgia, Kurdistan and other Countries; Besides the Profit that the Citizens do
receive from the continual concourse of strangers and Pilgrims from Places both
near and remote. It is also a great Thorow-fare from the Northern Regions to
^spaban and receivs a considerable Benefit of Caravans and Passengers, who
commonly stay here some time. Twice a week is their Market, at what time
abundance of Pesants com to Town; using Oxen and Kine instead of Sumpter-horses
to carry their Goods. Lastly this City is very famous in regard of its
Antiquity, being in times past the Royal Seat of Persia, as it was before the
Wars of Alexander of Macedonia, who had here his Residence, as they averr and
prove by many undeniable Tokens, besides the Language of their Records, which
if we may take upon Credit [as why not] do sufficiently testify it.

CHAP. XXIX. The Author taken for a Persian, which gave him occasion to see all
that was worthy of remark. The Caravan leaves Ardebil, and goes over the famous
Mountain Taurus. The Head of the River Kisiloseyn. Bad and uneasy Traveling by
reason of steep Rocks. Peril of Robbers. Arrival at Sultanie. Keydar Pey-Amber,
a wonderful high Mountain. Sultanie it is Situation and by whom built. Emarath,
the Noble Palace of King Choddahende. The Temple of Schach Ismael. The present
decaying State of ^ultany. The Author shorn and habituated after the Persian
Manner. Pleasant Dales and Valleys. Arrival at Cas^in. The Situation of that
Place. The Court of Schach Tamas. The Place of Convention or Exchange of
Whores. The Common Place of Sepulture and Metzid of Scach Beslade, the Son of
Hosseyn, by which the Persians swear. The Offering of a Camel.
FOurteen Days we staid in Ardebil, during which time I had leisure to see what
was worthy of Remark, and Opportunity besides, being apparreled like a Persian
so that none distrusted me to be a Musulman, but allowed me access over all.
When these 14 days were expired, the Caravan made preparation to break up, and
pursue the Journey for Ispahan, for which end many fresh Camels and Horses were
taken in. When the Caravan was ready, we observed that the Company was
considerably increased with new Passengers and Merchants.

On the 25 by sound of Trumpet all was warned to join themselves with the
Caravan, that intended for ^spahan; and accordingly left Ardebil and came to
Busun which lies about 14 Miles from Ardebil, where we staid that night.

The day following we broke up, and had that day a very rocky and uneasy Way,
insomuch that most, or all, allighted from their Horses and Camels and went a
foot. By the way we met several Troops of Robbers, who probably had understood
what a Prey and Purchase we had, yet finding the Caravan so very numerous durst
not assail us. At night we came to Sengoa a beautiful Village, where we had
very good Wine, and made our selves merry, but not to excess, for that is in
general odious to the Persians. Here I saw the best Beauties and most comely
Faces that I have seen in all Persia: their Women seem to have a greater
Liberty than in most places, where they do not only go covered abroad, but are
also denied the converse with Men; for here they go bare with their Face, and
are very familiar with those of the Masculine Gender, and if I be not mistaken
were too familiar with some, who within a few days after began to scratch
their Heads, and this is the first time I knew that the Persian Women
understood French. In sum, our Company enjoyed themselves here so contentedly
and well, that some of them thought the Sun had mistaken himself and was risen an
hour too soon.

The day following leaving Sengoa, we had high and rocky way, but toward the
Evening came into a most sweet and pleasant Dale or Plain, through which a
River glided very swiftly. This Valley was very pleasant, and notwithstanding
the season, appeared as if it were in May. This River is called Kis^loseyn,
having a very fair Stone Bridge over it, over which we passed and pitched on
the South side, in the open Field, for there were no Houses to be seen.

On the 28th. we broke up and went over the famous Taurus, being a very rough
and dangerous way, insomuch that all the Company were fain to allight and lead
their Camels and Horses, till we came into a Valley where we took our Rest for
an Hour, or two. This Valley is very deep and a Nest of Robbers and Vagabonds,
who find many lurking Places to hide themselves in, out of which they assail and
surprise Travailers, if they think themselves strong enough: but we, as was said
before, being increased to a considerable Number knew our selves sufficiently
out of peril. Out of this Valley arises the River Kisiloseyn, which running
very swiftly and beating through the Rocks makes a very hideous Murmur, so that
one cannot hear another speak: thus receiving as it were enlargement runs
through the Champain Country of K^lan, and thence is hurried with an admirable
celerity into the Caspian Lake, into which it empties it self. On the Banks of
this River is a Village bearing the same name, where is a fair Stone Bridge of
9 Arches, or Bows. All along the Way side grow great plenty of Almond, Cypress
and other Trees, which served us all the way in stead of Parasols: but when we
were come over the River found the Way very bad, being forced to clamber over
Rocks, the Path being so narrow that only one Camel at once could go on it. On
each side were many great Clefts and deep Caves, which with the rattling of the
Horses feet made a dreadful and horrid Echo; and being come to a place which
was the fullest of those Caverns, all the Company gave a Shout, which with an
Echo resounded from one Place to another, that it seemed as if there had been
10 or 12 Troops of Men in so many several Places calling to one another. On
this way it happened that a Camel broke the Leathers wherewith his Pack was
fastened to the Crutchet or Saddle, being just at the Brink of a wide and deep
Pit, where no Bottom could be seen. It cost the Slaves who attended him much
labor to save him, and were in struggling once in great hazard themselves of
tumbling down, Camel and all, yet at last, with loss of the Pack which in spite
of all they could do fell down, they got clear. The Pack was very rich, and the
loss thereof so concerning to the Merchant, that if others had not hindered him
he had thrown the Slaves after it, for their Negligence. This ill way much
detarded us on this Days Journey, for we were more than 5 Hours in travailing
one Mile. Being got over this bad way we found a Village where it was designed
that we should take our nights rest; The name of the Town was Keyntze, being
very poor and not in a Condition to supply us with such Necessaries as we
desired for our Money.

On the 29 we broke up, and had that day very good way, coming at night to the
village Hortzimur, where we were very ill at ease being cold Weather and the
Place not able to supply us with House-room.

The next day leaving Hortzimur we travailed through a very dry and barren Heath,
meeting by the way with some Robbers, who being but few in number durst not make
any attempt upon us: However night coming upon us here, we were fain to set
down on the Heath, and for fear of Robbers forced to watch all night, but were
so benumbed with cold that we many times wished for break of day.

On the first of the next Month we came into a little City called Senkan, which
is reputed the best Refreshing place between Derbent and Ispahan, there being
plenty of Oranges, Lemmons, Pomegranats, Melons, diverse sorts of huge Grapes
and many other Fruits then out of season. Veal and Mutton was here very cheap,
as also Bread. Thus finding Provision here very cheap, we bought what we
thought necessary. As for the City it self there is not much worthy of Remark
about it, save only a very fair and beautiful Metzid. It is situated in a
Plain, and a flat Ground, but near the Town very barren and dry. It has been
formerly a great Emporium, and flourished more than 4 Centuries of years in
Traffic and Commerce with the circumjacent Countries, but since it was
demolished by the great Tamerlan, is so run to decay, that it is out of Hopes,
ever to arrive to it is pristin State.

On the 2 of December. we set forward and came in good time to Sultanie, a City
lying in 36 degr. and 30 min. Northerly Latitude. It is situated between two
rows of very steep Mountains, and toward the West we saw the Mountain Keydar
Peyamber, whose lofty top seems to support the Heavens, this being, next to
Ararat, the highest Mountain I have ever seen. The City Sultany affoards a most
noble Prospect from abroad, by reason of her many lofty Piles, magnificent
Churches, high Towers, Pyramids, Obelisks and Cylinders which still remain,
notwithstanding the furious Irruption of the savage Tartars under conduct of
the valiant Tamerlan, who with many other Towns, laid this level with the
Ground, save the great and stupendous Fabrics, even now remembered, which when
one is within Town, look like a set of Nine-pins, or the Stones on Salisbury
Plain: so that this which was reputed one of the Royal Cities is meaner than
most villages. It was built by Sultan Choddabende a very rich and potent
Prince, who besides many famous Conquests in Persia and Usbec, subdued the
greatest part of Turkey, and many Indian Kingdoms and Provinces, some of which
still remain under the subjection of the Schach of Persia. This City he called
Sultanie from the As Caesarea from Caesar.
Honorary Title of Sultan, for so the Kings of Persia who are now called Schach
were of old entitled, as also at present the Ottoman Emperor. Notwithstanding
the abovesaid devastation of this City appear yet many signal Monuments of it is
former Glory; amongst which is the splendid Court and Palace of the great
Choddabende, DEC. 1671.
called, The Emarath This was fortified on each side with strong Walls and
several great Bulwarks, altogether built of huge square Stones of 3 Foot
Diameter it had also 4 high Towers, but strong and of neat Workmanship Within
is a very noble Sepulcher built by Sultan Choddabende himself who lay here
interred, but the too great Piety of his Successor would not suffer his Bones
to rest, but removed them to the Meschaich^ Ardebil. In entering this Sepulcher
one must pass through three very hig^ Gates all made of Indian Steel, very neatly
polished, and as smoot^ as Glass, this being the same Metal of which the
Damaskin, or Ard^bil Scymiters are made, and is praeferred before any other St^
that is used. That Gate which leads out to the Maydan (as the Persia^ would
persuade themselves and us) cannot be opened by any Force, bu^ when one prays to
GOD, for the sake of his Servant Aly, that may open, it opens of it is self. The
Building is very high, contractin^ its self at top into the manner of a Tower,
and within is set wit^ white and blew Tiles of Porceline. Above, where it
begins to dra^ its self into the form of a Tower, is a Partition of Steel
Bars, which makes a handsome Chore. In this Partition or Quire I saw many
Books, written in Arabic Characters, some whereof were above 30 Inches long, I
opened one of them and found an interlineary change o^ Gold and Black lines,
like the Rubrics in the Roman Breviaries, L^turgies and Mass books. Behind the
Altar is the Tomb where Sult^ Muhamed Choddabende lay interred but parted from
the Body of the Chore with great and massy Bars of Indian Steel, which the
Persia^ say was all of one piece, no place appearing where it might seem t^ be
well'd, or set together, and that it was seven years a making i^ India. In this
said Emarath are 20 pieces of Brass Ordnance, every Carridge having 4 wheels a
piece, and the Balls lying by them o^ white Marble, these are made (forsooth)
for defense of the H. Sepulcher. The Tower above is 8 square, and on each side
a Gallery, an^ upon each Gallery a small Turret going up with Winding-stairs
Before this Temple is a Fountain, the curious Work whereof show^ the great
skill and dexterity of the Workman that ordained it: it receives its Water by
an Aqueduct from the Keydar: and behind the Emarath is a very pleasant Garden,
with Walks and Rows of dive^ sorts of Trees.

Besides this illustrious Pile of Sultan Choddabende is another built by Schach
Ismael the first. This is also to be ascended by stairs. Within are seen many
fair Pillars and Arches upon which the Roof leans, The Temple of ^smael Sultan.
and the inside of the Walls is all laid with white and blew Tiles of
Porceline. Right before the Door within the first Court stands a fair Pyramid
of a reasonable Height. There is also a very fair Plesure-garden adjoining to
this Palace. Not far from thence is also a fair Arch, but something dilapidated
resting upon 2 Columns, or Obelisks, 162 Foot Which is just 13 Foot lower than
the Monunument lately erected near London Bridge, in memory of the sad
Conflagration in the year 1666.

The Author shorn after the Persian manner.


high. About an [ English] Mile and a half without Town are to be seen the
Relicts of a Gate, which they say was built by Sultan Choddabende, whence it
appears that the Extent of this City has been very great, although, as was said is
now not very great, nor much frequented by Trading People, subsisting mostly by
the Caravans, after which they long as greedily as a Landlord for Quarter day.

Five days we tarried in Sultante to rest, having almost tired our Camels and
Horses, which by that time were again in a travailing Condition: During our
abode here I was shorn after the Persian fashion, and could pass Muster for a
Musulman, and with more freedom visit what was worthy of remark and by them
reputed sacred; being thereto persuaded by my Companion who was a Russ, called
Ferrath, and that I might not be bewrayed by my speech, he bad me counterfeit
my self dumb, and when occasion served to make signs, he taking upon him to
interpret for me, which at once both secured me from Affronts, and gave me the
occasion to see their Sanctuaries, which was refused many Georgians,
notwithstanding considerable Sums they had proffered to see the Sepulchers.

On the 7th. we set out and came at night to Syllebek where we took up our
Nights-lodging, having this day very good way and with all pleasant, for on
each side were fair Meadows, Pasture and Cornfields, and by the way many neat
villages with Orchards, Gardens and Summer-Houses: which made the Time seem
short and the Journey no way taedious.

Leaving Syllebek we came the next day at night to Choramdeky which for it is
many Gardens seems to be a Paradise. Charamdeki^
It is also watered with a good River which glides through the Town, and by a
Serpentine course through the Fields round about the City renders the Earth more
fertile and of a very good soil, insomuch that this is one of the most
delightful places we had hitherto seen. The People confo^mable to the place
they inhabit gave us great Satisfaction, and we^ very sociable and friendly to
converse withal.

Caswin described.
On the Ninth we set forward again, and came at night to the City Caswin, which
is a Town of no small repute. It is situated in 3 degr. 15 min. Northerly
Latitude, lying in the Country of Er^ upon a level, but dry and sandy ground,
having on the West the Mountains of Elwind which reach as far as Babylon, or
Bagdet, as is now called. This City is about 6 English Miles in circuit, and h^
bin formerly the Residence of the King and Court of Persia: b^ since the same
was translated to Ispahan, it has continually run to decay, and daily looses
it is glory. The Walls and Fortifications which seem to have bin very strong,
lie buried in their Rubbish and unr^paired, for that this City lies far within
the Persian Dominions an^ dreads not any sudden Irruption as those that lie on
the Confines a^ ever fearful of, and therefore either without any
Fortifications at al^ to the end they may not prove a Check, if once invested
and take in by the Enemy, or else so strongly munited that they may res^ a
durable Siege: and another reason why the City Caswin fears n^ Foreign
Invasion is the Strength of the Inhabitants, who are ^ numerous that upon
occasion they can make up a mighty Army. The Houses are, as most other Towns in
Persia, mostly built of Bri^ which is only hardened in the Sun: so that without
they appear wit^ no Statelyness or Magnificency, but within neatly painted with
Co^partments and Foliage. The Streets are not paved as in other Places so that
when it is windy they are not passable, for the Dust that fli^ about, which
besides the aptness it has to hurt ones Eyes, is no sma^ annoyance to those who
are apparreled in a gay Garb.

The Palace of Schach Tamas.
In this City Schach Tamas kept his Court as also his Son Ismael who built that
Magnificent Palace before the Maydan, which stil^ remains as a lasting monument
of that puissant Monarch, and the Footsteps of a glorious Court, which, had not
the Unthankfullnes^ of the Inhabitants been so great, might have been there
till this Da^ The Gates are very high and stately, the Roof and Walls within
an^ all laid with Tiles of Porceline, and some of them embellished wit^ Flowers
of Gold, which are annealed or burned in, as the Chineezes do from whom I
presume they have that Art. Within the Chamber and the several Appartments are
diverse curious carved works altogether Foliage, Flowers and the like. Right
over against this Palace is a fair Garden or Paradise, almost 2 [ English]
Miles in circuit, planted with many Fruit Trees as Citrons, Pomegranats,
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Apricocks, etc. And on the outside round about pleasant
Walks of Cedars and Cypress trees. In this City are 2 Maydans. On the one
stands a Magnificent Hall, full of Shops, wherein are to be sold Jewels and
many other things of value. The Exchange of Whores.
Near this Exchange is a place where they deal altogether in Living Jewels,
which are there to be had at as mean a Price as a Lurcher or Shock upon the
Dog-market at Amsterdam; these being such Jewels as we commonly call Girls of
the Game, Misses, or Cracks, and I know not what canting names they have now a
days for such unnatural and sensual Prostitutes: The Persians call them
Cabbaha. About Sunset these are all brought out and set in a row by an old
Woman they call Delal who officiates as a Broker. Behind these young Females
stand a parcel of old Women who have by them a Bolster, a Quilt, a Coverlet,
and a little Lanthern in the Hand, all Implements for the purpose. Now so soon
as any one coms to view the Merchandise, these old Punks light the Candle,
unvail the Face, and so going from one to another till he finds one he likes
and then strikes a Bargain; which done one of the old Women follows him with
the Movables on her Shoulder whithersoever he pleases, and all with as little
shamefastness as if it were the most honorable Merchandise in the World.

On the East side of the City is the Common place of Sepulture: where also lies
interred the Body of Schach Besade, the Son of Hosseyn. By whose Tomb the
Persians swear, holding it for a most sacred Oath, and consequently very
heinous to violate: and when one desires another to asseverate a matter will
ask him, If he dare swear by the Holy Grave. In Caswin are 50 Churches which
stand open every day, and are frequented by those that go to pray, but the
great Metzid, or Temple, which they call Tzame, is open one day in Four, when
there is always a great Convent. They have also many Baths in Caswin, which
are frequented from morning to night.

On the 9th. dito was their Easter at Caswin, which they call Bairam, The Feast
of Bairam.
or Biram del Carban, which is only a commemoration of Abraham's Offering, who
as they say would have offered up his Son Ishmael, from whom they say Mahomet
is descended by a direct line: alleging that it was not Isaac, as the
Christians and Jews beleev; and further that it was not a Ram that was offered
in his stead, but a She-camel. Wherefore they always lead a Camel through the
streets for 3 days together before this Feast, adorning it with Garlands of
Leaves and Flowers, if there be any to be had, and on the Festival slay it, with
many Ceremonies. First comes the Mulla, who is one skilled in the Law, and
reads certain Passages out of the Alchoran, when he is silent they play upon
Trumpets, Flutes and Drums. In the mean while the Common People run and crowd
in to the Camel, to get some of the Hair, every one pulling as much as he can,
which is kept for Relicts, and reputed good for Women in Childbed who cannot
easily be delivered; insomuch that the Beast is almost bare before he com to be
Offered. When they have led him 3 days about Town he is brought out of the City
to a place thereto appointed, where all the greatest Personages are present and
immediately make a Ring. The Beast being brought in, one of the most eminent
Persons runs him through with a Spear, upon which all the People run with
Hatchets, Bills, and Knives striving every one to get a piece, which they carry
home, some boiling it, and other preserving it till the year after, reckoning it
a certain and sure token of Happiness to that House, where there is but a small
Morsel of this Camel. Those who are slow or impotent must be content with the
Entrails, Skin, and Blood, which they gather up so clean, that nothing of it
appears upon the Place where the Sacrifice is done. The whole night continues
this Feast with Music, Drinking and Banqueting.

CHAP. XXX. Departure from Caswin. Arrival at Saba, and an account of the
Condition of that Town. The Earth red and barren by the Curse of Mahomet. They
arrive at Kom, with a Description of that Place. Melons of a very fragrant and
lovely smell. A strange kind of Cucumbers. Khom the Staple for Weapons. The
People addicted to Thievery. The Author's combat with a Greek Renegado.
Departure out of Khom. Arrival at Kaschan. Its Situation. The People, and their
way of Living and Negotiation. Noble Carawanseras, or Houses of Entertainment.
Many Gold-and Silk-Cloth Weevers. A sort of great and venomous Scorpion and a
kind of fell Spiders, which are a powerful Poison, with the strange manner of
Cure for the same. Their Arrival at Natens. A Faulcon fights and conquers an
Eagle.
EIght days long stayed we in Caswin and departed thence on the 17 of December
coming at night to the Village Membere, DEC. 1671.
where all the Houses are built round, so that at a distance they appeared like
so many Pigeon-Cotes. The Town its self is well stored with Necessaries, and
affoarded us what we had occasion for.

On the 18 we came to the Village Areseng, which is situated in a very pleasant
Country and withal fertile, affoarding good store of Fruit, as Pomegranats,
Oranges, Lemmons and other Summer Fruits then out of season. Here we thought
good to take up our Nights Lodging.

On the 19 we betook our selves to our Journey, and that day travailed about 24
[ English] Miles, over a high, but level way, coming toward night to the great
Carawansera called Choskeru. This is a very commodious and large Inn, built
altogether of square stones, within is a spacious Court where was a Fountain of
very good Water: the Rooms and Appartments were no less commodious. On the
Walls I found several Dutch, Polish and Russian Names, and also wrote my own.

On the 20 we had a very pleasant days Journey through a delightful Landship;
very close inhabited and full of Villages and Hamlets coming at night to a
Carawansera, where we took up our Lodging for that night, and the next day set
forward for Saba, Arrival at Saba.
which is a City lying in 34 degr. and 56 min. in a plain Field having on the
West the Mountains of Elivend, which for their exceeding height may be seen
many Miles distant. Saba is far less than Caswin, but is munited with a Brick
Wall, which Bricks are not burned, as ours, but only hardened with the Sun.
Within the City is nothing worthy of remark, but all lies wast and foul.

They drive no Trade here than what is usually don in Villages and mean Market
Towns, to wit, Wheat and Barley, which is both plentiful, and to be had at a
low price, Fruits, as Pomegranats, Oranges, Lemmons, Grapes and other sorts
which grow as well within as without the Town. There is a place not far from
Saba, where the Ground is red and barren, which, the Persians say, was by
reason that Omarzaad within whose Jurisdiction this Place was, had murdered
their Holy Hosseyn, and for this reason it was cursed by Mahomet for his
Posterities sake, that it should never bring forth either Herb, or Tree, nor
that any Vegetable should like or thrive being transplanted. On the Southeast
side of the Town grows abundance of Tobacco, but not cultivated or planted,
which is no small profit to the Inhabitants.

On the 24 we departed from Saba, and at night set down at the Carawansera
Schach Ferabath. It was now good travailing by reason of the Cold which in this
hot Climate is very acceptable, being not far from the Torrid Zone; where in
the Summer time besides the scorching heat of the Sun, the Ground is so hot
that it brings all the Skin off ones Feet; the ways being altogether dry and
sandy, which also casts a reflection of the Sun upon ones Face, as if it came
out of a Furnace, whence many are stifled with the Heat.

Arrival at Khom.
On the 25 we came to the City Khom, and took up our Lodging in a Carawansera
near to the great Maydan. This seems to be a City of an ancient standing, and
is at present very large, but by the Ruins of a Wall a considerable distance
from the Town it appears that it has bin anciently much larger than now it is.
It lies in 34 degr. 17 min. Northerly Latitude, and is situate on a level flat
Ground having on the right hand the Mountains of Elivend whence issue two
Rivers which run through this City, first uniting themselves a little above the
Town. In the Winter they lay a Bridge over it, but in the Summer it is some
times dry. Near this Bridge stands a little Chapel, wherein they say the Sister
of one Iman Risa, who was one of the most eminent Successors of Mahomet lies
interred. The Persians have also a special veneration for this Female Saint,
and make long Pilgrimages to kiss her Tomb. However the City Khom has many fair
and spacious Streets, with many Piazzas and Galleries, to defend from Sun and
Rain. They have also great plenty of Fruit, as at Saba, as also Cotton and
Tobacco, which grows here in no less plenty than at Saba aforesaid. Besides the
many rare Fruits and Plants they have, there is an excellent sort of Melons,
having the outward form and color of an Orange, and is oftentimes taken for
one, but being cut up appears within as another Melon. These they commonly
carry in the Hand for the delicate flavor, but have no very acceptable or
delicious Taste. They have also an odd kind of Cucumber about 18 or 20 Inches
long but small, which they pickle much after the manner we do ours, and use'em
for Sauce. They have also the common sort of Melons which we commonly call
Musk-millions, that far surpass ours for Delicacy. Khom is a place very
considerable in regard of Traffic this being eminent for Swords, Knives,
Armorers and Cutlers Works. Some of our Company bought here Scymiter Blades,
for which they paid to the value of 20 Crowns a piece, yet were not those of
the best sort. The Steel they have from Niris near Ispahan where are several
Mines. Besides the Smiths work their chief Manufactory is Potts, there being
many Fullers, who are esteemed the best in Persia and their work praeferred
before Porceline, which is transmitted all over the Country. The Inhabitants
are sociable and friendly enough to converse withal when you have not much to
loose, but we were warned to look well about us, for they say that they are
brought into the World with their Fist doubled. My Patron lost here 2 new
Scymiters he had lately bought, and I a Tobacco box. Six days long stayed the
Caravan here, during which time there was much Merchandise negotiated. Here I
was cruelly pestered with a Greek Renegado, who continually railed upon me,
crying, You faithless Dog, you Infidel, etc. The Fellow had so often affronted
me with these and the like Words that I was no longer able to endure him, but
finding an opportunity I grasped him by the Collar, and trounc'd him lustily
off with my Fist, and at last getting him down I pummeld him back and sides,
saying, You varlet, now you shall find the Fist of a Man, and not the Paw of a
Dog. He seeing himself unable to get up again, drew out his Knife which he
indeavored to run into my Belly, but I observing got it wrested out of his
Hands, although not without a little slash, or two, on the Palm of my Hand: with
which I gave him an Excellent Cross in the Cheek that he looked like St. Agnes
of Monte Sante, withal telling him that although he was a Musulman I would give
him a Christian Token. With this he began to howl out, and I seeing the Coast
clear thought good to get out of the way betimes, being fain to abscond till
such times as the Caravan was to set forward, which was 24 Hours after.

On the 1 of January we left Khom, and came that night to Carawansera Kosmabath
where we set down. JAN. 1672.
That night it began to freez harder than is usual in those Countries, but was
by day very fair and lovly weather.

The next day we got the Village Sensen, lying about 5 Dutch Miles distant from
Kaschan where on the 3 day of January we arrived toward the Evening, taking up
our Quarters at a very noble and commodious Carawansera, seeming rather a
Palace than an Inn.

Situation of Kaschan, etc.
Kaschan lies in 33 degr. 51 min. It is built long wise and points East and
West, being munited with strong Walls and round Redoubts after the old manner
of Fortification, on the South side of the Tow^ is a place where they exercise
the Spear in Tilt and Tournament where are also several Pillars set up for
Butts, or Marks to shoot at. O^ the other side of the Town are several Royal
Gardens and Summe^ Houses, and amongst the rest one of a stately Fabric, having
a Thousand Windows. Kaschan is at this day the most populous and emine^ Marts
in all Persia; having also a very famous Basar and Maydan wit^ Piazzas and
stately Galleries, wherein are many rich Shops. It i^ the staple for the most
part of the Silk stuffs that are made in Persi^ They have also many that work
in Velvets and Sattins but not altogether so good as those in Europe; so that
the King has sent often to Venice expressly for Workmen to come and reside
there, which nevertheless he cannot accomplish. The Carawanseras which are here
very numerous do surpass all others that ever I have seen elsewhere: tha^ where
we took up our Quarters being more like a Palace than an In^ as I have said
before, having 65 spacious Rooms, besides many Conveniences which others want.
Below it was all Arched and mad^ into stable use, and above with Galleries to
entertain the common so^ of People. Hither resort many Indian and other
Merchants, coming very far and bringing with them many rich Wares and precious
Commodities. There are abundance of Looms for Cloth of Gold and Silver, as also
many that make Tapestry, and no less is the number of Idle Persons, who swarm
hither from all Parts, and like Drone^ are maintained by the sedulous Labors
of those that take Pains, and here have I seen more Beggars than ever I have
seen in any Town in all my Travels. As for the Country of Kaschan, it is very
fertile and of an excellent Soil, producing vast Quantities of Wine, Fruit,
Corn and is very rich of Cattle, insomuch that it is very cheap living there.
But this is also concomitated with other Annoyances, to wit, the Extreme Heat
of the Climat, and the Multitudes of Scorpions which haunt the Town, those
being both great and dangerous, yet both in shape and color differing from
those in Italy. The Inhabitants for fear of that venomous Animal dare not ly
upon the Floor, as in other Places, where they only throw a Quilt upon the
Tapestry, but have high Couches hanging from the Roofs of the Rooms, like
Hammocks: and although this Creature be very venomous and many are stung by it,
yet few die, they having found out a ready Medicin against it, which is made of
the Filings of Copper tempered with Vinegar and Honey, which is a very speedy
remedy, yet if neglected the Party stung is in danger of his Life. This I
presume has bin first found out by an Antipathetical quality which seems to be
between those Scorpions and Copper, for not far from the City is the
Copper-mint, where if one of these be brought it dies immediately.

Besides these Scorpions, they are pesterd with another venomous Creature which
they call Enkurekan, being very much like a Spider, A great and venomous sort
of Spider.
but bigger than a Mouse, some of these are speckled, and some have long streaks
over the Back. These keep most in stony Places, and haunt the Herb Tremne,
almost like our Wormwood. The venomous Matter which they have in them they spit
out, as some say Toads do, which wheresoever it lights, whether on man or Beast
it immediately penetrates and incorporates with the Blood, An Antidot for their
venom.
and so proceeds to the Head and Heart. So soon as the Patient is touched he
falls immediately into a deep sleep, in such sort that all the calling and
beating him, will not avail or awake him; or if by chance it do he remains
still senceless. The best and speediest Remedy for this, is the Enkurekan it is
self, pounded into a Cataplasm and applied: but when these are not to be had,
they use another mean, which is thus. The Patient is laid upon his Back and his
Mouth set open, into which they pour much Milk as they can make him digest;
which done, they put him in a square Chest, having on each side a Ring, through
which are four Cords put and made fast at one Ring on the Cieling. This Chest
thus hanging, they whirl it about for a quarter of an Hour together, till the
Patient breaks up and vomits all he has within him. This commonly lucks, if the
Patient can be brought to swallow the Potion* yet they feel the vigorous force
of the Poison for a long time after. These nevertheless do not much annoy the
Town, unless when they are brought in with the Faggots, which they use for
Fuel. But wha^ is most worthy of Remark, is, that Sheep covet them more than
an^ thing else, and if they chance to spy one run in at a hole will not lea^
throwing up Earth till she gets it, and so snapp it up, yet ail nothing at all.

After we had lay Eight days in Kaschan and bought Wares and Pr^vision, we
broke up, and on the 13 at night came to Carawanser^ Chotza Cassim, which
stands in the middle of a Grove of Cypres^ and other Trees, which Winter and
Summer grow always green In the said Carawansera we found very good
Accommodation. Her^ my Patron was taken with a sudden Fit of the Cholic, which
hel^ him so hard, that, we very much doubted of his Recovery, although at last to
my unfeigned Joy it went over.

On the 14th. we had very bad travailing way through dry and sand Ground, and
found no Villages nor Towns to refresh our selves a^ till we came at Natens
which is a very pleasant little City. Here w^ set down and took up our
Carawansera for that night. The Countre^ close by Natens is very fertile and
affords great plenty of good Wine The Inhabitants being diligent Propagaters of
the Vineyards. Nea^ this City is a Hill upon which is erected a very high Tower
of squar^ and polished stone which was built by Schach Abas as a Monumen^ of a
Battle between an Eagle and a Hawk, where the last after a long Encounter came
off with Victory. It began now to freez harder and harder, as also to snow so
that we were fain to stay 3 Day at Natens, during which time we made good
Cheer, and spared not our Proviands which we had taken up by the way, having
now got sight of the Royal City Ispahan.

On the 17th. we left Natens and that Day had very rocky ground to drive over,
and by the way stopped at a famous Carawansera called Dombi, where we rested and
refreshed our selves, and at night were fain to set down at Ruk a Village not
far from Ispahan, by reason of the snow, remaining there also the most part of
the next day.

CHAP. XXXI. Arrival at Ispahan. Their Reception with the Dutch Resident. A
Relation of the Stability of Anthony Munster, who was urged to embrace
Mahometanism: his Death and Burial. The Manner and Situation of the Dutch
Lodge. The Situation of Ispahan, it is Greatness: Rivers running through the same.
The Aqueduct, a mighty work of Schach Abas. The Streets of Ispahan. Maydan and
Basar. Fair Arches and Galleries. The Sumptuous Mestzid of Schach Abas. Dowlet-
or Schach-Chane, the Royal Palace. The Divan-Chane, or Court of Justice. The
Hiram-Chane, or Palace of the Kings Concubines. Allycarpi a Sanctuary, or place
of Refuge. Carawanseras, Taverns. Cahwae-Chane, Coffee-Houses. Persian Saints
and Philosophers. Remal and Falkil, two sorts of Soothsayers. Their strange
and ridiculous way of presaging. The Kaysery or Gallerie of Shops.
HAving stayed the most part of 2 Days at Ruk, Arrival at Ispahan.
we set forward again, and on the 19 we came to the long-wishd-for Ispahan.
Where being arrived I longed greedily to see my Contrymen, and went to my
good Master Hadsi Byram to take my leav of him, with a Thousand Thanks for his
many Favors: I desired him also to let some go with me to show me the Dutch
Lodge, which he with great willingness assented to, and sent one of his Slaves
with me.

Thus I went with Monsr. Lewis Fabritius and Christian Brandt to the Lodge,
where for that time the Here Frederic Bent of Enkhuysen was Chief Factor for
the East India Company, Monsr. Kasenbroot of Rheenen, Second, or Under-Factor,
and Mr. Hubert Balde of Amsterdam Assistant. When we came at the Gate we found
a Black, who was the Porter, and spoke very good Nether-Dutch whom we desired
to make our coming known; which when he had don, we were admitted in, and very
friendly received by the said Gentlemen, who invited us to stay there, which
without much refusal we accepted with many Thanks. They brought us forthwith
into a very stately Room hung with Tapestry, and furnished with Beds, where we
lay; and had also Victuals and Firing provided us, with what else was
necessary. Besides that they showed us all imaginable Friendship and
Divertisements, taking great delight to hear our many Evasions and Deliverances
from such hard Adventures. I have elsewhere advised how that being at Scamachi,
we had a Letter from one of our Company, to which was set no name; yet
praesumed that it was from Anthony Munster the Jeweller. The certainty thereof
I understood here, as also how he was brought to Ispahan. Being com to Ispahan,
his Patron wrought very hard upon him to renounce Christianity, and embrace the
Mohammedan Faith, promising him upon his so doing to esteem him for his Son, to
giv him one of his Daughters in Marriage, and a considerable Dowry, beyond what
was customary in those Lands. All these the young Man declined, saying, that
neither Promises nor Threats should ever praevail with him and therefore begged
of him to rest contented. His Patron finally marking, that he was not flexible
to espouse that Religion, he began to pester and oppress him with all manner of
Cruelty that he could invent, insomuch that he became very Melancholic, and at
last lost his Senses, in which condition he made his Escape into the Dutch
Lodge, which he took up for his Sanctuary, and was kindly received by the Hee^
Bent, who held him so long in private till he had obtained his Freedom from the
King. Yet still continued this Frenzy with him, till he died, only some say that
by certain Expressions he made, about the Eternity of the Soul, he was sensible
of himself a little before his Death. He was buried with a more than ordinary
Pomp, considering the meanness of his Person, as to outward Estate; but was
highly set by for his perseverance and constancy in the Christian Faith. His
outward Qualities were very commendable being of a handsome stature, fair
Complexion and in every Way and Gesture very taking: nor was he less to be
praised for the internal Faculties of the Mind and Soul, being very
conscientious and just in all his dealings, and withal pious. His sweet
Manners and Conversation was such that those who had the left converse with him
were very sorry for his untimely, or to speak more properly, his early Death,
he not being fully 26 years of Age.

The Dutch Lodge is a very fair Building, not far from the Kings Palace, having
many fair Appartments, Warehouses, and other Conveniences for reposing
Merchandises. The many fair Rooms it has, are furnished with all necessary
Movables, beyond those of the Persians, and far more costly. Behind the House
is a fair and spacious Garden, having all sorts of Fruit Trees proper to that
and other Climats, as also a great Vineyard and an Arboret, or Nursery for
young Trees. In the middle is to be seen a very noble Fountain, dispersing it is
water in various Figures in the Air, to an admirable height, surpassing most
Waterworks that I have seen in Europe. The Hollanders live there very
splendidly, to uphold the Honor of the East India Company, and go in the
Persian Habit, as also their Waiters and Attendants, who are mostly Turks and
Moors: and because I was to go for Gameron they gave me a new Persian Suit:
which I was to take with me. In the mean while I had work enough to satisfy
their curiosity with frequent rehearsals of what had befallen me in my
foregoing Voyages to the Indies, and the Levant.

Ispahan, called also Isphahan, lies in 32 degr. and 26 min. in the Country of
Or, Arak as Mercator calls it, others call it Chorasan, and others Lexa.
Erak, formerly called Parthia. It is situated in a level and plain Landship,
environed on every side with Mountains at a considerable distance, as the
Mountains of Demawend on the South and South-west, Masanderan and Jeylak Persan
on the North-east. This is the greatest City that I have seen in all Persia,
being, with it is Suburbs and all 16 hours going in circuit [about 48 English
Miles] It is but very weakly fortified, the Walls being only of Earth and
sloaping inward, so that at Top they are not above 6 Foot thick; the Trench or
Ditch is also very narrow, and in the Summer so shallow that the Children wade
through it, and sometimes it is wholly dry: so that this City seems to ^ear no
Enemy or foreign Invasion, trusting to the potency and number of Inhabitants.

On the South and South-west side it is watered with the Senderut, a reasonable
great River rising from the Demawend Mountains, which coming here is led through
the Town by Pipes and Subterranean Aqueducts, for Kitchen and other uses, although
in Gardens and Gentlemen's Houses they have Fountains apart. There is also a
Branch of this River that runs through the Park wherein are Hearts, and other
Beasts of chase: this Park or Warrant they call Hozartzieris. Another arm of
the River is brought under Ground through the Tzarbag, or Royal Garden. Not far
from hence is a fair Stone Bridge which lies over the River, wherein is great
variety of rare Workmanship. Besides the Senderut, there is another River, or
rather Aqueduct, called Abkuren, begun by Schach Abas and not yet finished,
which is fetched from beyond the Mountains of Demawende. About the making of
this Aquaeduct were more than a 1000 Men continually at Work, each Man having
about 7d sterling. a day wages, yet what with the Violence of unusual Floods, and
what with the Foreign Wars in which this Prince was involved, the work was
totally laid aside after a 3 Months labor. But the Chans, and Deputies who
were more at leisure, seeing the work so detarded jointly lent their Assistance
to carry on this laudable Design, in which they saw the King took so much
delight, maintaining so many Men at their proper Expenses. The Difficulty they
met with was unspeakably great, having hard Rocks of Flint and Marble to cut
through, besides much rising and falling Ground, which they had to make aequal.
But the work being brought within 600 Paces of the Town the King died, and his
Successor, whose inclinations were quite of another strain, had no mind to
finish it insomuch that it remains still as it was when Schach Abas died.

The Streets of Ispahan were formerly very wide, but when the abovementioned
Abas, King of Persia, removed the Imperial Throne from Caswin hither, he was
followed by so many Gentry and others that had their Appendency from the Court,
that whole Rows of Houses were built in the middle of every Street, making by
that one Street into 2. It is exceeding populous, insomuch that many times when
one would pass through the Maydan or Basar he must be fain to stay a long time,
before he gets passage. The Maydan, which is a place serving as our Exchanges,
is very large, being 700 Paces long, and 250 broad, and yet too little by far
to contain the vast Multitudes which daily have recourse hither about different
Businesses. On the West side toward the Kings Palace are many fair Galleries,
Piazzas and Arches, where all the Goldsmiths and Jewellers have their Shops:
and before the said Piazzas are planted many Palm Trees to secure them from the
vigorous heat of the Sun. On the East side is another Gallerie with many fair
Arches, where all sorts of Mechanics work in the open sight of all. Right over
against this said Gallerie is a Triumphal Arch erected, where the
Kettle-drummers, Trumpetters and Fifers sit, and play when the King goes out,
or in, as also upon the Introduction of any foreign Prince, Chan, or
Ambassador.

In the middle of the Maydan which is not far from the great Gate of the Palace
is a Great Mast like a May Pole planted, on the Top whereof they set Melon, at
which they shoot, and oftentimes make great ^ ^ngelse Logye 2. Metzid of
Tempel. 3. Hollantse Logie. 4. Doodts Hoofden Icoren. 5. Maydan of marckt 6
Vrouwen Tempel 7. ^t Hof van. Persien.


Matches, which is held for the principal Divertisement used at Court, as
Tilting was formerly in most Courts of Europe.

On the 23 of January was a great Match which I had the Fortune to see. It was
appointed at the Intercession of the Usbec Ambassador by the King who was
himself present, and was mounted on a stately Arabian Horse richly
capparison'd, for the Sadle and Saddle-cloth were very richly embroydered and
so thick beset with Rubies and other Precious Stones that one could hardly view
it. The Court and Royal Retinue were also well mounted and appeard very
splendid. When they were ready to try their Dexterity one went up to the Top,
and set up a Cup of Gold, which who could hit and bring it down, should not
only have it for his Pains, but also be preferred to great Honor, and take
place among the Princess of Persia, The King gave the Tartars the Advantage of
shooting first who after they had shot more than an hour, were fain to give
over: for it was to be don on Horse back, and the Horse in a full carier, and
furthermore not to shoot till they came to a certain Place where they had the
mast directly on the left side. The Ambassador seeing that none of his men were
so dexterous gave over, and desired the King that he would vouchsafe to try the
skill of the Persians. Upon which the King ordered certain Persons, who,
without doubt, were very expert Marksmen, to ride in a circle, one for one,
where the third that shot had the Fortune to bring it down, upon which the
Persians gave a shout that the Palace rang again. Upon this he was sent for by
the King and brought into the Palace with as much Triumph as if he had won some
signal Victory; the Cup, Bow, and Quivers were like Trophys carried before him,
by certain Heralds thereto appointed, and he himself although but a poor Man's Son
of Keylan, promoted to great honor and reckoned in the Degree of a Chan.
Besides this the King gave him a considerable Pension out of the Tresury to
maintain his Grandour.

On the South side of the Maydan is a very stately Mestzid which was founded
and begun by Schach Abas, The Metzid of Schach Abas described.
but finished by Sephy his Nephew, who dedicated it to Twelve Saints, which are
all included under the name of Mehedi, and, as their Historians affirm, were
all buried in one Grave. The way from the Maydan to this Mes^zid is all paved
with huge marble Stones, in the middle whereof is a great Stone Bath where
every one that will enter the said Temple is first obliged to wash. Leaving
this Passage you go up two Stepps which leads you into a broad Plain, and about
8 hundred Foot directly forward another step which brings you into the Church.
The Gate which enters the Mesquite is of fair Marble and about as high as that
of the Meschaich of Choddabende in Sultanie. The Doors of this Temple are laid
ore with Silver Plates, and set in with Flowers of Gold. Entering within the
Gate, you com into a pompous Antichamber, the Floor whereof is bespred with
very fine Matts, upon which they fall down on their Knees, and make a short
prayer. From hence on each hand is a stately Gallery, each leading into another
spacious Court, having in the middle a great Fountain, with a Bath. Above these
great Galleries are some less, which are supported by marble Pillars, the
Chapters and Foliage whereof are neatly gilded. When you are past these
Galleries and the Courts, you come into the Temple i^ self, entering in at a
splendid Port, within and under the Cieling, all laid in with blew Tiles of
true Porceline, and intermixed with Flowers of Gold. The Temple its self is
very large and sumptuous, supported with huge marble Pillars. On the right hand
at going out of this Church, you enter through an Arch into a magnificent Hall,
where stands a Pulpit and an Altar, which said place, for sumptuousness and
uniformity of structure, is reputed the most costly Building and most glorious
Fabric in the whole Emarath. All the Marble whereof it is built, seeming to
outvy the Snow its self for whiteness, is brought hither, not without vast
trouble and Charges, from the Mountains of Elivend.

The Palace.
The Kings Palace, called Dowlet, or Schach Chane is also a very stately House.
Before you enter the outer Gate is a large Plain, on which are many Pieces of
old Brass Ordnance, unfit for use, and are only thrown together on heaps, and
out of order: a true Emblem of such Persons as have in the Flower of their
Youth been serviceable to their Prince and Commonwealth, but growing old and
impotent become Abjects; and are laid aside. The Palace, it is true, is munited
on every side with a Wall, but so meanly, that it would not resist a Cannon
ball, much less secure the Person of the King, if attacqued with any sudden
Force, which is the least thing they dread. By day the utmost Gate is only
guarded with 4 Sentinels but at night, by 15 Halberdiers: and in the
Bedchamber of the King 30 young Gentlemen, being mostly the Sons of great
Personages; in whom the King reposes most Confidence. Every night the
Kischiktzchi, or Captain of the Guards, brings the King a List of their Names;
who are to stand upon the Ward the night following. Within the Palace are
several great Halls or Appartments, amongst which the Tabchane and the
Diwan-Chane are the chiefest: The former being the Banqueting House, and the
latter the Court of Justice. In the Diwan-Chane Ambassadors are always received
and thence introducted into the Chamber of Audience, the more because the Glory
of the Cavalcade and other Solemnities can be here the better seen. Another
Appartment which is not much inferior to those already made mention of, is the
Haram-Chane, where the King diverts himself with his Wives and Concubines. The
Dekay is the Place where the King retires, and has his Residence, when not
engaged in any important Affair, holding here his Table with his legitimat
Wives. In short there are many other Appartments within the Palace for inferior
Concerns. Behind the Palace is a Garden which they call the Chobbadar; in the
middle whereof is a beautiful little Chapel. Here is also the great
Sanctuary, or Place of Refuge, which they call Allycarpi, which is as much as
to say, Gods Gate; in which Place a Malefactor is free from Justice. There is
also another such Place of Refuge, on the other side of the Maydan, called
Tzechil Sutun, so called from 40 huge massy Beams that rest upon one Pillar
standing in the middle, and so support the Roof. Hither it was whither the
Persians fled when the Town was taken in by the great Tamerlan, and opposed him
again, but he breaking in with violence put all to the sword, save those that
had got into the interior Temple, or Metzid, for which he had such a veneration
that he would not violate the Institutions of Mahomet, or pollute the Sanctuary
with Blood.

On the North side of the Maydan, are many Taverns and Taphouses, and among
those a House greatly frequented by Traders, called the Tzaychatti-Chane or
Thee-house, which they prepare quite after another manner than the Indians, of
whom the Europeans first had it; for here they put in so many aromatical
Ingredients, that one can neither perceiv any Taste or Smell of Tee in it. In
drinking Tee they also accustom themselves to Play, and especially at Chess, at
which they are very quick and expert. The Coffee-houses they call Cahwa-Chane,
where they only go to drink Coffee and smoke Tobacco, with which they are so
deeply affected that they sometimes smoke in the Church. When they are within
doors they have a great Glass, full of water, through which they put their Pipes
and smoke, much after the manner of an Alembric Still, which renders it very
cool. When they draw, the water bubbles up as if it boiled, yet by reason of a
stinking vapor that rises from it, is very annoysom. But when they smoke along
the street have only such a Pipe as those which are now grown common in the
Low Countries, being of several joints, and the Head of Earth. Their Coffee
they drink very hot, and are (...) opinion that it sedates and asswages their
Lust to Women, which make their Wives ready to protest against it, rather
willing tha^ their Husbands should transgress against the Alchoran and use the
Juice of the Grape than that Arabian Berry. The chief Custome^ which those
Public Houses have, are the Barbers, who frequent^ haunt them to be employed in
shaving their Heads: but every man that is able to buy a Rasor always carries
one about with him, being very fearful of the Venereal Murrain, which they
call Keschi, and w^ the French Pox, or some such thing.

But quaint is the Habit, and more strange the Customs of the^ Clergy, and such
as are under any Spiritual Order, who notwithstanding their vain and palpable
Fooleries, have drawn themsel^ into a great esteem of the Laity of all degrees.
These abstain from Wine, live an austere life, and never marry till they grow
very old Some go in a long course Robe, others half naked, and a third f^ only
with a Skin girded about their middle. They go about the Streets and when they
come to any large Place as the Maydan, Basar, or the like, sit down, and with a
most hideous yelling convoke an Auditory which being assembled they make a kind
of a hortatory Oration which notwithstanding the Scope or End, contains little
else tha^ a commemoration of the great and worthy Acts of Aly, and alwai^ at
Peroration vilify and curse the Turkish Saints Omar, Osman an^ Abubeker. but
more eagerly against the dogmatical Decrees of the Ubec-Tartars: But those of
that nation being of late years grown ver^ numerous at Ispahan, assumed the
boldness to oppose them, for which end the King has allowed those Worthies to
go armed with Hatchets as at present they do, and have free Toleration to knock
any man down that shall offer to interrupt them. They have one only Monastery,
or Coenobium, where they all live together, which was built them at the Charges
of the present King: and have also a considerable Sum allowed them for their
maintenance, besides what they gather from the People by mumping, or rather
Mountebanking.

On the West side about Dowlet-Chane are all the Soothsayers, of which there
be two sorts, to wit, Remal and Falkir, both which are in their practice more
ridiculous than our circumventing Gypsies, and consequently not worth my Pains
to recount, nor the Readers Patience to hear of 'em.

In going from the Maydan to the Northward you find a way which leads you to
the Basan, where is a very stately Kayserie, full of Shops and those stored
with very rich commodities. This Market consists in a certain number of
Streets, that are mostly arched over. Hither repair Merchants of all Nations,
except Persians alone, as Indians, Tartars, Turks, Armenians, Georgians, as
also English, French, Italians, Hollanders and other Europeans. Their way of
Dealing is altogether for Money, nothing by Barter. Abas is the most plentiful
coin in use among them, valuing something less than an [ English] Shilling, and
the Schach Abas which is half the value of the other; the latter is also mostly
called Choddabende. They do not use much Gold, but abundance of Copper which
they call Pull, 40 of which Pieces make an Abas. The Europeans who com thither
bring commonly Rix-dollars, which the Persians once getting into their Hands
will by no means part with them, for they are diligently sought up by the
Money Changers, who bring them to the Serab-Chane, or Mint, and make a
considerable profit of them.

CHAP. XXXII. Taberik Kale the Treasury of the Kingdom. The Suburbs of
Ispahan. Tziulfa, a place where the Armenian Christians have their Residence.
Tabrisabath. Hassenabath. Kebrabath, so called from Kebber, Persians that are
still Pagans. Tzarbag. The Nature of the Persians. Property of the Land.
Celebration of the Epiphany by the Armenian Christians.
ISpahan, as it is a Royal City of so considerable a Monarchy, and one of the
first magnitude, so it has a great concourse of Strangers from all Countries in
the World, so that above all other Vocations the Innkeepers generally thrive
the best, and by their great doings accommodate all Persons to their full
Content: The Carawanseras here are more sumptuous by far than either those of
Caswin, or any other City in Persia. They are for the most part square, some of
them having 4 or 5 Galleries abov one another, and those furnished with very
commodious Appartments, and for their better Security for Thieves are
surrounded with high Stone Walls.

In Ispahan are also many fair Buildings, besides what are already remembered,
amongst which the Taberik Kale, or Fort Royal where the Kings Tresury is, is
one of the most eminent, situated between the Palace and the Mestzid Mehedi,
which is both munited with strong Walls, guarded continually with a sufficient
Body of Soldiery, and has plenty of Brass Cannon. The same also serves for a
Magazin or Repository of Armory. There are also two fair Christian Monasteries,
the one for the Carmelites and the other for Augustine Monks.

These with many other fair Buildings, too taedious to recount, are within the
Walls. There are also many splendid Piles of Buildings without in the Suburbs,
which they call the Rhabath. In the Suburbs are two eminent Wards, to wit,
Tzulfa and Ciulfa, mostly, or altogether inhabited by the Armenian Christians,
who are reputed the ablest Merchants in Ispahan, being transported hither by
Schach Abas from their own Country, and have since enjoyed sundry Immunities,
and have a Governor of their own, which they call Daruga who must bring up 200
Tumain yearly contribution to the King, which is taken out of their Public
Stock. The private Dwelling-Houses of those Armenians do equal, or rather
surpass those within Walls for splendid structure. On the one side of the River
Senderut is another Place, called Tabri- or Abas-Sabath for that Schach Abas
had allotted the People of Tabris this Part of the Town to dwell in* Another
Ward, or Quarter of the Suburbs is called Hassenabath, which is mostly
inhabited by the Georgian Christians, commonly called Trurtzi, These as well as
the Armenians are great Merchants, being also highly in favor with the King,
not only for the vast Tribute which they pay, but as well for their Loyalty and
good deportment: and these are the only Christians who are tolerated to live
within the Walls, and have a Quarter of the Town allotted them near the Mestzid
Mehedi, although they rather choose to dwell in the Suburbs, that they may be
retire from the Calumny of the Mahometans, and the better enjoy the Benefits of
a Christian Society. The Kebrabath is a District of the Suburbs lying on the
West side of the City, so called from the Kebbers, which are a sort of ancient
Persian Pagans, who following the old opinion of the Persians, when they were
yet Heathens, will not embrace Mahometanism. These differ from the rest in
Habit, as well as in Customs and Religion, wearing loose Drawers, with a long
Coat only fastened at the Collar, open at the shoulders: Their Hair they let
grow, all over their Head and Face. The Women are attired as the Men only with
this difference, that they wear a long Silk or Cotton Scarf which trails on the
Ground. The Language they speak is still the ancient Lingua Persica, for they
are very curious in preserving their ancient Tongue without any Innovation,
insomuch that the Persians who speak the modern Language cannot understand them
[as the English cannot understand the old British, or Welsh] yet these can
both understand and speak the present Persian Tongue. They retain also the
Ancient Characters, and adore the Sun and the Elements for Deities performing
Monthly Sacrifices. Besides the veneration they have for the Sun, they do
worship to the Stars, but have little or no Judgment in the course of the
same. Snakes and all other venomous Animals they hold for unclean, so that
whosoever touches any of those, whether voluntarily, or by accident, must not
enter into their Temples till he be purified. Their Dead they do not burn as
most Pagans do, but when any Person dies, whether it be an Infant, or one com
to full growth and Maturity, they wash the Body very clean, and carry it to a
Place far distant from any Houses, and there set it upright against a Post,
where they wait till the Ravens com and pick out the one Eye, which if it be
the right Eye, they are of opinion that the Soul of the Departed is in
Paradise, and therefore interr him very decently; but if the Bird pull out his
left Eye first, then they hold it for a sure Token, that he is damned, and for
his wicked Life to suffer perpetual Torments, and therefore esteem him not
worthy of such solemn Exequies, but cast him headlong into a deep Pit.

Without the City of Ispahan are many fair Gardens and Summer-houses, belonging
to the King and diverse great Personages. The most eminent of all these is the
Tzarbag, not far from the great Bridge, being 4 square, and about 2 [ English]
Miles in circuit. This (as was said before) is watered with an Aquaeduct that
is conveyed under Ground by several small leaden Pipes from the Main, and here
and there vented by Fountains, which force the Water sometimes 36 or 40 foot
high. On each corner stands a noble Summer House, of an admirable rare Fabric.
The Garden it is self has the most and greatest varieties of Fruit Trees and
Vegetables that ever I have seen, although it was then Winter when I was there.
And indeed the Persians are great Lovers of Planting, Gardening, and all manner
of Tillage; so that there is hardly a House in all Ispahan, but has something of
a Garden behind it, more or less, whence it coms that this City is so great in
compass.

As to the manner of their Hous-keeping and other peculiar Customs, I hold it
needless to treat any thing about, since it may be collected out of what I have
already said in the foregoing Chapters. They are in general very sociable, and
for their Urbanity toward strangers, draw many Foreigners thither. They are
also Lovers of all kinds of Discipline, and the Gentry very ambitious in Arts
and Sciences. The Land about Ispahan is very fertile, and affoards all that is
necessary for human sustenance in good plenty. But the Town being very populous
through the great concourse of Strangers from all parts of the World makes all
things very dear, but especially Fuel, insomuch that Wood and Charcoal are
sold by the Pound, and notwithstanding it may seem to be in a warm climat, yet
in the Winter it is very cold, or at lest so seeming to them, who are used to
the great heat of the Summer Solstice. During the time of my being there they
were very busy about gathering their Ice, which is got and preserved after this
manner: First they dig a great Pit in the Earth, about 40 Foot deep, which they
encompass with a Wall, about 10 Fathom high which is commonly made of Clay, but
that side next to the North is lower than the rest, that the cool North Winds
may allay the violent Heat of the Sun: then they dig or plow certain furrows in
the Plains round about, which when it freezes, they set all over with Water,
and so gather the Ice, and when they have enough cover it with straw. This Ice
is very common in use among the richer sort in the Summer time, not only for
cooling the Wines, but as well for lying upon their Dishes of Fruit, FEB. 1672.
when they are brought up to the Table, which is only laid on a heap in the
middle of the Dish, and so dissolves it self, through all the Fruit. This is
reckoned for a good commodity if it be a hot Summer, and is sold as well along
the Streets, as in Houses.

On the 16 of February, was the Epiphany celebrated by the Armenian and
Georgian Christians. So soon as I heard what was the matter, I rose pretty
early in the morning with intent to see the Solemnity of the Day. The first I
met was the Jesaulcor, or Great Marshal with all his subordinat Officers, who
were ordered to prevent Tumults, and not to suffer Horses and Camels with any
Burdens to pass over the Bridges and through the Streets that lead to Tzulfa and
Tzarbag; which was not only don for the sake of the Christians, but upon the
account of one of the Kings legitimat Wives, whom he entirely loved, being a
Georgian by birth and educated in the Christian Religion, and had a desire to
go and see the Solemnities performed, which the King would not deny her, for
that she was great with Child. About 8 in the morning were all the Christian
Ladies in Balconies, which were all hung with Tapestry, and those of the
greatest rank with Canopies over head. Those of meaner degree sat on each side
the River Senderus, and had a Guard of Soldiers under the Command of an
Officer, to secure them from being abused by the Mahometans, and to suffer no
Men to crowd in upon them. About 9 assembled all those under Spiritual Orders
and the Clergy belonging to the 10 Churches of Tzulpha, and the 2 Churches of
Ispahan. Those were all attired in white Stoles and Capps of Cloth of Gold upon
their Heads, with long Labels hanging down to their middle, but more gorgeous
was the Attire of the Patriarch, being all over richly embroydered with Gold
and adorned with costly Gems. Every Priest carried a Silver Cross hung with
little Silver Bells and Basins. The Crosses which were carried by those of
higher degrees and in the foremost Ranks were supported, each by 3 Men. The
Inferior Clergy followed after with lighted Tapours in their Hands, accompanied
with the most eminent of the Laity. The Superior Monks of Ispahan adjoined
themselves to the Patriarch, 5 of them bearing up his Pontifical Robes, 2 on
each side and one behind. About one a clock came the King mounted on a stately
Arabian Horse, without any considerable Retinu save only the Chancellor and
Grand Marshal, the the Guards and the rest of the Court having order to keep
behind the Procession. The Begum, or Queen before mentioned was carried before
as a private Gentlewoman in a Sedan to a great Merchants house, accompanied only
with one Gentlewoman, the Master of the Eunuchs and 4 of his Company: for the
King ever reposes great Confidence in the Christians, and esteems them as the
most loyal of all his Subjects, as appears by his adventuring his person among
them, without any Guards. But before the Procession was ended it began to snow
very hard, which did not only cause the King to leav them but put a stop to the
further Celebration of this great Festival, which, by the preparations, seemed
to be intended to be solemnized with very great Pomp: for besides the
Contribution of all the Christians, who, as I have elsewhere noted, are very
rich, the King sends the Patriarch a considerable Sum of Money some time before,
in order to the carrying on and maintaining this anniversary Custom. The
Patriarch and Superior Clergy seeing there was no hopes of the Weather growing
better, they departed without performing the ritual Ceremonies: but the Laity
continued Dancing and Singing all the Night long.

In the mean while the Caravan was in a readiness to depart for Gammeron, and
the Here Bent gave order for Horses and Camels to be bought up for us, to carry
our Provision and Baggage. He also took care to buy us all Necessaries we had
occasion for on our Journey and was pleased to appoint me as Caffil Abassi, or
Overseer of the Provision. About this time it frose very hard, and as I not
without wondering saw Ice 3 Foot thick, which was averred never to be known in
that Country in any man's Age. How hard a season it was for poor People may be
gathered from what I have already said how scarce all kind of Fuel is is
Ispahan.

CHAP. XXXIII. The great Civility of Hadsi Biram. The Authors Departure out of
Ispahan. Their incommodous Traveling through the Snow. Wells and Pits of Water
abounding with Fish. They are much incommodated in their Travailing. The
Caravan assailed by Robbers. Their Superstitious horror of Swines Flesh.
Sepulcher of Schach Solyman's Mother. The Sepulcher of Noah, his Wife,
Children, and Childrens Children. Tzilminar. The Pompous Relicts and Ruins of
the famous Persepolis, and the noble Fort thereof. The Statue of Rustan, a
Persian Champion.
ON the 17 of February we had order to make ready for our Journey, FEB. 1672.
wherefore that morning I went to return my hearty Thanks to my good Master,
Hadzi Byram, where coming and finding him at home I saluted him after the
Persian manner, withal manifesting my gratefullness to him for his many
Favors, which he had shown me, although without the lest deserts; but he
interpelling me in my discourse, forbad me to talk any more of that, saying, I
have not yet him so worthy as to give you the Reward I promised you: which was
to set you free when you came to Ispahan, and now I understand you have
redeemed your self with your own Money: however I shall make it good to you by
an Equivalent. With that he opened a Chest and gave me 100 Dollars, saying,
This I give you as part of Reward, for your care to save my life when I was in
danger of loosing it at the Caspian Sea. This extraordinary great Bounty coming
so besides my expectation, put me to a stand what reply to make at first, but
considering how he might look upon it as an Ingratitude to be silent, I
expressed my self after this manner, Sir, I am not able ever to do you such
service as may recompense your Goodness, but I hope that GOD will remember your
Bounty don in secret, which is the truest Charity, notwithstanding the
unworthiness of my self on whom it is shown. Great reason it is that I should
record the worthy Deeds of this Turkish Christian or Christian Turk: not only
as don to me, but as don to one of another Faith, and that without vain Glory,
a thing he ever hated: his calling me aside and forbidding me to make it known,
manifest the Absoluteness and Integrity of Charity, well knowing that I was
just upon my departure, and consequently not likely to be his Trumpeter: but
the more he charged me to conceal it the more I reckon it my Office to publish
it, that Christians whose first and chief Duty toward their Neighbor is
Charity, and that the remissness of that Duty may be convinced by those who
hold it as a voluntary and not an enjoined Act. In sum his fair Carriage
toward me, unfortunately thrown from a Condition of Freedom to a State of
Slavery, had so far engaged me to love and honor him, that (had it not been
for the Restriction and Care of a Wife and Children who lived all this time as
Widow and Orphans) I could have bin more content to serve him all my Life as a
Slave, than to have the Liberty which I have before and since enjoyed, with
such Anxiety. When, with a faint Heart and Eyes full of Tears, I took my last
leav of him he embraced me, and told me he had yet hopes to see me once again,
and when I was at a distance, cried out, GOD in the highest Heavens conduct
you: GOD Almighty bring you in safety home: which were the last words I heard
him speak.

Departure of the Author from Ispahan.
My two Companions, to wit, C. Brand, and L. Fabritius were returned back again
to Derbent, with intent to go by way of Russia, and I departed with the Caravan
of the Honorable the East India Company, from the Royal City Ispahan, having a
sufficient number of Camels and Mules to carry our Provision and Baggage to
Gammeron.

Mayar.
The same day we travailed 8 Leagues and about 10 a Clock came to a village
called Majar, where we took up our nights Lodging. We had also in our Company
some of those Persians, of whom I have already made mention that live still in
Heathenism, whom I found very civil and faithful in all their Doings.

On the 18 it was very cold weather and snowy, that we could hardly keep a
Horseback. The snow was here thicker than ever I have seen it (to my knowledge)
in the Low Countries, being between 4 and 5 Foot deep upon the Ground, and the
Path so narrow, that the Horses oftentimes going out of the Way, tumbled down
in the snow with the Packs, which happening so often mainly detarded that days
Journey. Before night we got the hilly Country and set down in the village
Canischa, where, by reason of bad Weather, we rested 3 days with the Caravan.

Upon the 22 we set forward again and had very hilly way, which proved so
incommodous that we travailed that day no more than 6 Dutch Miles, and took our
Nights rest at a Carawansera, where we met another Caravan coming from Gammeron
richly laden with all sorts of Indian Commodities, and bound for several
Markets in Persia.

On the 23 we broke up and the same day had bad and slippery way insomuch that
some of our Camels and Horses fell, whereby the Chests and Goods were much
endamaged. The Here Bent, as I said before, having appointed me as Caffil
Abassi, or Overseer, it was my duty to look to the reparation of this Damage,
and to see the Chests effectually mended, and therefore I went to see if I
could meet with any Person who could help me in the Village, letting the
Caravan remain so long in a Carawansera. At last after much enquiry I found
one, but coming back understood that my Portmantle and my Money was stole,
which put me in a great strait for I had not above the value of 25 gild. [or 55
sh. sterling.] left I suspected that some of our Company was the Party that had
committed the Theft, and had also a private hint given me of it. The matter
concerned me so far, that I forthwith began to tax the Party with it that I had
in suspicion, but he stoutly denied it, and was so displeased at me for
blemishing his Reputation, that he intimated the matter to some of his
Companions, who unanimously swore to be revenged on me and taking their
opportunity fell all together upon me, and used me in most cruel manner. It was
the Brother of the Party that told me, averring that he had seen it, but when
he came to confront him; denied every word he spoke to me, insomuch that I was
fain for the time being to be patient, yet fully resolved to have it out of his
Hide the first opportunity. That day we travailed 7 Dutch Miles and came at
night to a Village formerly called Jurgestan, now Iesegas.

On the 24 we broke up again, and that morning met a Post coming from Gameron,
and intending for Ispahan, of whom I understood that the Director van der
Dussen, who had remitted the Money for my Redemption was gone for Batavia.
These Tidings I must confess, were very unwelcom to me, because I knew it would
be 4 Months before any Ships would go for Batavia, the more because I was to
endure the hot season at Gameron. This day we travailed 6 Dutch Miles and at
night came to a fair new-built Carawansera.

The next day we broke up and passed through a fair Town called Surina. About 12 a
clock it began to snow very hard, so continuing till the Evening when we met
with a good Carawansera, which was no small comfort to us, having no stomach to
lie such weather without a Roof in the open Field. The same day we travailed 7
Dutch Miles.

On the 25 we had very good weather, and the Way also reasonable good so that
in good time we got to a Carawansera, which lay about 8 Dutch Miles, or
something more from the other. Near this place are diverse Ponds of sweet Water
affoarding also great plenty of Fish: wherefore we went to Angle, and took
about 40 Carps, which because of the Novelty were very acceptable, having eaten
nothing all the way but salt Meat. These Ponds as well as the Carawansera were
made, as we understood from an Inscription over the Door, at the Charges of the
Dutch East India Company.

On the 26 we had very high Hills to clamber over, so that the hollow places in
the way being filled with snow, put us (notwithstanding all the care and
vigilance we could use) to a great deal of trouble, for the way being very
slippery, the Camels, Mules and Horses often stumbled and fell, which greatly
endamaged the Chests which were but newly and very loosly repaired. Besides
that it snew very thick all the Forenoon, which made us long for a Carawansera,
that we could not reach till late at night coming to the Village Gufti, where
we rested for that night, having made no more than 5 Dutch Miles the whole day.
That night and the next day it continued snowing, so that we resolved to
continue under roof till the weather grew better. About noon came a Caravan
from S^yras, but we having taken up the place, they were fain to go forward
till they found another.

The Caravan surprised by Robbers.
On the 27 the weather grew better and the Sun shone, so that we proceeded on
our Journey, but having travailed an hour or two, we were surprised by some
Robbers, who all on a sudden assailed us and beset the Caravan round, and fell
a tearing all they could com at. Our Company, being afraid of their lives
deserted the Camels and left me alone to stand out the brunt of all. One of the
Robbers thrust his hand into a Bag in which were 3 or 4 Flitches of Bacon and
some Hams, who, when he came to know what it was, fell a cursing and menacing
me, that I did not warn him, for he was thereby unclean, and according to the
Mohammedan Superstition not to com into the Society of others, or enter the
Temple. That Gnat, it seems he strained at, yet stuck not to swallow a Camel.
Having taken what they could carry they left me, but not without a Token to
remember them, giving me so many Rebounders about the Head with their
Truncheons, that I was taken up for Dead by my faithful Fellow-Travellers, who
came again when they saw there was none to molest'em. That day we travailed 24
[ English] Miles, and at night came to a very commodious and stately
Carawansera, such as I had not met with all the way unless in some great City,
being all round with Galleries.

On the 28 we set forward on our Journey and came to a fair Village called
Mestzid, where we had a very commodious Carawansera, and stayed there that
night. The said Carawansera was nothing inferior to that we had the night
before, as well in respect of Convenience as ornament, having much variety of
Carved work, as Foliage, Fructurage, etc. after the Persian manner: the Walls
also were covered with a neat sort of white glazed Tiles. Near to this Place is
the Sepulcher and Tomb of the Mother of Schach Solomon, The Sepulcher of Schach
Solymans Mother.
being a fair Monument of white Marble: hither repair many devout Women to
visit the Tomb and pour out their Prayers and Supplications for themselves and
Friends, which I remarked was very brief, for they only (according to the
general Injunction) pushed the Tomb with their Head 3 times, and as often
stooped to kiss it, then muttered out a short prayer, which doubtless they have
by form, and so departed. Having stayed there that night we went in the Morning
to buy up some fresh Provisions and Fruits, that place being very famous for
Winter-growth of Fruits, both as to plenty and Cheapness.

On the For it was Leap year.
Nine and Twentieth of Febr. we came to a little village called Siwa, having
that day travailed 5 Dutch Miles.

The next day we set forward on our Journey and travailing a good pace, came
pretty early into the village Mardasch, where we resolved to rest a little
being almost wearied out with the badness of the Way and Weather. The next
morning I took a turn without Town on Horseback, with one of our Company;
where having rode about 2 Miles to the Eastward from the Town, we descried a
huge fair Pile of Building, which afterward by some Pilgrims that we met, we
understood was a Sepulcher. The general Structure was a very fair Temple
altogether built of Marble, standing on a rising ground and supported with 10
high and massy Pillars. When we entered we ascended several steps, MAR. 1672.
and went through a very stately Gate of fair white and speckled Marble; but
understood very well that (...) Christian was permitted to enter, lest they
should pollute it: however being shorn after their manner, and having no
discrepance of Habit whereby they might suspect me to be any other than a very
Musulman, I went boldly in to view all that was to be seen, which a private
Person and a Layman was permitted to view, for the innermost Vault is not to be
seen unless of Princes and the Spiritualists. Above the said Vault hung several
golden Lamps, which burn continually, and as the Watchmen told us the Coffins
that stood below were of massy Gold. In this Sepulcher they told us were
preserved the Bones of Noah and his Wife, of Shem, Ham and Japhet, together
with the 5 Sons of Shem, viz, Ashur, Arphaxad, Lud, Aram and Elam, by whom the
City See Josephus.
Persepolis is said to be first founded of old called Elamus. This was told me
by an old Persian, with whom I had some Discourse, who also said that he had the
keeping of some old Registers and Antiquities. Here they also show several
Skeletons and Pieces of Bones to Pilgrims in Golden Dishes, which they say are
the Bones of Noah and of his Grandchild Elam [but beleev it that list]

From this Temple we posted forward to the Ruins of the Royal Fort called
Schilminar, on Tzilminar, or according to the variety of the Dialects
Cehilminar, which is as much as to say Forty Pillars, so called from such a
number of Columns that it has formerly had; although the number is now
sufficiently diminished, partly by the negligence of the Persians, in
reparation of the same, and partly from other Occasions which make 'em to use
some of the Stones of this said Castle: besides the great disesteem which the
Mahometans have for Heathenish Antiquities, rather inclined to raze and
demolish, than maintain and repair the Relicts of Gentilism, especially what
has bin built to any superstitious End. Those Pillars that remain still whole
are 9 Cubits high, and about Five in compass at the Basis. I told about 18 or
20 of those said Pillars that were whole to the Chapter. It retains still the
name of K. Darius his Palace that being his Mansion House. The ancient Greek
and Latin Writers ascribe the Founding of it to Cyrus, but the Persians to one
Schach Iamscha, which I presume cannot be reconciled: but however their
Difference in Opinion be, certain it is that the Founder must have bin a mighty
Prince, who has raised such an admirable Structure, appearing more like a vast
City than one entire Building: and such was the Satisfaction I reaped from it,
that I should not have repented my Labor to have travailed a Thousand Miles to
see it. This stupendous Palace is seated, as appears by the Ruins, on a Plain,
environed on every side with Hills, and has extended it is Compass as far as the
Hill called Kuhirahmet, which is as much as to say, the Mount of Mercy. On the
East are two places of Entry with Marble Stairs, each step being 30 Foot long
and 17 of those steps are wrought out of one Stone, which ^t necessarily have
been a very great one, each step being half a Foot high. Being ascended 32 or
33 of those Steps we came at a great square Resting place the Walls and
Pavement whereof was altogether of hard and polished Marble. On each side were
the Images of diverse Beasts as Lions, Elephants, Grissins, Horses and others
Animals, afterward we came into a large and spacious place, about 90 Paces
square, where were Eight Gates, 4 whereof were 4 Paces and 3 Two Paces wide.
Above and on each side of these Gates were diverse Statues and other Figures,
which for their Boldness, due Construction of Members, Symmetric of Parts,
Analogy of Depression and Eleva^on, Holding and Foreshortning of Plains, with
all other Tokens of true Art, surpass all the Carved works that ever I have
seen either in Greece, Italy, or the whole World besides, that I have had the
Fortune to see. Below stood a hard bright polished Stone, set fast in the Wall
which might have served for a Mirror, on which was an Inscription in very
ancient Characters such as the modern Persians cannot read. The Letters below
were broad and rising higher grew smaller toward the Top like an Obelisk. I
had work enough to view all the Images that were up and down, as of Giants,
Lions, Bulls, Griffins, Tygres, The Olympian, or Games of Hercules, Battles,
etc. The Statues have mostly Weapons, Instruments of Music, or Garlands in
their Hands. Here and there are several Horsemen armed with Bow and Quiver, Some
with Spears, Rondaces, Scymiters and such like Weapons. Their Habit is very
strange and seems to be very ancient: some have round Bonnets as the noble
Venetians now, and Knights Templars of old used to wear. Abov the great Gate is
a huge Statue appearing abov the rest, having a long Rob^ on, with curled hair
and a long Beard, a Torse about his Head as formerly the Roman Emperors were
went to have: under his Robe he had a Vesture full of Foldings which were very
soft and silk-like, the sleeves were very loosely cut and wide, hanging down
like a Surplice, [or as those of a Batchlor of Art in Oxford] In one hand he
had a Mond, and in the other a Staff or Scepter. The Persians say that it is
the Statue of Solomon King of the Hebrews, but I rather take it to be Alexander
the Great, because of the Mond, who was the first Monarch (according to
History) that was so painted, as supposing himself to have conquered the whole
World, and for some time had his Residence in this Palace. Besides this were on
each side several others which seemed to be of less degree and meaner
Personages, a^ well by the Places where they stood as by the Habit, being clad
in shorter Robes and narrow Vestures, with sleeves close at the wrist, like the
Pesantry about Derbent. Some of these had long old-fashioned Spears, others led
Horses and Mules, and others brought oxen and Sheep with Mallets, Hatchets,
Knives and other Implements for Slaughter as if they were a going to Offer. In
this spacious Hall were also many other Figures as Emblemes, which were too
dark and abstru^e for me to unriddle. Leaving this Appartment we went into
another more wide and spacious than the former. At one End wa^ another Statue
close and (as I supposed) fast to the Walls, which by the Crown, or rather Cap
of State, seemed to be some Prince. H^ was on his knees, and as it were, praying
to the Sun, Fire and a Se^pent. The Inhabitants told me that it was the Image
of Jamschet, o^ Je^^scha to whom, as I have already said, the Persians ascribe
the Founding. The most part of those Statues were gilded, and appea^ so yet.
There were also several Battails admirably well don, and had good Symmetry and
Proportion according to the Distance, Holding and Perspective, all hewn out of
black Marble and set fast in the Wall. When this illustrious Pile has bin in
it is glory, might no^ only have bin recounted among the Wonders of the World,
but for it is admirable rare Works and stupendous Structure, well have claimed
the Priority as Paramount, according to the appearance of it is Ruins, which I
found conformable to what is recorded of it in History, for there appears the
Foundation of a triple Wall; the first or outmost was about 32 Foot high,
having many Bulwarks and Towers, which have bin as excellent for their Ornament
as Strength as sufficiently appears by what is still remaining. The second
seems to have been nothing inferior to the first for Beauty nor Strength, and
twice as high: The third was 120 Foot high: on each side was a Passage to
enter, where were many Watch-Towers and Gates of durable and hardest Marble.
These Fortifications were also environed with Pallisados of huge Beams, and
many Batteries, to the Terror of the Enemy. It is neither to be known nor
guessed what an immense Treasure this vast Fabric has cost, when it has bin
first founded: and it is highly to be lamented that such a stately Fabric
should be laid wast upon such a light account, which in some manner might be
thought intransitory, or not to suffer decay so long as Art had any Countenance
upon Earth. The Historians all concur in this Opinion that it was burned by
Qu* Curtius lib. 5.
Alexander the Great in a drunken ^od, at the instigation of the notable Whore
Thais, who perswa^d him that he could not gratify the Greeks and spite the
Persians ^ore, than to set this City on Fire, which had ever bin a Terror, not
only to Greece but to the whole World. Upon this Motiv the King ^ent himself in
Person and lay the first fire to it, being imitated (...) a Train of Courtiers
and Whores all besotted with drink, so ^t this wonderful great and the most
splendid Palace in the Uni^se was in a moment laid in Rubbish, there being much
Cedar in (...) When the Soldiers saw all on a flame, they ran to quench it but
^ing the King very busy in setting it on Fire, they fell to a con^ry work, and
in stead of endeavoring to quench it brought wood increase the Fire; whence it
appears that the strongest Fort, I pre^^e, that ever was, or is in the World,
was demolished by the powerful Interest of Women and effects of Wine.

About 2 Leagues from Chehilminar are the Ruins of some Statues, The Image of
Rustan a Persian Champion.
and amongst others one which they say was the Image of Rustan, a ^ersian
Champion of great fame; for which reason every great Hero among them that has
performed any valorous Atchievment is called ^stan, and glories as much in
that, as the Greeks of old by the usurped ^me of Achilles, or the Roman
Stage Players in the name of Roscius. ^his Image as also all the rest are about
3 times as great as the Life, ^^d armed with Clubbs and other ancient Armor.
But to rehearse (...) the Fables that the Persians told me of those Heroes,
would rather ^pair the Credit of what is already said in conformity with Truth
than giv Satisfaction to the Curious; wherefore here as in many other places
where I might have interspersed such Dreams, I thought good to spare the pains
of relating them.

CHAP. XXXIV. Arrival at Scyras. They meet with some Carmelites. The base
dealings of those of the Caravan. The Author meets with the Thief that had
pillaged him. Mr. Stru^ well entertained by a French Surgeon. A Description
of Scyras. Dive^ Mestzids, or Sepulchers. The Palace of the Chan. Excellent
Wine abo^ Scyras. Noble Orchards. Departure from Scyras. The Special Bounty o^
the Carmelites and the French Surgeon. Dates plentiful and cheap. How the
Date-trees are propagated. Arrival at Scharim. They meet a Caravan. Assailed by
night of 30 Robbers, who kill 5 Men of the Company, and at (...) by a unanimous
continuance of the Caravan force them to yield. The Robbers b^ Quarter which is
refused. They suffer themselves to be bound, are diversely to^tured and
dispatched. Great plenty of Partridges.
AFter we had refreshed our selves and rested the Caravan, we go^ all in a
readiness, and the first day toward the Evening came^ the Village Alikon,
which we found well plenished with all necess^ries and Refreshments for our
selves, and good Provender for o^ Horses and Camels. Thus having spent the fore
part of the nig^ in mirth and divertisement, we took our rest, and the next d^
pursued our Journey coming on the 8 of March to Scyras, where brought the Goods
of the East India Company into their Ware-hou^ there.

So soon as I was arrived at Scyras I came to understand that the^ was a
Monastery of Carmelites in the Town who had bin always friendly to Christian
Passengers and Travailers in assisting them with the advice, etc. Whereupon I
went to find out the Convent, and bei^ come got speech with 2 of them who
received me very kindly, a^ desired me to lodge in the Convent so long as I
stayed at Scy^ and treated me all the while with all the Delicacies they cou^
get, and the Wine that the Country affoarded. The one was a^ Italian of the
City of Naples by name Felicello; the other a Pole from Warsaw and called
Jadistau.

During my abode here our Caravans Company had made unanimous resolution among
themselves not to proceed on their Journey with me, and that upon very slender
and weak pretenses: they had already received half their Moneys at Ispahan, and
we were not half way by much: but whether it was because my Money was stolen,
or because (perhaps) that they feared to be examined about the Theft when we
came to Gameron and so condignly punished, I cannot determine: But whatsoever
their Reason was, they left me there at a great loss, so that I was fain to
seek out a new Conduct, and supply my self with fresh Camels and Horses, which
without the help of the 2 Monks had bin impossible for me to accomplish.

The third day after my arrival at Scyras I went without the Town to walk, and
accidentally found the Thief who had stole my Moneys, and with the help of his
Brother had so misused me, as was said before, bathing himself in the River, so
that seeing so fair an opportunity to revenge the Villainy, I ran toward him
and with a Damaskin Scymiter I always wore, gave him an excellent Cross on the
Cheek, and besides that lent him a few slashes about his back and shoulders,
which don I took his clothes and cut them all to patches, ^o that the poor
Caitiff was fain to go mother naked into the Town. I threatened him also to
write to Ispahan, and make complaint at Court, and in order thereto to address
my self to the Chan of Scyras to dispatch the Letters. This it seems put him
into such Consternation as well as his Companions, that he durst not appear
abroad to challenge me for any injury don him, fearing, perhaps, upon my
address to the Deputy that they would be secured till further Information: nor
did I ever see him since.

Besides the gentle Reception and the great kindness these Friars showd me, I
was kindly treated by one Doctor Robin, a Frenchman, which the Persians called
Hakim Robin, for Hakim in their Tongue is as much as to say Doctor: but his
first name I cannot remember. This same Gentleman, I must confess, showed me
great friendship, and sent a Letter for me to Holland enclosed in his own. So
that in the hardest and greatest extremities I ever found some Friends, and when
I was almost in despair of ever returning to my pristin State, and plunged in
the most grievous Miseries, obtained nevertheless by the Providence of Almighty
GOD, some unexpected Sublevation; that I should know what it is to be miserable,
and what it is to be thankful.

Scyras as most other Towns in Persia lies in a Valley, environed on every side
with Hills. On that side toward Ispahan is only one Thorowfare or Passage,
which is laid ore with an Arch all over painted with variety of Beasts and
Animals, and inscribed in several Places with Turkish and Persian Rhymes and
Mottos. When one is passed through the said Arch is a fair and spacious street,
which leads to the City, being plain, wide, eaven, and planted on each side
with Trees [like the Palmal in Saint James's Park] which with the great number
of Gentlemen's Houses on each side renders it as an amiable Paradise. At the end
of the way is a still standing pool or pond, which is drawn off with a Trench
on each side: having past this we come over a Plain or Flat field, and just
before the Gates of the City to a great long Stone Bridge which lies over a
Ditch, which in the Summer time is dry, but in the Winter gives the Inhabitants
work enough to keep it in with damming, for sometimes when it snows and the
Water falling unexpectedly from the Mountains it overflows the whole champain
Land, between the aforesaid Pool and the Ditch, is a little Chapel founded by
a Carmelite Friar, which is often visited by the Christians that live in
Scyras. The Maydan or Market of Scyras is without the Walls, which they say is
by reason that this Place is of great Importance and in danger of being
surprised or taken in by the Boors that live without the Persian Jurisdiction,
who have more than once attempted to make themselves Masters of the Town and
Fort. On each side the Town appear the Ruins of Old Walls, Gates, Towers,
Pillars and other great Buildings, which is a fair argument that Scyras has bin
formerly much larger than it is now at this day, which is nevertheless a Town
of consideration, in respect of the present Trade and number of Inhabitants.
The greatest part of the City Walls are of Marble, for that is there in greater
plenty than Frise [or Portland] Stone with us: but as for the Streets they are
neither fair nor spacious, but void of elegant building and uniformity of
structure, and by reason that they lie unpav'd very foul and hardly to be
passed in bad and rainy Weather. There also many Mestzids, or Churches but
those very mean and hardly worth our taking notice of: only one which they
call Sadur, being as the Cathedral or Minster may pass for an eminent Building,
in which they say that one of Mahomets Successors lies interred. Within it
appears with great magnificency, and is very well ordained as to it is structure
and Order of Colums; in the middle is a Chore, or Quire, which receives it is
light from a Lanthorn or Tower of Glass above. The next remarkable Temple is
that of Aga Riza a very rich Indian Merchant who founded it at his proper
Charges and left a considerable sum to erect him a Tomb at the East and
thereof. There is a very fair Basar round about with rich Shops and many
Galleries. There is also an Academy which may take place with the best public
Edifices about Town, in which are taught the Literature there in use, besides
variety of other discipline and sciences. These are all the Buildings that are
of any note in Scyras save only the Palace of the Deputy, which is environed
with a thick stone Wall, and has on each side several spacious and fair
Galleries.

The Land round about Scyras is very fertile, produces great plenty of Corn and
Fruit, but abov all is eminent for the rich Vineyards; insomuch that this Place
and Country has got the name beyond all the Provinces in Persia for delicate
Wine, surpassing not only the Candian and Canary-Wines but all the Wines in the
World for a delicate taste, relish, and flavor. From hence the King of Persia
and all the great Personages at Ispahan have their Wine, and hither repair the
English and Dutch to market: nay, such is the esteem thereof, that
notwithstanding the great abundance of the yearly product, it is as dear here
as Canary Sack in the Low Countries. This Trade in Wines which they of Scyras
have is at present so considerable that there is not so much as half an Acre
together of wast ground, or hardly employed in any other use, for the Vineyards
com so close to the Town that one may throw a stone from the Walls into them.
Such ground as is not proper to nourish the vine they convert to Orchard use,
and have many fair Arborets or Nurseries for young Fruit Trees of all sorts,
which are transported hence to other Places, the Fruit of this Country being
nothing inferior to their Wines. They have abundance of Oranges, Cittrons,
Pomegranats, Almonds, Dates, Apples, Pears and almost all Fruits that I have
seen elsewhere, insomuch that the Town of Scyras, as one beholds the Country
from some high building or Tower seems to stand in the Center of an Earthy
Paradise. Without the City is a Ward inhabited by a People that came from
Babylon, when that City was taken in by the Turks. Without stands a fair House
built for charitable use, where all the Poor of the City that are destitute of
a Meals meat may have their needs supplied at the Kings charges, if they have
the humility to fetch it: this House is called Aly Kapin where there are
several persons in service to dress Victuals for the said use, and have as good
custom as all the Inns in Scyras.

Having staid here a considerable time, and so nobly entertained by the said
Carmelites all the while I was in Scyras, I went to take my leave of them,
giving them many Thanks (the only Tresure I had by me) for their many
Civilities, and setting forward on our Journey came at night to a good and very
commodious Carawansera, where we took our Rest. Near this Place was a Fish Pond
in which some of our company got great store of Fish on a sudden, with a Hook
and Line, for they were always provided therewith to use when occasion and
opportunity concurred.

The next day it blew hard and was intermixed with showers of Rain, so that we
had very bad travailing and almost wearied out. Toward the Evening I happened
to espy some persons driving on very hard after us, and coming nearer, to my
great joy and happiness I descryed that it was Father Felisello the Carmelite,
and Doctor Robine, who were going for Gameron to direct some affairs they had
there.

Besides my good Fortune to enjoy the Company of such Friends I was further
obliged by fresh kindnesses, they offering me always to eat with them, till we
came to our Journeys end, which was no small happiness for me, considering my
mean Condition, and great strait, being very short of Moneys and almost in
despair of coming to Gameron with the Charge I had upon me. I cannot but tell
you how much I was ashamed to be so caressed by Strangers, who had nothing to
expect from me, and loath I was to be so burthensom to them of whose hands I
had not deserved the smallest friendship and kindness that they manifested
toward me, yet being so cruelly straightened on every hand I was forced to accept
of their Offer. They held a very noble Table, and had taken along with them a
great Case of Bottles full of Scyras Wine, which they spared not so long as it
lasted. The Doctor had with him 3 Men to attend him and was every where highly
respected, being a Gentleman of a sweet Temper, discreet and and sociable, so
that my Journey seemed much shorter for his Company. This day, being as I said
very bad weather, we hardly travailed 6 Dutch Miles.

The next day setting forward we came at night to a Village called D^bba, where
we set our Caravan down. This Village appeared like a Camp or Army with their
Tents, the Cottages being so mean, and the highest house hardly sufficient for
a tall man to stand upright, being built only of Reeds and Twigs plated like
Basket-work and ^aubed over with clay. The Inhabitants like the Cottages they
lived ^n were very poor and despicable People, insomuch that we had not much
Divertisement or accommodation there. This day we hardly ^vanced 5 Dutch Miles.

On the 4 we set forward and went over very Rocky and hilly way, ^ssing through
several villages. Great store of Dates.
Upon those Hills grow great ^ore of Dates, and are so cheap that one may buy
100lb. weight for the ^lue of 2 Shillings Sterling. and are both of an excellent
taste and lovely ^lour. The strange manner of procreation of those Trees.
The Date-tree seems to have some harmony with living Ani^als, in their
Procreation, and have also their Sexes. The Female will ^ot bear any Fruit if
planted alone, so that they are always planted ^y Pairs together all along, and
indeed do naturally grow so. But ^he Female growing old will not bear Fruit,
unless they take a piece of the Top-branch of the Male and ingraft it in the
Female, which they also do to some young Trees to make them bring forth good
Fruit, which would otherwise be of a bitter and odious Taste. I have ^^rther
remarked that when the Male and Female are planted a small distance asunder
they will lean toward each other, as if there were some mutual sympathy between
them. The Inhabitants who have bin, from one Generation to another, used to
plant and propagate these Trees told me many remarkable things about them,
which because I will not be prolix, I shall ommit. This day we travailed 7
Dutch Miles, and at night got a fair Carawansera to take our rest in.

The next day we had very dry ground and a barren Country to pass through, and in
some places rocky, so that we travailed that day no more than 5 Miles. On our
way and near the Carawansera which we took up for that night, we saw great
Flocks of wild Goats which some of our Company had a great mind to taste, and
went out in the Evening upon the Chase, but the Creatures were too cunning to
b^ caught, so that our Hunters were fain to return to the Carawanse^ hungry
and weary. The season being sharp and cold we laid on great pile of wood, and
warmed our selves thoroughly.

The day following in the Afternoon we came to a Town call^ Scharim, which I
presume had bin anciently a City and walled i^ it stood in the middle of a
grove altogether of Date-Trees. It is all a Town of considerable Traffic in
consideration of their Manufact^rie in Cottons, there being very many Weevers.
There is also a ve^ fair Marketplace, where besides the many Shops of their
own M^nufactories, are several rich Warehouses of Silks and Persi^ Stuffs, in
which they also drive a great Trade and have correspo^dence with the greatest
Marts in all the Country round. Besides t^ great Concourse of Trading-people,
they have a Market twice a we^ for the Boors, which is no small advantage to
the Town. Findi^ this a very commodious place to rest in, we tarried here 3
days refresh our selves, and ease our Camels, Horses and Mules, having f^ 3 or 4
days had very bad way and weather.

Having sufficiently taken our rest at Scharim, we set forward a^ had very good
weather, travailing all the day long through a flat Country, and by the way saw
many Noblemens houses, and here a^ there a Grove of Date trees, and many fair
Orchards, so that the was the most pleasant days Journey we had from Ispahan.
Here (...) met a huge Caravan consisting of a great Troop of Men, Camels Mules,
and Sumpter-Horses laden with rich Indian Wares. T^ said Caravan came from
Gammeron, and intended to go by the same Po^ we came, being bound for Scamachy
and Surwan. In this company met accidentally with a Persian who had bin our
Neighbor at S^machy, and delivered him two Letters, the one for my Master H^
Byram which was written in Turkish, and the other for my Wife, whi^ he promised
to send for me by way of Smyrna. At night we ca^ to have very rocky and ill
way, The Caravan assaulted by Robbers in the Carawansera.
but found a Carawansera where we to^ our rest, having travailed that day about
24 English Miles.

When we were lay down to sleep we were surprised with abo^ 30 Robbers, that
came boldly into the Carawansera, with intent, as (...) had reason to beleev,
to murder us all whilst we were asleep. 'T^ true they did not at first make
any assault but deferred their purpose till midnight, thinking perhaps, that we
not suspecting them might grow supine, and judging our selves secure, grow so
negligent as to fall asleep; but we thought good to set a narrow Watch and kept
our selves in a readiness all the Night, with Weapons in our hand, for fear of a
sudden assault. About midnight they fell in and fought outright, so that 5 of
our Men lay presently under Feet, being in all 37. We fought jointly together
with good Courage so that we speedily allayed their Fury. Our Party as we could
observe were much stronger than theirs, yet if we had not bin unanimous and
faithful to one another we had not com so well of, for there was not one Man
from the greatest to the least, but fought manfully and with a good ^ill, till
the very last, when they ran into another Room and shut ^e Door after them,
which was no small advantage to us: for, when ^e had them so penned up we knew
our selves secure, there being no ^ther Passage for them to com out at. The Door
we barricado'd in ^ith huge Stones, and with all our Carbines and Blunderbusses
^oured in shot upon them, so long, till they began to beg for Quarter, The
Robbers beg Quarter.
which we resolved not to giv them, but promised them the liberty (...) com
forth and to stand to our mercy. In the mean while we had ^bserved that several
of them lay dead and wounded. After they had consulted a while among themselves
they resolved to comforth, but we refused to let them com all together, but one
by one: keeping a narrow watch at the Door that they should not rush out
altogether. Having got them out they were very patient and suffered us to ty
them back to back. Those that were wounded we killed outright; and and when it
began to be light we set forward on our Journey, taking the rest being abov 20
along with us, and coming to a Grove of Date-Trees, there hung them up by the
heels, and stripping off their Clothes ^ashed off their Noses, Ears and Hands,
Their Punishment.
which we nailed to a Tree as Monuments and Relicts of Roguery, and left the
Bodies hanging. How we came to be so happy as to conquer those Villains was no
small wonder to me, since there was never a man among the Company that fought
with any other Order than as his Courage led him, so that we see what some will
do and can atchieve, when Life and Goods lie at the stake. Their Punishment
it is true, was severe enough to let them die a lingering Death, but the Loss of
our Companions was so precious to us that could we but have bethought a harder,
they had bin sure t^ have gone that way to pot: and not have had the opportunity
to pre^ upon Passengers again.

Having performed the Hangmans Office we went to our Came^ and Caravan, leaving
the Bodies there for an Example to their Companions. The way proved very hilly
and uneaven, wast and rocky being of a hard Flint-Stone, and indeed so uneasy
that we had mu^ ado to get all the Camels and Horses forward, some weary and
read^ to lay down, others stumbling and others straying, for the way was no
beat. However in the Evening after 4 Dutch miles Travail we got Carawansera,
and there resolved to take our rest. Here about we sa^ great Flocks of
Partridges, Great plenty of Partriges.
which Father Felisello who was passi^ dextrous with a Birding-piece, went out
to shoot, and brought (...) many as served us for supper, which we illustrated
with a Glass of d^licat Scyras Wine.

CHAP. XXXV. The incommodous Traveling over Mountains. They com into an Inn
(or Carawanse^ where they are well entertained. Arrival at Lar. A Description
of that Tow^ The Vnwholsomness of the Air and water there. The Inhabitants
given (...) Hospitality and Lovers of all kinds of Discipline and Science.
Mummay Kob^ a precious Balsam. Remarkable Monuments of Robbers executed.
Depart^ from Lar. They meet with another Troop of Robbers, whereof 7 are killed
They are overtaken by Monsr. Kasenbroot. Their Arrival at Gamron.
THe next morning being the 12 of March, we got all in a re^diness in order to
our Journey, and had very steep and dang^rous rocky hills to clamber over,
insomuch that we durst not ke^ a Horseback but were fain to allight and lead
the greatest part of t^ way, being in danger if the Horses should happen to
stumble to (...) dashed in pieces upon the sharp Flints which were terrible to
look at in respect of their acuity and sharpness. These are a part of that
Circ^ of hills which encompass the famous Taurus. This day we advance^ 5 Dutch
Miles and got a good Carawansera.

On the 13 we betook our selves to our Journey, and about 3 in the Afternoon
got to a Carawansera. Father Felisello finding her^ some sheep to be sold bought
a Lamb, which although it was in the Fast he was resolved to Feast of, saying that
all Meats was dispensed with a Travailer who must eat what he can and not what
he will. But this being the Birthday of the good Father he was resolved to
celebrate it with a good supper, which indeed we had, and drunk good store of
Wine to boot, in which we remembered the Catholic King and his Royal Highness
the Prince of Orange in several healths, and that to such a Mesure that we were
in as good as mood a those Potentates themselves could be; in short we were so
moistened within, that we slept that night without much care.

On the 14 in the morning betimes we set forward and passed by several Pitts
which were dug through from one to another under ground, so that the water
ran through them all. The same Pits were well stored with Carps and other Fish
which our Company angled for and took several, which served us for a Novelty at
night, these Pitts or rather Ponds were conveyed by a channel or narrow Conduit
to a great Stone Cistern which was near to a Carawansera, where we took our
Nights rest, having that day traveled 5 Dutch Miles.

On the 15th. about Noon we came into the Village Barry where we ^et down and
stayed there 2 Days, finding our selves unable to go any further without a
Pause, and the Camels and other Beasts almost wearied out; understanding
moreover that we had very hilly and rocky way to pass over. This day we had
only advanced 4 Miles [ Dutch]

On the 18th. betimes in the morn we left Barry, and clambered up a very steep
Hill, meeting by the way some Gentlemen that were diverting themselves with the
Hawk, which there, as well as in Europe, is held for a noble Game, and not a
Gentleman but has his Faulcon. In the Afternoon we got the height of the Hill
where we found a very old Man, who neither combed nor shaved his Hair but let
it grow negligently, so that it looked like a Mop. This Man as we understood
afterward was one, that lived a Heremitical and austere Life, being reputed
for a Saint among the Inhabitants. The said Hermit came to me and begged that
I would give him a pipe of Tobacco which I did, and got his Prayers for it.
Having that day traveled 6 Leagues we came pretty late in the Evening to a
Carawansera.

On the 19 we travailed through a most pleasant Valley, where we saw many Boors
Cottages and great groves of Date-trees, on the right hand and on the left. We
called at a Boors house and would have bought of them some Milk, but the People
would take no Money for it. They asked me from whence I came, I told them from
Surwan Scamachy; but that being a place they had never heard of in their lives,
asked me further if that were as far as Ispahan, I told them it was more than
twice as far, at which they greatly wondered thinking that I must needs com from
the utmost bounds of the World, these being a poor ignorant People and never
travail farther than their Market Town, which is a little Grange in the Valley,
and never heard tell of any Country than their own; in short they would have
had me to stay longer with them, but my Time was too precious to spend in
answering all they would have asked me. At night we came to the City Laar,
where we took up our Resting place in the Dutch Lodge, where we found very good
Convenience, and only an old Man and a Woman to look to the House and assist
the Caravans, who were set there by the Company. Here I got the Chests and
Cases repaired that were broken and endamaged, by the often falling of the
Camels through the rocky way.

Laar or Lar is a pretty big Town; but has no Walls to resist or endure a
strong siege, save only such as are made of Bricks that are dried in the Sun,
but is reasonably strong in respect of its Situation, as well as for the Fort
or Castle, which is built upon a Hill on the North-side, the Walls thereof are
of solid stone, and the Fort it self so seated that it can command the whole
Town, having one narrow Passage to enter it, which is very steep: it is
supplied with several pieces of great Ordnance, which the King sent hither from
Ormus, when by the help of the English he took that City in. About Laar grow
abundance of Date-trees, but no Wine, and by reason that they have no Commerce
or Traffic abroad but poor, must supply themselves with Water, which, as well as
the Air here about, is very unwholsom, insomuch that many times Strangers who
are to make use of it for want of Wine fall sick, and are tormented with a
small Worm, but long, which breeds between the Skin and the Flesh, and cannot
be taken out without great pain. They showed me one that was above 5 Foot long,
and not so thick as an ordinary Goos-quill. The Inhabitants of Laar are very
free and sociable to converse withal, and great Lovers of Sciences and
Learning. Not far from the Castle is a certain Rock out of which issues a very
precious Balsem, called by the Persians, Mummay Kobas. This Balsem, or Oil, A
most precious Balsem proceeding a Rock.
is gathered only in the Month of June about which time it runs stillatim, or
drop by drop, out at a Vein. The said Rock from whence it coms is continually
guarded with a strict Watch, by Order of the King, and none is suffered to
touch it upon pain of Death. This Oil is reckoned and well known by experience
to be the greatest Antidot against Poison in the World, although never so strong;
and is therefore held by the King as an inestimable Tresure, and never suffered
to be exported out of his Dominions. The King also willing to show any of his
Subordinat Princes and Deputies an extraordinary and high Favor, always sends
them a few drops thereof, to make it the greater in esteem and value, and with
one injoyns them, not to send it out of the Kingdom, upon pain of his
displesure. Without Laar are erected several Pillars for Monuments of the
Execution of several Robbers, who had made the high Ways unfree to Travel: Half
of their Bodies are set up on these Pillars, and the other half buried in the
Ground, being cut asunder whilst they are still alive.

Having tarried here 3 Nights and 2 Days, we set forward on the 22 and had very
bad and rocky way. Abundance of Wild Swine,
We saw here great Flocks of wild Swine whereof our Company shot 2 with their
Hand-guns, but durst not fetch them for fear of the Persians, that threatened to
leav us if we did, for they loath them more than Toads. We also shot several
Eagles which notwithstanding they prey upon the Pigs the Persians fed heartily
upon them. This day we travailed 7 Dutch Miles, and Eagles.
which we thought more than a dieta rationabilis, or an ordinary Stage, in
regard of the badness of Way and Weather: and at night had a good Carawansera.

On the 23 we broke up and passed by a fair Town called Pharate, which we left
on the right hand. The said Town was pleasantly seated in the midst of a
Grove of Date-Orange-and Lemmon Trees. The Caravan assaulted by Robbers.
By the way we met with a Party of Robbers who furiously set upon us, but
finding themselves too weak betook themselves to flight leaving 7 Dead behind
them. We also lost 2 Men of our Company that were outright killed in this
Bickering, and had six wounded. The Dead we buried near the Way and bound up
the wounded. At night we came to a small Village called Sarap, where we took up
our nights rest, having that day advanced 6 Miles.

On the 24 we set forward again, and at night came to a great Village which we
took up for our Stage, having a fair and spacious Carawansera in it. We had no
sooner disburthened the Camels, but had 50 or 60 Women who came and proffered
us Milk to sell, and were so importunat and troublesome, that we could not get
rid of 'em, till we set the Dogs upon them. These went all with their Face
uncovered, which I had not seen any Honest Women in all Persia do, except in
one Village between Scamachy and Ispahan. This day we had furthered our Journey
by 7 Miles.

On the 25 we had a great and wearisom Mountain to travail over at the Foot
whereof was a River which we were forced to wade through, by reason that the
stone bridge which had formerly lain over it was broken down. After we had
travailed 5 Dutch Miles we took up ou^ nights rest in a Carawansera. But we
could here get no manner of Refreshment, the Country round about being dry and
barren, producing nothing but Date-trees, that we could see.

On the 26 toward night we came to a Grange of Fishermen of whom we bought a
few for our use. We were no sooner set down but came Monsr. Kasenbroot with his
Slaves riding into the Town, being sent for from Ispahan to Suratte. The night
being very still we could easily hear the rushing of the main Ocean. That day
we had travailed 7 Miles.

On the 27 we went onwards, and about Noon came to a Carawansera which lay
close to the shore, and could see Ships a sailing, which filled me with a more
than ordinary Joy, not having seen such a comfortable sight in a long time.
Hence we saw Gammeron and could distinctly discern the English and Dutch Flaggs
fly abroad that were planted upon the Lodges. However we thought good to tarry
there that night having only advanced 4 Dutch Miles, that we might enter
Gammeron the fore part of the Day.

On the 28 for the last time we made ready for the pursuit of our Journey, and
in the Fore-noon came into Gammeron, where we were friendly received and, I by
permission of the Here Francoys de Ha^s, then Director brought into the
Companies Lodge. At my first coming every one took me for a Persian, being
shorn after that manner, but hearing me speak Dutch, they asked me if I was one
of those who were in the service of the Czar of Moscovia, I answered, Yes, and
also gave them a full Relation of what had passed and of the great hardship I
had suffered since in Slavery and otherwise, about which they were very curious
and asked me diverse Questions. The Director himself was also pleased to send
for me into the great Hall where he welcomed me out of my Slavery, and promised
to send me by the first Shipping for Batavia.

CHAP. XXXVI. A Description of Gamron, or Bendar, and the Etymology. The great
Traffic with all Nations. Vnwholsomness of the Air, and Heat at Gamron.
Palepunschen an unwholsom Drink how made. The Earth dry and barren. Fertility
of Kismisch. Of the Inhabitants of Gamron. A wonderful Tree growing without the
City. An Indian (reputed) Saint. The best season for strangers to com and
Traffic at Gamron. Merchandise brought thither by the English. The English
receiv Toll with the Scach. The Hollanders trade without paying Toll. The
Author falls very sick and in despair of Recovery. The kindness and bounty of
L. van Akersloot to him. He recovers. Set sail from Gamron. Arrival at Maschate
and a Description of that Town. The violent Heat about Maschate which renders
the Air very unwholsom. Their Departure from Maskate. Arrival at Batavia. The
Author hires himself for Sailmaker. Comes with 7 Ships before Bantham. Arrival
at the Cape of Good Hope.
GAmeron is also by the Persians called Bendar, Description of Gammeron*
which is as much as to say, The Key of the Kingdom, like the Name Derbent,
already mentioned. It lies in 27 degr. Northerly Latitude upon the Gulf of
Persia: on each side stand 2 Castles built after the old manner of
Fortification, but very strong and able to command the Haven from side to side:
they are also well supplied with Men and ^ave good store of Ammunition. That
part of the Town which lies toward the Country is munited with a reasonable
strong Wall; and has without at a convenient Distance several Redoubts, to
defend the Upper Quarter of the City; There is also a considerable strong
Redoubt. on the Coast. Gammeron is in respect of it is commodious site become a
very famous Emporium and that on a sudden, being lately a poor small Town,
inhabited by Fishers It is frequented by Indians, The Strong Trade at Gammeron.
Moors, English, French and Hollanders, who drive here a mighty Trade which
three last have their Houses of Residence next to the shore, and stand very
Convenient for loading and unloading of Goods. Gammeron is a place subject to a
very unwholsom Air being a hot Climat: the Heats continuing violent from May
till September which is the reason that so many Strangers either die or dwindle
away with a lingering Disease, which if they once get, it will hardly leave
them, although they should change the climat. Besides the Unwholsom Airs and
Damps, there are many Strangers who destroy themselves with drinking of a Liquor
much in use there called Palepunshen, being compounded of Arak, Sugar, and
Raisins, which i^ so bewitching that they cannot refrain from drinking it, if
they on^ com to taste it, being very delicious and tempting. It occasion a
Giddiness in the Head, Fevers, and Fluxes, and is so corros^ that some who have
drunk immoderatly of it and died, being op^ned, their Bowels were gnawed
through and through. The scorc^ing Heat of that Clime also renders the Earth
very dry and baren so that there is little or nothing that grows about it, save
only Dates, which like best in sandy and dry ground, but as for Garden^ they
are very rare to be seen except here and there a little one which with great
trouble and continual Watering bring forth a few Po^herbs, and Roots. However
they are very well supplied with many sorts of Refreshments, as Cittrons
Oranges, Pomegranats, Peaches, Apricocks, Grapes, Almonds, Apples, Pears and
other Fruits as well as Plants, which grow upon the Island K^mish, about thre^
Leagues from Gammeron; but their most usual Diet is Fish. The Inh^bitants go
almost quite naked by reason of the great Heat, Of the Inhabitants of Gammeron.
and a^ of a tawny yellowish Color. The Women adorn their Arms, Noses, and
Ears with Rings and Plates of Gold, Silver, Copper, and Iron every one
according to their ability.

About a Mile without Gammeron is a wonderful kind of a Tre^ always which
grows round, A strange Tree without Gammeron.
and the Branches declining to the Ground rise out again, as if it were from
another Root, and so co^tinues for 250 Paces in circuit. This same Tree bears a
sort of Fru^ round and yellow, but sourish of Taste, and has small stones or Ke^
(...) (...) Hillang^e Log^c. (...) (...). (...). 5. (...) (...). (...). 8 E^n
(...). (...) 10 D'(...).


^ess like a Fig. Hither repair many lazy People to shadow them^lvs under it,
being thick and impenetrable for the Sun. Under ^s Tree is a Pagod, or little
Temple, wherein they say the Founder (being one of their Holies) lies at rest:
this Pagod is attended ^waies by one of their Saints, Indian Pagod.
and is continually visited by the Indians who go thither to perform their
devout Offices. The Indian who keeps it never shaves himself, but lets his
Beard and the Hair of his Head grow so long as it will, which by his permission
I mesured and found it more than 6 Foot long, After I had don I gave him a
small piece of Money, valuing about Twopence, for which he showed himself very
thankful, and brought me in to see the Pagod and Tomb. Above was a Canopy of
silk, and on each side were Lamps that were never suffered to go out. It was
also painted round with ^ans, wherewith they say that the Soul of the Departed
Saint is ^gely delighted. I desired to know the ground of that their Opi^on and
by what Token they were so persuaded: His answer was, that it was not lawful
to impart such sacred Mysteries to Unbeleev^. In the Month of October the Heat
is almost past, at what time resort hither Merchants from all Places to
negotiate their Affairs: The Persians and Armenians come by way of Ispahan, and
the Arabians through Babylon, or Bagdet as it is now called, with multitudes of
Caravans consisting of many Thousands of Camels, Horses, Mules and other Beasts
of Portage. Hither also repair both English and Hollanders bringing all sorts
of Commodities that are there Market^ble and may be vended. The English bring
mostly Woollen Manufactory, Pewter, Steel, etc. The Hollanders trade there
mostly in Spices and Indian Commodities. The Portugeez Tongue is here almost
universally spoke, they having so long had that place, and yet above all other
Europeans are obliged to pay Custom: The Dutch Factors buy their Silks at the
Price Courant and are also Custom-free. But the English are not only
Custom-free here but also go Sharers with the King of Persia in the Custom that
is received at Ormus, for the good Service they did in assisting the King to
take that Town ^om the Portugueezes. The Hollanders notwithstanding their being
Custom-free have nevertheless a hard Task to satisfy the Sabandar, or chief
Officier, who always coms in with new Pretenses and Inventions, which he knows
they will rather comply with than suffer any obstruction of Trade.

IUL. 1672.
On the 18 of July I was visited with a most violent burning Feave^ which raged
so cruelty that I grew desperate, for I felt my self eve^ day weaker and
weaker, The Author taken very sick of a burning Fever.
wherefore supposing, notwithstanding t^ contrary opinion of many, that if I
should change the Air, tha^ should change the Air, that I should recover, and
therefore g^ one to address himself to the H^er Director de Haas and in my na^
intercede that I might go for Batavia with the Ship N^ytsenbur^ which lay ready
for sail. The Director was pleased to give order the I should go aboard which
was matter of Joy for me, fearing if I ha^ stayed much longer that I should
have taken my leav of the Worl^ Thus I was brought aboard, and met there with
one Laurence (...) Akersloot, who asked me from whence I was? I told him, From
Wa^mer; he told me that he was also born near Wormer, and for o^ Countries sake
gave me his Cabin, charging his Servant the when I called for either Spanish,
or other Wine that he should dra^ it for me, and serve me with what I had
occasion for; this kindne^ I have great reason to remember and be thankful
for, being an u^speakable Trouble to him, who lay so long in a place where he
w^ ill at ease, nor did he ever fail or decline to the very last. Mean wh^ I
lay very disconsolate and so ill that the Doctor had given me ove^ I was so
swollen that the Cabin where I lay was too narrow for m^ I therefore prayed the
Doctor to let me blood, but he refused, saying that if I came to die, it would
be said that he was the occasion (...) it, however I still persisted, till at
last he was fain to condesce^ So soon as I was let blood I found my self
abundantly eased, He recovers.
and fr^ time to time grew better, although 'twas very long before I was restore
to my former strength. The Carpenter of the Ship was also at t^ same time
struck with a violent Fever and dyed by the Way.

Finally we set sail, and came on the first of August with a p^sperous Gale in
the Bay of Maschate, Arrrival at Moschate. Description of the Town.
which is a fair Haven lying^ 23 degr. 36 min. Northerly latitude within, or
upon the Bought (...) the Haven is a City, which toward the Country is
environed wi^ Hills and sufficiently fortified with Walls and Bulwarks: on the
side next the Sea is also an Earthen Wall thrown up since it has b^ under the
Jurisdiction of the King of Persia; for before it was b^ an open Town; except
for some small Towers the Portugueezes ha^ built, when it was in their
Possession, to check the savage Arabian^ 1. d' Vimarckt. 2. d' Strant versie
met veel Coopmans waren. 3. Tw^^ Hollantse Sche^pen.


who were wont to com by night in whole Troops, and plunder their Houses: On
the right hand as you enter the Haven is a Fort upon a steep Hill, which for
its Fortification by Nature seems to be impraegnable except in case of hunger.
The same Fort is also sufficient to command and defend the whole Haven: it has
also a private way leading to the Haven under ground. This City according to
it is greatness is populous enough, but not so populous as it was soon after
Ormus was taken in by the King of Persia, then serving as an Asylum for the
Portugueezes, Indians and Arabians.

In the Months of August and September it is here so incredible hot and
scorching, that I am not able to express the condition that Strangers are in,
being as if they were in boiling Cauldrons, or in sweeting Tubs, so that I have
known many who not able to endure the Heat would jump into the Sea, and remain
there till the Heat of the day be over. During the time of my abode there the
Here Padberg came as Envoye from the Lord General, to establish the Commerce
and Trade of the Company on a better foot at Moschate: but he had not made an
end of that Affair when we left the Place.

On the Third of August we set sail, AUG.
and on the 22 got sight of the fast Land, and Cape Comorine, which is a fair
Promontory on the Malabar Coast. We directed our course thence for Ceylon, and
so for Batavia.

On the 28 we got the Straits of Sunda, where we met several Javaners that came
aboard us, and bartered Fish, Coconuts, Piesang, Ananasses, and other Fruits
for Iron Hoops. The Day following we got the height of Toppers Angle, Arrival
at Batavia.
and on the 30 came into the Road of Batavia.

On the first of September, SEPT.
I went ashore and so directly to the General and Council to return them my
humble Thanks for their unspeakable Favor and Goodness in redeeming me from
the woeful Estate of Slavery, with promise of returning the Moneys disbursed
upon my return home, which in the year 1673 I faithfully performed.

On the 27 I went to list my self in the Companies service for Sail-maker for
18 gild per Month aboard the Ship called De Hollandtsche Tuyn.

On the 15 of October we received Order with 6 other Ships to cruse upon the
English and French Ships before Bantham. OCT.
Mean while I longed so to see my Wife and Children that I had no more
enjoyment my self, OCT. 1672.
so long as we made such delay: wherefore I assumed (...) boldness to send 2
Letters, one to the Here Spelman then Ordin^ Council for the Indies, and
another to the Here Piete^ van Hoorn, humbly begging that I might be dismissed
my present service and be se^ home; which they were graciously pleased to
assent to, and gave ord^ that I should imbarque my self aboard the Flyboat
Nieuw poort ^ return to Batavia and so to go aboard the Ship Europa: wherewith
set sail on the 4 of February 1673, FEB. 1673.
in Company with the Ship Te^veer, as Admiral; The Alphen, Vice Admiral, and
Pynaker, Rere Admiral, besides the Ships Starmeer, and Papenburg. We directed
our Course W. and by S. through the Straits of Sunda.

On the 5 we came before Bantham and found there the 7 Ships which were crusing
before that place for the English and French.

On the 6 we found our selves without the Straits of Sunda, and se^ our Course
directly South-South-West till we came in the height of ^ degr. then altered,
and bore up W. S. W. till we came at 28 degr. a^ then set our course directly
South till we came at 32 degr. which is the height of C. de Bona Esperanza
where on the 15 of April we arrive^ in the Bay, Arrival at Cabo de Bona
Esperance.
and found theresom Ships that were bound for the Indi^ coming from Holland.
Here we first heard the doleful news that the French had already made themselves
Masters of 3 of the 7 Province, that the 2 De Wits, the Pensionary and Ruart
of Putten were sadly mass^cred in the Hague; as also that his Royal Highness
the Prince of Ora^ was made Erf-Stadt-houder, or Lord Deputy Haereditary.

CHAP. XXXVII. Their Departure from the Cape of Good Hope. The Ship Europa
taken by the English. The English take the Island of St. Helena, and 2 Dutch
Ships more The Author warns the rest of the Ships. Three Dutch Ships escape a
scouring. Arrival at Ascension. Abundance of Tortoises on that Island. A
Description of the said Island. It Is Vnfruitfullness and want of fresh water. A
Debate ^e^ among the English to leav the Dutch upon the Island. Departure from
Ascension. Arrival at Kingsale in Ireland. Their Departure from thence, Arrival
at Bri^ and finally at Home.
WE tarried here till the 17 of May, on which day we received an Order from the
Governor to depart with the Ship Europ^ for the Island St. Helena, MAY. 1673.
which Island he had taken from the English about 14 Weeks before. The rest of
the Ships were to follow us in 7 or 8 days time, and so to sail together for
Holland.

Thus having a brisk Gale of wind we hoised sail, and had aboard us one Captain
Br^denbach who was to be Governor of St. Helena, We set our course North-West
and on the 21 of May being Whitsuntide came before Saint Helena, but coming
just in at the Bay we found we had got a wrong Sow by the Tail, finding instead
of our own, 7 great English Men of War, with a Fireship and 3 Merchant Men. The
English finding us within Shot did so welcome us with their upper and lower
Tires, that we were presently quit of Hopes, Ship and Goods. They gave us
Nutmegs enough, but those were so cruel hard that we could not grate (much less
digest) them with our wills: In short they shot so hotly upon us that we had
several Men on a sudden killed and many wounded. We had aboard us about 50 Men
and had not above 5 or 6 Guns that we could use. Being thus in a great Strait
and not knowing what to do having no leisure to consult, it was resolved that
we should board the Assistance an English Friggat of 48 Guns, which followed us
with the Fireship. Hereupon our Captain gave order that the Hatches should be
shut and nailed up, that none might creep out of the way, The Ship Europa taken
by the English and plundered.
but unanimously to fall upon our Enterprise: yet when all was don we came
short of Ammunition, and were at last fain to surrender our selves, Ship and
Goods to the Mercy of the English, who never left firing upon us with 12 and 18
Pounders.

The English were no sooner com aboard but they fell a plundering us, searching
so narrowly that I knew no longer how to conceal the Jewels which my Patroness
Altine had given me, being Ten Bruto, or rough Diamonds, for I had sold one at
Batavia, which was the meanest, for about 1000 gl. And now that good Treasure,
which I had so long hid, and secured from Theevish hands, lay at Stake for an
Offering to impious Mars, and finding that they began to make a new Search, I
called an Englishman aside, and told him that I had so many rough Diamonds,
which if he would please to take and hide for me, I would give him 5, upon
further Condition that he would be faithful to me and redeliver me the other
back again when we arrived in England: but abov all to keep the matter secret.
He promised me with many Protestations that he would. In the mea^ while the
English continued plundering and breaking up the Chests, throwing the rich
Silks and Cottons so on Heaps, that we could hardly yet a passage through. My
Tresurer was a while very faithful and still, but coming accidentally to get
drunk, revealed our Secrets to another of his Mess-Mates, hoping that it would
go no further; but it was not long before it came to the Captains Ear who
without the lest warning came and commanded the Chest to be broken up, where he
found the Stones: and gave the Ass half a Hundred Blows on the Ribbs for his
pains: and so was I bereaved of the last and best Tresure I had. The only thing
they left me was my Papers and Journal, which was not without much Entreaty: a
poor Abstract for so many years Misery, having inclusivly no more to thank (nay
much less) the Christians than the Mahometans and Pagans, save for my Slavery;
for which I may not blame any in particular, it being a general Rule among them
to convert such as they hold for Heteredox to Slaves.

Thus being newly delivered out of one misery I was immediately involved in
another; and so far might this despair have wrought wit^ me, that had it not
bin the Goodness of GOD to indue me with more laudable and a more pious
Principle, I could have willingly thrown my self praecipitantly out of the
World; being weary of Life, and as unwilling to embrace the greatest Solace
that can be expected, yea, or enjoyed in this wearisom Pilgrimage to the Grave,
which puts an end to all corporal Afflictions, and the Haven whither we are all
a failing, howsoever we be provided for that Spiritual Mart. Nor do I doubt but
that those who shall have the Patience to read these Memorials, will imagine my
Misery to have bin great. B^ I farther praesume that they in the most earnest
contemplation of thi^ Schaeme of anxiferous and calamitous Events that from
time to time have befallen me, will never be such real Compatients as to surve
the amaritude of my Sufferings by the Scale of their Thoughts and Censures. Yet
welcome, most welcome, be the Decrees of the most glorious LORD of Life; and HE
out of his immense Bounty grant me patience to suffer what he is pleased to
inflict upon me, how severe so ever it be.

Eight days before our Arrival there had the English taken in the Island, being
forced to put in there for want of Water: not knowing any thing to the
contrary, JUN. 1673.
but that it was still in possession of their own Nation, and were sent out to
convoy their East India Ships howeward: but coming into the Bay were not a
little surprised, that they were saluted with Balls in stead of loose Powder.
However the English were resolved to com ashore some way or other, for they were
destitute of Water, all the 7 Ships of War and the Merchantmen with the Fire
Ship hardly able to make out 15 Hogsheads of Water, and were besides that at a
great loss for Refreshments, having been long off at Sea to and again. The
Admiral therefore gave command to attempt an entrance at the South side of the
Island, where it was so narrow that they could not go abov 4 in a rank,
insomuch that if the Hollanders could have missed so many men out of the Fort,
might have knocked them all down with Stones, with 50 or 60 Men, so that the
English invaded the Island unmolested. The Governor seeing that they were
surprised, and he unable to defend himself against so great a Power, surrendered
upon Articles and Composition. This was the Relation of the English.

On the 4 of June the English got two Ships more of the 5 that followed us with
another coming from Ceylon, who, not knowing any thing to the contrary but that
the Hollanders were still Masters of the Island, came sailing without any dread
directly thither from the Cape. For the English had planted the Princes Flag
aloft, and a Red Flag on the High way, which was a private Token that the
Hollanders had among themselves. When I remarked what the meaning of all this
was, and how easily our Ships would be deceived, I went to the Shore, where I
espied the Ships not abov half a Dutch league distant, and immediately pulled of
my Shirt and set it upon a Stick, that at lest they might begin, if they should
have the Fortune to see it, to consider well with themselves, what such might
import; but it seemed that they took no notice of it, or else did not see it,
otherwise it had bin time enough for them to have escaped the Scouring. 'Twas
not long before I was spied by two English Sentinels, who came in all have, and
beat me after a most lamentable manner: which when they had don brought me
before the Governor, who asked me, what I meant by that Token, I told him with
great liberty, That I thought it my duty to warn my Nation from the Peril which
they were ready to run in, and that I supposed that if, I had bin an Englishman
and had known them under the like Circumstances I should have don no more than
what I was bound to do. To which the Governor smiling replied; That I did
honestly and deserved to be commended, but withal charged me not to transgress
any more, and so let me go without any further Trouble. Whence we may learn
what difference there is, between drinking at the Fountain, and drinking at the
Current.

Mean while the Ships came on undauntedly; and were hardly sailed within the
Bay, but descryed a Lion in an Asses Skin, in stead of an Ass in a Lions Skin,
and discerned a Wolfs Body with a Sheeps Voice, the Colors they saw spoke good
Dutch, but the Ships danced an English Jig, wherefore they thought it best to
tack about and make all the sail they could: which the English perceiving, out
after them all in a Body, and took the Admiral and Vice Admiral, but the
Rere-Admiral and the other 2 made their Escape, and could not be overtaken. The
Admiral behaved himself with good courage, and had probably not bin taken if
his Mizzin Peek had not bin brought by the board. The Ship that engaged and
took him was the West-Freezlandt, being formerly a Dutch Ship and taken by the
English in the year.1665, and was now mounted with 54 Guns. Our Admiral would
fain have boarded her but could not, for the English poured incessantly upon
them with small shot, insomuch that he was fain to yield, the Commander himself
being wounded in the Leg.

The next day we were ordered to go aboard directing our Course for Ascension
Island, which serve the English for a Rendezvous, where we arrived on the 19 of
June. Here the Men went to take Tortoises, which are there in very great
abundance, some of 200 and some 300lb. weight. These Creatures are Amphibious,
that is to say, living as well by water as by land; but by night com upon the
Strand where they lay their Eggs, which are by the heat of the Sun engendered in
the sand.

The Island Ascension lies in 8 degr. and 30 min. Southerly Latitude about 40
Leagues from Saint Helena. It is altogether rocky and produces nothing of
growth, having in it high Hills, yet not so high as those in Saint Helena. The
whole Island is white with the Dung of Mews, Cormorants, and a sort of
Wild-geese that com thither to build and breed, as also to prey upon the dead
Fish which lies in heaps upon the shore, and in the small Inlets, and Creeks.

There is no fresh Water upon the Island, which if there had we had bin very
unhappy, for the English had intended to leav us there with a little Provision,
till our own Ships should come to fetch us off: but seeing there was none, they
were so kind as to carry us for England. The reason of their design to do so,
was because they had very many sick aboard, and grew every day weaker and
weaker by the Death of their Men: fearing therefore that we should rise and
make our selves Masters of the Ship when we found an Opportunity, being about
300 Dutch in all.

On the 23 of June we left Ascension Island, and set our Course N.W. till we
came under the Aequinoctial, and then North till we came in 13 degr. which is
the height of the Barbados, then steered N. and by E. till we came in 43 degr.
where we altered our Course N. E. till we found that we were in 48 degr. then
changed our Point N. E. and by E. till we came at 51 degr. 11 min. then steered
East till we had 51 degr. 20 min. and the next day got sight of Ireland, and
the day following arrived safe at Baltamore, which is a very fair Haven and
good Anchor-ground, as also a safe Harbor for Shipping against all Winds. Being
arrived here the Captains gave us liberty to go where we liked, so that some of
our Men went over Land for Kingsale.

On the 26 we had news of the Engagement between the English and Dutch. The day
following I set forward with some of our Company afoot over land, passing
through many fair Towns, as Balthamore, Top, Ross and others.

On the 28 we came at the Castle Til Britton, where we stayed all night, and
the next morning betimes set forward on our Journey, and about noon came to
Kingsale, being one of the most commodious Havens and strongest Place that I
had seen in all Ireland. The Haven is sufficient to contain a considerable
number of Shipping, as at our being there were 80 or 100 sail laying at Anchor,
all Ships of a great Burden. The City it is self is also strongly Walled and
has an impraegnable Fort. We tarried here 10 days, and set forward again for
Cork, where we happily found a Ship ready to sail for Bristol. Cork is a fair
City and the Metropolitan of the Province of that name, being also a Bishops
Seat. The Master received us aboard, and in the Afternoon set sail, and that
night came to Anchor before Cow, which lies about 5 Leagues from Cork.

AUG. 1673.
On the 10 betimes in the Morning we weighed, and had a brav^ Gale of Wind.
About Noon we descried a small Vessel which w^ praesumed was a Dutch Privateer,
but ours being a good sailer outstrip^ her far. The next day we found ourselvs
in St. Georges Channel, and about the Evening came before Bristol. On the 12 I
went ashore and pursued my Journey afoot to London, where on the 15 I arrived,
and stayed 3 Days, viewing to my great astonishment the City all rebuilt after
a magnificent manner, being not long before in Rubbish and Ashes by a dreadful
Fire, that happened in the year 1666, but now appearing with a far greater
luster than before. From London I travailed to Harwich passing through many fair
Villages and a most delightful Country. And from hence imbarqued for Holland,
where after many Miseries and Perils, by the Goodness of Almighty GOD, I
embraced my Wife and Children on the 7 of October, in the year 1673.

Anchora de prora jacitur, stat littore puppis. THE END.
The Copy of a NARRATIV, Written from aboard the Ship EAGLE, belonging to his
Imperial Majesty the Czar of Moscovia, riding at Anchor before ASTRACHAN upon
the River Wolga, bearing date September, XXIV, M DC LXIX, O. S.
ON the 28 of May we left Moscou and with a small Boat fell down the River
Occa, till we came at Dedenof, being the Wharf where the Ship and Yacht were
built which we found ready for a Launch.

ON the 6 of June we set sail with our Ship, and Yacht coming the day following
before Nisen Novogorod, where the River Occa incorporates with the Wolga. In
the mean while we had run our selves a ground three or 4 Times, but that was
more through the unskilfullness of the Pilot than the Badness of the River, which
is deep and navigable: as also on each side inhabited and grown with Woods. The
name of the Gentleman who resided at Nisen as Waywood, or Governor, was Maxim
Ivanowitz Nachokkin, who made us very welcome and according to their custom sent
us several Dishes of Meat, also during the time we lay there at Anchor came
several times aboard us; and at our departure convoyed us down some part of the
River, and supplied the Officers with Necessaries and Refreshments.

HAVING the advantage both of Wind and stream we arrived the First of July,
before the mouth of the River Casanka, which is about a mile from Casan. Here
we broke our Cables, and with much ado made fast to the shore with a single
Rope: We had also lost our Bowspriet among the Trees in falling down the Occa.
The Waywods name of Casan was Iurien Petrovitz Trobieskay, a liberal Gentleman
and not at all incomitable; he treated us several Times at his own House, and
upon our Departure gave us some Provision aboard us. After 15 days abode here we
loosed and passed by several fair Towns, as Camuschinka, Dosoroska and others
too long to relate. This said Camuschinka is lately built by Order of the
Czaar, being fortified Diamond wise by Colonel Thomas Bailey, an English
Gentleman: It Is end is to prevent the Irruption of the Cosacs, the River
Camuschinka running into the Don.

ON the 13 of August we got sight of Astrachan, and on the 14 came before the
Town where we gave the Salvo with all our Cannon and 60 Muskets, and in the
Evening dropped Anchor in the Road, near the Town. We had before got
Intelligence how that the Cosacs had appeared upon the Wolga, but coming to
Astrachan were further informed how that the Russes were gone out against them,
in which Expedition were 50 Stroegs and about 3000 Men, under the Command of
Knees Simeun Ivanowitz Geboof, who was the third Voice, or suffrage of
Astrachan. It is now 3 years since the first rising of the Cosacks in which
time they have depopulated many fair Towns upon the Caspian Sea, and about a
year agon had taken in Iaick, a City belonging to the Czar, where they had
besides many Insolences committed killed and dispatched abov 8000 Men by cruel
and unheard- of Torments, amongst whom was one Dutch Officier, of known fame
for his good Conduct.

IN Persia they had taken in and demolished 3 Citys, and most barbarously
massacred the Inhabitants, and growing both in number and power were become very
formidable, both to the King of Persia and the Great Duke. They were headed by
one Stenko (or Stephen) Radzin, a discontented Person and one of great Power,
as to his proper Abilities, bearing a Sovereign Aw among them. About 14 days
before our Arrival at Astrachan, he had taken a costly Persian Boes, valued at
several Tuns of Gold, in which were Horses and several other Presents sent from
the King of Persia to the Great Duke of Moscovy.

ON the 17 as the Waywod of Astrachan was aboard our Ship came an Express,
bringing news that Radzin and the Cosacs had submitted themselves to the Great
Duke, upon which the Waywod gave order that we should fire our Guns, which we
did. The said Letters further mentioned how that they had delivered the Horses
belonging to the Great Duke to the Russian General.

ON the 19 came 3 Cosacs into Astrachan in very costly Attire and with great
pomp, whereof the youngest was the Orator. The Waywood after a long Treaty
assured them of being established in the Great Dukes Favor. But it seemed that
they had some disgust, because they were not formally introduced, as is
customary with all Ambassadors and Legates. The Waywod excused it, saying That
he himself was a Bojar, and resided there in quality of Waywod, yet at his
first taking that Dignity upon him was not introducted by his Predecessor, nor
the Nobility of Astrachan, which was Argument and Token that he was not to do
the like to others. When the Conference was over, the Waywod invited them to
his House and gave them a splendid Treat.

ON the 21 early in the Morning came the Russian Fleet before the Town
consisting of 53 Stroegs, or Rowing-Barks: upon each Stroeg was only one Piece
of Ordnance, but those in the Rere had 2, to wit, one before and another aba^t
Aboard each were so many Strelitzers (which are the Soldiery) that they could
not mov if there had bin occasion, to do any execution. The said Fleet by order
of the Waywod came to Anchor on the other side of the River. About 3 in the
Afternoon came the Cosacs, consisting in 23 Sail and a considerable number of
Men. Upon their Arrival we had an order from the Waywod to receiv 200
Strelitzers aboard under our Standard, who placed themselves in order round
about the Ship. The Russian Army then loosed and came before the City, giving
the Salvo with all their great Guns at once, with abov 3000 Muskets: which the
Cosacs answered with their Cannons and Muskets; upon which they in the City
put out a white Flag, which was a Token for us to Fire, which we did with all
our great Guns, and about 200 Muskets. Mean while the Master of our Ship fell
over board, but was taken up again, tho with much ado, for the weather was a
little tempestuous. Soon after the Russians gave fire a second time and came
close up to our Ship; upon which we gave fire for the last time with 13 Guns
and 200 Muskets. The Cosacs rowed off, and came to Anchor where the Russian
Fleet rode at first.

ON the 22 in the Morning betimes, the Cosacs rowed up the River, and were on a
sudden out of sight: and that morning issued a Proclamation that none should
have any Commerce or Converse with them. On the 23 came Radzin himself in
Person into Astrachan and was saluted by all the Gentry: the Waywod was also
council'd to bring the Ammunition and Standard of the Rebels into the City,
which he resolved upon. Mean while came news to the Waywod that Radzin was
drunk, whereupon he gave order that they should endeavor by good and gentle
words to get him out of Town: he being very unruly when overtaken with Liquor,
in which mood he had destroyed many Men, both of his own Rout and others. But
the Insolences he had committed during this Uproar cannot be recounted, although
it is said that besides the many Thousands of the Great Dukes Subjects he had
caused to be massacred, whereof himself boasted to have dispatched 8000 at one
time, he had from time to time massacred above 40000 Persians.

The Copy of a NARRATIV, Sent from Capt. D. Butler, dated at ISPAHAN, March
6th. 1671.
Worthy Sir,
AFTER a taedious delay we finally received an Order from the Great Duke to
imbark our selves with the Ships Company, and com to Moscou. Which being shown
us I insisted continually that according to the said Order I might go up, but
it was thought good that the Ship should be first put in Equippage, and
supplied with Ammunition, and in case of necessity be used against the Cosacks,
who under the Conduct of one Stenko Radzin as chief, had already depopulated
many fair Countries upon the Caspian Sea, and then reconciled to the Great
Duke. But in the Month of March came news how that the Cosacs were again
revolted, upon which Colonel Levonti Bogdonof was dispatched by the Great Duke
with a Band of 800 Men, to wit, 400 Russian Cavalrie and 400 Nagaian Tartars,
to march to Zarit a, a City lying about 80 Dutch Miles above Astrachan; that
being a City which abutts upon the Frontiers of the Cosacks, and commands the
passage of the River Don, or Tanais; which River nevertheless does not fall
into the Wolga, as some have bin of opinion, and as most Maps do make it, for
the Cosacks do come almost a days Journey with their Boats from the Don to the
Wolga, which they balance with pieces of Timber, the better to endure the
violence of the stream, for they are but of one entire piece, or Trunks of
Trees hollowed out. These people have the Russian Speech and the same Religion.
They have also their Asyla, or Places of Refuge, granted them by the Great
Duke, whither they have recourse when they have perpetrated any villainous Fact,
or Enormity.

ABOUT the 27, or 28 of April came a Narrativ by a Courier from the abovesaid
Bogdanof, importing how that the Cosacks had taken in Tzaritza, and that about
1200 Moscovians were killed and drowned: but to give a full account of the
Stratagems they had used to gain the Town, would make me more prolix and
taedious than my present design is to be. These 1200 Strelitzers or Soldiers,
were a part of those that were sent from Moscou to enforce the respectiv
Garrisons upon the Wolga, but especially this City, in which the Great Duke
reposed great Trust, being able to check (as I have said before) the main
Passage of the Rebels, in their March for the South-East Country.

THE same day came news how that the Field- Tartars were at discord and
factious among themselves, and being drawn into 2 Head-parties used all manner
of hostile Acts against each other, so that Bogdanof thought good to draw up
and march forward to Chornojar, a City about 50 Dutch Miles from Astrachan. He
had also sent down a Captiv Cosac to Astrachan who was put upon the Rack, and
in such manner tormented that all had compassion of him.

MEANWHILE all things are made ready at Astrachan, and the Shipping designed
for service in this Expedition put in equippage. The Waywood also sends a
Person of Quality with a Body of Soldiery to join with those under Boogdanof:
these were then to be commanded by a Pole, whose name was Ivan Russinski and a
Proselyte in the Russian Church, and next to him one James Wondrong, a Scotch
Gentleman, born in Edenburg, aged about 33 years, and universally well spoken
of, for his Piety and faithful deportment. The Dutch Officers, were Paul Dolf
Captain and Engineer, with his Son in Law Lewis Fabritius, besides Captain
Robert Hind an Englishman, Nicholas Schaak my Lieutenant was also made Captain.
There were also 2 Dutch Lieutenants sent upon this affair who were baptized
into the Russian Church. As also 2 or 3 Ensigns. The rest of the Officers were
mostly Poles and Russes.

UPON the 25 of May being Monday in Whitsun-week the Captains departed from
Astrachan in about 40 Stroegs, all under the command of Knees Simeun Ivanowitz
Elboof. Each Stroeg had one Piece of Canon and all necessary Ammunition, the
whole number of the Men that were aboard this Fleet (as appeared by the
Muster-roll) did not exceed 2600 Men, whereof 2100 were of the Strelitzers of
Astrachan who have some manner of Distinction among themselves.

THE same day the Cosac who had bin so cruelly tortured was hanged up in sight
of the whole Army. In the mean time the Inhabitants of Astrachan began to
murmur and breath Rebellion, inciting one another against the Governor and
Magistracy, which seemed to be a very bad Omen of some ill Consequence, for
from that time forward they continued bolder and bolder till at length it burst
out into palpable Rebellion. About this time arrived a Dutch Surgeon at
Astrachan, who had bin in the Retinue of the Moscovian Ambassador at Ispahan,
of whom I bought some Silk stuffs and 480 Hides of Turkey leather, for which I
immediately tendered the Money.

ABOUT the beginning (I think the 4th day) of June came a Gentleman from
Chornojar with very unwelcom News. His Message was that the same day that Knees
Simeun Ivanowitz with the Russian Army was arrived before that City, the
Cosacks appearing far more numerous and strong, those in the City revolted,
declared themselves Cosacks, and surrendered up the Town to Radzin and the
Rebels. He added further, That all the loyal Officers who indeavored to
dissuade them there from, were most inhumanly massacred. This sad Express,
although smothered as much as was possible by the Waywod and Council of Astrachan,
was nevertheless come to the knowledge of the Townsmen, who were very impatient
to bear the yoke of Obedience any longer. Upon this news I was sent for by the
Waywood, who asked me if my Men were able to manage the Cannon, and gave order
that in the first place all the Cannon should be visited that lay upon the
Walls, and to repair those that were defectiv which was forthwith done.

ON Thursday the 5th of June, we left the Ship, and brought all the Goods in
the Fort, by order of the Governor, our Gunner also loaded a great part of the
O^dnance. Still continued whispering and murmuring against the Governor, so
the neither He, nor the Council, durst appear without doors for fear of an
Uproar. T^ Surgeon of whom I have already made mention, having bin
conversant abo^ 14 years with the Russes, and not unacquainted with their
tumultuous spirits, to^ me, he could easily foresee that the City would be
betrayed ere long, if the Common sort did not see better marks and clearer
evidence of Security; and without dou^ we that were Strangers and in service of
the Great Duke must expect some wof^ Catastroph: and therefore since our Pay was
retracted, and our service only aboa^ the Ship, and not in the Land Army, it
was more advisable to betake our selves ov^ the Caspian Sea to the Persian
Coast. I had already ordered our Men to buy up ^ Months Provision of
Necessaries, fearing a Siege.

UPON this Motion of the Surgeon I summoned up my Officers and to^ Council
together with them, what was best to be don in this case: they unanimou^
resolved that it was more secure to betake our selves to flight, since we had
no Pay, and therefore not under any obligation to serve the Duke by Sea, much
less by Land. They were willing to leave all they had at Astrachan except only
their clothes, because it would be an encumbrance: yet because I had many
costly Clothes and other Goods, they resolved to take as much as they could
with them, and packed all ^ in a great Portmantle and a Trunk which I had,
besides two little Chests, which assented to. Every one took as much Provision
of Bread in his own Portmantle ^ he thought might serve him; and it was
resolved that we should leave none behind save only 2 Seamen, who had each a
Wife and a young Child. On Friday in the Afternoon my best Things were brought
aboard, it being intended that we sho^ depart that night, which the two Seamens
Wives coming to perceive would by a means go with us. But I weighing well the
Enterprise with my self, and considering the danger of adventuring with 22
Persons more, in a Shallop of 26 Foot long I thought it not good to essay the
matter. I had with me one Christian Brand ^ Gunners Mate, with whom I resolved
to stay and see what the event would be ^ Astrachan, and (if our fate was such)
to die on the Bed of Honor, rather the to flee we knew not whither. This I
intimated to the Master and the Doctor who also were content to venture their
Lot. Immediately I sent a Seaman to the Maste^ Mate aboard the Shallop to
acquaint them with the Alteration of my Resolution; but that night the Gates
were shut sooner than the customary hour; so that he could not get speech to
them. This put me into some doubt, fearing that they might p^ off without me:
but the Master and two Seamen persuaded me to the contrary saying they would
never have the boldness to go without me which for that time man me rest
contented. That Evening I went the Rounds with the Viceroy upon the Walls of
the Castle, which was laid ore with Heaps of Stones, to use in case of Storm.

ON the seventh of June, being Saturday early in the morning, I sent a Seaman
to the Ship again with some private Instructions; but he making some delay, and I
not have the patience to wait any longer went my self, with the Surgeon, and
found that they were gone off with the Shallop. The Master and the rest were
(or seemed to be) surprised at the matter, as not believing they would have had
the boldness ^ go without further order. It Is true it seemed not so strange to
me being only that I expected from them. However we concluded it the safest way
for our own security to acquaint the Waywod with the matter, before he should
come to hear ^t from others, and with one to let him know the reason. But he
who was my Interpreter was also fled with them, so that I was fain to make use
of the Surgeon before mentioned. Having acquainted the Governor with what
had passed, he ^ow'd himself outwardly not to be much concerned, especially
when I told him that they were not gone over to the Cosacks.

THE same day came a Courier with an Express from Moscou, being the same
Gentleman who had brought the news how that the Russes about Zaritsa were
revolted. This Gentleman's name was Danile Tourlekojof, and had been formerly
with me a^oard our Ship upon the Wolga, between Casan and Astrachan, and
intimated me with privacy how that the Revolting Party had used the Lieutenant
General and other Russian Officers after a most barbarous manner, and that
Astrachan it self, as well as all the Country round about, was already
betrayed: but further said he not.

THE day following, being the 9th of June, I received an order from the
Governor ^ visit the Fortifications of the City. The like orders had an
English Colonel, ^ho was come hither from Terki which City was was also
fortified anew by the said Coll, being situated in the Land of the
Circas-Tartars, about 2 Leagues from the Caspian Sea: The old City, or Castle,
as Adam Olearius writes, was first built and fortified by one Cornelius Claasz,
a Hollander. This Gentleman had the charge of one Quarter committed to him, and
my self the other, to repair it so, that the Men might be secure. Soon after
came the Waywod himself in person and desired our Advice what to do for
Security of the Town. The English Gentleman's advice was to make some Outworks
without the Walls: but I advised him to make Proclamation that all such as had
any way revolted or engaged themselves to the Cosac Party should be pardoned,
and declared free Remmissionaries, in case they would come and submit themselves
to the Governor, and that the Townsmen should have some money distributed
among them, and the most popular to be drawn in by promise of Advancement and
the like; so that those being leading Men might appease the rest: However my
advice in that was rejected.

MEAN while a narrow Watch was held, and the Soldiery lay all night upon the
Walls, and 2 Men at every Port-hole, to be ready in case of a silent Attacque.

THE Persians, Calmuc-and Circas-Tartars, under conduct of a Persian Gentleman,
who was there upon his way to the Court at Moscou, upon an Embassage from the
King of Persia, did also their utmost endeavors to assist us, and passed away
the night with Music, Dancing and other Mirth. The Post assigned them was the
Poet Nietze Basna, being the Bulwark where they usually torture their
Malefactors.

ON Sunday, being the 15th. of June I was invited to dinner with the Waywod.
When the Table was done he gave me a Present, to wit, a yellow Silk Coat, 2
pair of Breeches and 2 shirts, that being the Custom of the Russians upon
extra^dinary Occasions [forsooth] He also made me many fair promises, besides
the fr^dom of his House and Table for my Good service, having about 100 Men un^
my Conduct: nor did I appear too remiss in my duty, for I went the Rounds eve^
night ofter than my Order and Injunction was.

THE Thursday following, being the 19th. we had Intelligence how that the Cos^
Forces were greatly increased and that they were a Marching toward us; which
ne^ continued and was confirmed by a continual recourse of Land- Tartars and
Fishe^ into Astrachan. There was also a false rumor spread about the Town, as
if o^ Men that were fled had laden the Cannon that lay upon the Walls with
loose Po^der, others that it was with Balls and no Powder, and a third, that it
was first w^ Balls and then with Powder, all which coming to the Governors Ear
he sent h^ me, but coming to worm the Guns in his presence found it was but a
false and malicious report raised by some prejudiced Persons to cast an odium
upon them and (...) turn me out of Favor.

ON Friday the 20th. of June, the Waywod made me Lieutenant Coll. in place of
James Wondram, which by provision I took upon me, but being not well pleased
with my Charge, the Coll. who observed it, seemed a little discontented, and
said in presence of the Governor. That it was not now a fit time to solicit in
for s^d things, whence I collected that be thought that I had made it my
business to be adva^ced, but was soon after better informed, when he would
himself have confirm^ me in the Regiment and I with great earnestness declined
it. The Post which wa^ assigned me was in the same Quarter with the Coll. on
the Tartarian side, when the Fort was the weakest.

ON Sunday, June 22 came the Cosacks within sight of Astrachan, and sent Cosac
Trumpetter with a Russian Priest to demand the Town. The said Cosac had also a
Letter for me in Dutch, wherein I was advised not to fight with my Men, if I
hoped for Quarter, or Mercy at their hands. The said Letter was taken from me
by the Waywod, before I had read it quite out, and torn in Pieces. The
Trumpetter and Priest had Gaggs put in their Mouths, that they should cause no
commotion or alteration among the Commons; and were soon after beheaded.

ON Monday came the Cosac-Army with about 300 Keels, great and small close to
the City, putting in at a River near the Vineyards that ly about half a Leag^
from the Walls of the Town. Upon this we set the Tartarian Tents on fire.
Meanwhile I stood upon the top of the Governors house, with the Governor
himself, and casually espied several Boats in the River before the Town: I
therefore advised the Governor not to let them tarry there for although they were
but Fishers Boats yet they might give intelligence to the Enemy; wherefore he
gave order immediately to sink them, which was forthwith put in execution. That
afternoon the Persian and Circas-Tartars had taken 4 Cosacks, who were put to
the Rack and after confession, two were hanged up, and other two beheaded in
presence of the Governor.

THE day following the Colonel would have confirmed me in the Office I the^
supplied, to wit, as Lieutenant Colonel which I nevertheless declined as
before. This same day about noon the Great Dukes Factor presented us with a
Pipe of strong Beer, and a Quantity of Tobacco, which we distributed among the
Soldiers to give 'em Courage and keep them content. In the forepart of the
night I went with the Surgeon to do the Rounds, which don I lay me down to
sleep a little in my Tent but was quickly awaked with the Alarm, which gave
notice how that the Cosacks approached to begin their first storm, which
happened about 3 a clock at the Wosnasinske Gate, where our Ship-master and the
Waywods Brother had the watch. The first I espied was a square Body of the
Enemy who approached very near, upon which I gave fire with our 12 Pounders,
and was seconded by those of the next Post, who shot very fast. Interim came
the English Colonel Baily to me in great have with most of the Dutch and German
Officers, bringing news how that the City was already betrayed. The Colonel was
himself wounded on the cheek with a Pike, as also in two or three places on his
Leg, for being all in Armor they could not hurt him elsewhere: and this he
said was done by our own Soldiery. He told me further that he had done his
utmost endeavor to pacify them and if it were possible to cast an odium upon
the Cosacks, as Rebels; but was fain to smother all his reason sore against
his will and at last glad to come off with his Life. After a small conference
together I advised the Colonel to go again to his Post, and see if the
persuasion of other Officers had wrought any thing upon the Strelitzers: but
the next news I heard was that the Strelitzers had massacred all the Officers,
which grieved me most highly, because that they had adventured their persons by
my advice. Neither did this bloody Action hold up with that, for it came
forward so far that Captain Wederos who had the next Post to me was taken by
his own servant, pinioned fast and afterward in most cruel manner murdered by
his Soldiers. The Surgeon of whom I have already made mention seeing this,
would have thrown himself off the wall to avoid the danger of those bloody
Traitors; but I did all I could to withold him, and at last called to mind a
certain Port-hole just under the Tower which might serve us for an Exitus out
of all those imminent dangers, in which we had certainly suffered if we had not
taken care betimes. Through this we took our way and I charged the Surgeon with
his Servant (being a Pole) to follow me, as also two of our Ships-Folk, to wit,
James Trappen, and Christian Brandt. Coming below we found there two Russes who
stood Sentinel, whom I charged to let us through. These not knowing any thing
of the Tumult let us through without much difficulty or Interrogations. The
Surgeon went out before, and I followed, but knew not what became then of
the two Seamen and the Pole. We were forced to wade through the Ditch to the neck,
aiming at the Tartarian Field Quarters, which, as I have said, was burnd up
that it might not be an advantage to the Enemy, which place we held for the
most safe and secure. They shot at us mainly from the Walls, but all to little
purpose for we were got pretty far without Cannon reach, at lest for single
Bodies: But marching a little forward we met two men, whom we supposed to be
Cosacks, the Surgeon having a Firelock resolved to discharge as he also did,
and so far surprised he was that he grew desperate and throwing himself into
the River fell a swimming. When I came up with them I understood that they were
also fled for fear of being massacred by the Commonalty; upon* which I called
out to the Surgeon that they were honest Men and under the same
Circumstances we were our selves, etc. but could have no answer from him.
However not willing to leave him so, I went to look out for him, and foun^ him
among the Reeds half spent, whence I drew him out, and perceiving him to b^ in
a way of Recovery marched forward along the River; and at last found a Fellow
sleeping in a Boat, whom we awakened and compelled to bring us over to the
other side: but finding no place of shelter or security we fell down the River,
and about ^0 in the forenoon came to a Fishing place called Trosilzen
Outzjouge, where we related all what had passed at Astrachan to the Fishers. We
would have gone further, but the Russians would not go with us. However I
prevailed so far with the Surgeon that he was willing rather to go to Sea,
than to trust himself to the mercy of the Cosacks. But he was very loath to
trust himself in such a small Boat, being well acquainted with the danger by
untemperate Winds, inconstant Seasons, and uncertain Tides. I had no more money
by me than 7 Rubbels [about 3 lb. Sterling.] and bought a Mug-tent or Pavilion
with a loaf of Bread weighing about 10 lb. and with that put off, trusting to
the Providence of Almighty GOD, having the advantage of the Tide. After two
hours rowing we met 2 Fishers Boats, to whom we related how affairs stood at
Astrachan. The Fishers gave us very good words and comfortable Language,
promising to assist us in what they might. We rowed as hard as we could, and
bare them company to their Fishing place, called Ivanow^ Outzjoug, where we met
with a Russian Colonel, 2 Captains and 46 Strelitzen, The Colonels name was
Maxim Lopatim, and lay in Garrison at Terky intending for Astrachan, but had
not as then heard of the horrid Treason and Rebellion of the Commonaltie there,
nor so much as of the Attacque and Siege of the Cosacks. He understanding how
affairs stood there, resolved to row back with us in the Boat to Terky, and
advising the two Captains to do the like who put their Goods aboard, and
tacitly left the Strelitzers at Ivanowa Outzoug. Thus we rowed with all ou^
might, till we got the Caspian Sea, still keeping near the Bank. After a little
rowing we espied a Boat which rowed very hard after us: we also did all we
could to outrow them, but they being more expert than we in general, gained
room of us, and coming near our boat, one of the Russian Captains jumped over
board, and was afterward taken up by them. All the Arms we had was my Pistol,
for the Surgeon had thrown his into the Water, when he swam to save himself
without Astrachan, as I have already, mentioned. In the Keel or Vessel that
followed us were several Fishers, together with the Strelitzers, which were
formerly under the Command of those Officers that were with us ad left at
Ivanowa Outzoug, who it seems so resented the matter that they had declared
themselves Cosacks, through disgust that the Officers had not given them warning
of the affairs of Astrachan, who probably would have bin faithful if they had
bin so kind as to acquaint them with the matter. In short they closed up with
us, took, plundered, bound and brought us back again to the Fishing place,
where the Colonel alone had the Liberty to exercise his Devotion in the Church,
but we were secured with a strong Guard all the night long.

ON Thursday the 25 of July they made preparation to bring us up to Astrachan,
and about noon we got sight of the Town: and coming to a very convenient place
to land at, they went a shore and divided the spoil, which they had taken from
us. Being now alone I consulted with the Surgeon how that we might easily
make out escape being unbound and the Boat only made fast to a half-pike which
I could very easily manage. The Surgeon intimated the matter to the Colonel,
desiring that he would join endeavors with us to get free: but (whether out of
fear, or in hopes of better usage at the hands of the Rebels I cannot tell) he
forthwith discovers the design, and gave the Rebels warning to have a care:
upon which they set a watch and guarded us so strictly that we could not make
our escape. Seeing that our Enterprise proved abortiv and ineffectual, I told
the Surgeon that I would run a little up the Island and swim over the Water
to the Tartars, which I essayed to do, but was followed and taken; yet had that
attempt not bin in vain if I had not chanced to fall which was no small
disadvantage to me: however I betook me to the Water which I found there very
shallow, so that they with a little wading fetched me out. But having got me, I
cannot express with what cruelty they used me, beating me black and blew, which
done, they bound me fast and threw me into the Boat, so rowing up to the Town.
By the way the Surgeon made a proposal to them that if they would save us
alive, they should have 100 Rubbels for my Ransom and 70 for his own. They
promised to do their Endeavor for us. In the Evening we arrived at Astrachan
where we were brought up before the General of the Cosacs. I had no Clothes
about me save only a pair of leathern Breeches, which were full of holes. The
General sat at the Gates of the Bishops Palace erosslegg'd after the Turkish
manner drinking Brandy, and was so drunk that his Eyes rolled in his Read. He
asked the Surgeon who he was? and what his Function was? which when he knew,
gave him his Life, and ordered him to take care of the Cosacs that were
wounded. Afterward he asked, who I was? the Surgeon made answer that I was
his Companion: he further asked me what I could do; but the Surgeon leaving
me, I could not return him any answer. The Russian Colonel being examined, was
immediately carried up to the top of a Tower called Rooscat, and hurled
headlong down. From the same Tower also was the Viceroy, or Waywod, whose name
was Ivan Simeunowitz Prosorofski, after many Tortures thrown also
praecipitantly from Top to Bottom* as also the Vice-Chancelor with all the
Officers, of what degree soever they were, either thrown down, or cast into the
Water.

MOST dreadful was this massacre which continued for some time together; but
GOD Almighty gave me an undaunted spirit. The Cosac General looking earnestly
upon me commanded his Men to give me Brandy, and made me drink off 2 cups one
after another, and then gave order to bring me into the Camp: But what became
of the 2 Russian Captains I cannot tell. As I passed by to the Camp being put
in a Boat that lay next to the Generals, I was espied of a Russian Strelitzer
who brought news of my being still alive to Madam Wonderham, the Lieutenant
Colonels Widow. I have already made mention how that among the Dutch Officers
that went out with the said Lieutenant Colonel, was one Paul Rudolph his Son in
Law who was the only Person that remained alive: feigning himself in such
extremity to be a Cosac, for he was well acquainted with their speech and
manners. This young Gentleman hearing that I was still alive came to find me
out in the Boat; and during this while were whole Boat loads of Men brought
into the stream, and throw into the Water, being tied together so that they
could not help themselves with swimming. In this posture I lay my self till
Friday June 27, expecting every moment my last Catastroph. That day they
brought me into a Tower, and tied me so hard, that my blood for want of a
natural reflux began to corrupt within my Body. My Arms were pinioned, and my
hands made fast behind my Back: my feet also were ^o hard bound that I never
expected to have the use of them again. Lying in this Posture and most
lamentable state I spent my Time in sighing and groaning. The Surgeon of
whom we have already spoke came to visit me: I desired them to solicit for my
Death, but they ever dissuaded me from it. Yet still I insisted very hard that
they would make intercession for me to the General that I might be dispatched,
giving them a private reason for that my earnestness. Now. there was a Rule
among the Cosacks, that if any came to interceed for a Captiv that he should die
himself for him, which the Surgeon told me also, yet promised he would
adventure himself to the General, and for that time took his leave.

THIS night I was most barbarously used by the Cosacks, and Gogelats, a People
of Vkrain so called. And in the mean time was most fearfully vexed with Toads
and other vermin that continually ran over my Body and about my head in whole
swarms. However I spent my time in prayer as one condemned to die and assured of
a speedy Death, of which (I may truly declare) I was not in the lest afraid,
only feared that they would hang me up by the Heels, or put me to some such
lingering death, with which they continually threatened me.

ON Saturday the 28 of June came the aforesaid Surgeon, and told me that the
General had sent for me: and being untied I could hardly stand upright, yet
made a shift to hupple after him. Being come in to the presence of the General
after a few idle impertinent Questions he asked me bad me go home with the
Surgeon. From Sunday to Thursday I continued there in house with him, in
which time I saw much cruelty committed, some hanging up by the Feet, others
with their Feet and hands chopped off left in the open street to shift for
themselves, none daring so much as put forth a finger to help them.

ON Thursday July 3d I was again taken and carried to the Brink of the River
where I expected to part with my Life. But the Cosacks told me, if I would pay
the 100 Rubbles, which the Surgeon had promised them on my behalf, I might
go free: which the Surgeon, who against his will feigned himself to be a
Cosack, was content to disburse for me, which afterward I was obliged to repay
upon demand, when able.

ON Sunday I was sent for by the General, who was then a Drinking at the
Emperors Cellar, but nothing of moment passed at that time he being drunk, and
forced me to drink off several Bowls of Brandy and Wine after one another, so
that I was afraid to displease him, being (as I have elsewhere remembered) very
outrageous when drunk; wherefore I took occasion to steal out of his presence.

ABOUT this time happened many memorable passages, and cruel Examples of
Tyranny, which would prove too tedious to relate. I should want words to
express Schrickelycke Moordt int Slod^ van ASTRACAN

A. Het Slot van Astracan. B. Tooren shae^de art Slot. C. D. Stade Astracan D.
D. Basschen overste ^ande T^ora gesmete. E. D'Gouvernour Ivan Simennowitz en
order Cansetier vande to ren gesmeten G. Offeciers van Proseroski ^lendich
omgebrackt H. Alexe Alexewitz secretaris by de rib^e^ op g^ng^n de soon van c^n
Cham u^t Cilan I. ^ee Soonen vande Gouvern^ur ^yde Boris (...) by de (...)
op^hangen. K. Ge^ngen^ dis a^le omgebracht sya. L. Vluc^ende dis Ach^r^alt en
god^ot wor^en. M. Plaets daer sy de Doode^ op mallander (...) N. Wrn parsery O.
De Kerck P. Net Gerecht Huys Q. Muur van't Slodt


the most barbarous and inhuman Acts and Torments, which the Cosacks studied to
kill and torture the Inhabitants and Loyal Officers, who did not forthwith
submit themselves to their unreasonable and unjust Wills.

On the Wednesday following was the Secretary Alexo Alexowits hung up upon a
Flesh-hook by the Ribbs, and suffered much despightful usage and Torments
before he died. The same was done to a Noble man's Son of Gilan. Also two Sons
of the Viceroy, Deputy, or Waywod were hung up by the heels, the one being a
very hopeful youth of about 16 years of Age, and the other a Child of about 7
or 8 at the most.

The Day following they were both found alive, and the youngest at the
intercession and Mediator of some of Radzins Minions was taken down, and saved
alive, but the eldest was thrown down from the Top of the Tower, whilst still
alive, which was the Death his Father suffered.

The same day I had News how that Christian Brand one of my Men was still
alive, and was constrained to feign himself as Cosac.

On the 20th of July the Cosac General Radzin departed with an infinite number
of small Shipping and several Thousands of Men, drawing 20 Men out of each
Company to serve for the Garrison at Astrachan and left there 2 Governors of
equal Command and Power, the one being a Cosac, and the other a Russ.

ON the 2 of August began a New Massacre continuing for several days together,
where taking one day with another, were 150 Persons killed, sparing neither
sex nor Age. For which reason I began to hunt out for a Cave in the Earth where
I might save my self in time of need, hearing of nothing but a perpetual and
incessant massacre; and a general Lamentation of Parents for their Children,
Widows and Orphans for their Husbands and Fathers, and that as well among
those who had bin instrumental and most forward to let in the Rebels, as
others that opposed it; a just reward for their Treachery who had been
assistant in the Bloodshed of those who under GOD should have protected them
from such dismal Calamities.

ABOUT this time I dispatched three Letter for Ispahan and had notice how that
Christian Brandt was set free. It seems that he was taken for a Persian, having
a brown, swarthy complexion, and by such means was spared in the massacre; for
all the Dutch were hewn down, or otherwise dispatched, save only L. Fabritius
Son in Law to Captain Rudolph.

ABOUT the same time I had news by the Surgeon, how that my Ships-company
that betook themselves to flight with the Shallop were run astrand on the
Scemkal or Dagestan Coast, a Country butting out against the Caspian Sea.

ON the 22 of August was much Tyranny committed in the City, and people of all
ages massacred. The Surgeon after a long soliciting procured a Pasport to
depart with a Servant to attend him, although not without giving Security for his
Return. This gave me likewise opportunity to leave the place under pretext of
being his Servant.

ON Monday in the afternoon being Aug. 25 we left Astrachan and imbarqued our
selves aboard a Vessel belonging to some Banjan Merchants, who were also
pillaged and robbed of all they had.

ON Tuseday we came to Sea, sailing close by the Coast and to the Southward. We
also saw 3 small Vessels, or Barks which endeavored to keep Company with us.
Having passed Settinabo Gora the Wind was flat North, and about the Evening all
was calm.

THE Day following one of the above mentioned Shipping hailed us, and said that
they were bound for Terki and came from Astrachan being laden with Salt. We
kept them Company along the Coast near the broken Land which is all grown over
with huge tall Reeds: we had 11 and 12 Foot Water. At night one of those
Vessels strayed about a Cannon shot from us: and the next morning 2 Barks made
up toward us and gave Fire, without doing any Execution: But when they came
near us the cowardly Banians fell upon their knees and begged their Lives. In
each Boat were 9 Persons and aboard of us were 46, some Persians, Tartars and
Bouchars, but most Banians. Coming to board us they plundered all to our very
Provision. I had about 8 Rubbles in Money and my Seal-ring which had bin once
already redeemed from the Cosacs. This Ring with the Money I gave to the
Surgeon; but they threatening to put him to the Torture when it came to his
turn to be pillaged; he confessed all and delivered up the Money and Ring,
besides 4 double Ducats of his own: but found an opportunity to hide 52 Ducats
more after an especial manner about his Body.

WHEN the Cosacks had taken all and pillaged us of what they could find, they
held a certain sort of a Council among themselves what they should do with us.
At last it was resolved after a long debate, that we should be saved alive but
turned off to Sea, with charge not to come anigh the Coast any more, upon pain
of being thrown over board if they came to take us again.

UPON this they left us, and gave us opportunity to make use of the Wind, which
was Westerly, and about the Evening with a brisk Gale, and a dark moon we set
sail and bore up to the Sea.

BUT after we had sailed about 2 Leagues the Weather began to be somewhat
boistrous, so that we were fain to put in at a small Creek of an Island, where
we lay at Anchor till Saturday following; at what time the Weather growing more
calm and temperate we weighed and bore up again to the Coast, where we
immediately descried 2 Barks that made up to us, and at last came close by the
board. The Surgeon and I had taken our last Farewell of each other, expecting
nothing more than Death. In short, they fell a plundering us, and I to pass for
a Banjan had anointed my self with Black tempered with Grease, and tied a
Handhercheif about my Head, but it was so botchingly don that they found
occasion to ask the Surgeon, what for a Black Devil that I was? In the mean
while they searched very close for Bread and Provision which I seeing pointed
to my mouth, whereupon they were so merciful as to return me a part of the
Provision back again. Two Degestan Merchants were thrown over board and the
Surgeon who passed for a Pole was most severely beat. They threatened that if
they met us again near the Coa^ that we should have no Mercy at their hands.
Meanwhile I had lost my little Compass, so that we had no other help in
directing our Course, than only the Sun and North-star. Toward the Evening it
began to blow hard again and the Pirates left us, bearing up close to the Coast.
The Surgeon had again hid his Gold in a place where they did not once make
search for it.

THE Wind continued hard till Thursday following, blowing mostly from North-W.
and by N. and now changed again into W. N. W. which was good and favorable for
us; but the Banians would in no wise give their consent that we should weigh
Anchor, for that they thought it too high and boistrous.

BUT on Saturday the Wind continuing still in the same point, we weighed, and
with a fresh Gale steered away South and by West; and soon after descried a
small Vessel riding at Anchor, being one of those that left Astrachan with us:
those aboard were Persians and had the luck to escape the Cosacks, keeping off
at Sea. When they saw who we were, they weighed and kept us company. Toward
the Evening the Wind blew North-East, and I found that we had sailed too much
Westerly, I pressed hard that we should alter our course, but could not
praevail with them to steer another way: so that in the Morning we found our
selves close to the Coast, and had the Wind at East and by N. With this sort of
Shipping it is very difficult to steer without 12 points of the Compass Wind to
their advantage.

HOWEVER we thought good to keep close to the Coast, but toward the Evening it
growing calm we rowed off to the Seaward and lost the other Vessel. Meanwhile
we began to be distressed for want of Provision, and fed of the crumbs of moldy
Bread: and the greatest part of the Company had no more to eat. But the Banjans
were best provided, and imparted to us such as they had.

INTERIM, the Wind came about East, and E. and by S. so that we were
constrained to drop Anchor, and so to ride three days at half a fathom Water.
Yet growing calmer we ever now and then rowed a little. But having spent all
our ^ood were at a great loss for Fuel to bake bread, of that little quantity
of Meal which the Banians had left: and were fain at last to cut up some parts
of the Ship ^r Chips, which stood us in very good stead. The Wind then
continued Easterly and we steered as far Southerly as we could, till on the
10th. of September toward the Evening we came to a good place of Anchorage,
near the Coast, of 5 Foot water, where I stepped ashore to seek up some Wood and
Herbs, or what else I thought might be serviceable to us on our Voyage.

ON Thursday being the 11th. of September we sailed close by the Coast which we
kept in sight till Saturday following, when as the Banians, a poor and helpless
People not able to endure such hardship, pressed very hard that we should put
ashore, which out of mere pity we were willing to do, being all wet and very
cold.

MEANWHILE we were set upon by a party of Cosacks, who now the third time
plundered us: but the Surgeon not having time nor the convenience to hide
his Ducats as before, dug a hole and hid them in the Sand, and threw down
his Musket about the same place for a token to find them again. I also being
afraid, ^an and hid my self among the Reeds; but they making a very narrow
scrutiny ^ound me out: and having by me a Psalmbook found that passage or Title
of a Psalm, where David is said to have feigned himself mad before the
Philistines to escape them, I resolved to do the like, by which means I
escaped. When they had me they disputed what Countreyman I was, and some of
them said I was a Dutchman: but others said I was a Georgian, and to my
Happiness the latter swayed it. However (not without wounding and killing of
some of our Company they let us go, and themselves departed from us: which the
Surgeon seeing went and after much seeking found his Gold.

ON the 20 of September it was very good Weather; we therefore made ready to
set sail. About noon being under sail we saw about 30 Tartars on the Strand who
called out to us that we should come ashore: This unwelcom summons mainly added
to our fear; insomuch that one of the Banians ran ashore and fell down upon his
Knees. The Boat was drawn ashore, and after they had consulted a little
together what they should do with us they demanded Ransom, which was agreed
upon for 3 Rubbles each Man. They were Circas and Nagayan Tartars, and accepted
of one of the Banians for a Pledge till the Ransom was paid. We went about two
Miles with them and left our Vessel behind us. I had with me a little Coffer of
Books which I carried along with me; and was fain to trudge a foot without
either Shoes or Stockings through Thistles and Brambles, insomuch that my Feet
were all blistered and bloody. Toward the Evening we came in a Bay where their
Shipping lay. Here I met with an Armenian whom I had formerly known at
Astrachan who treated me very kindly, as also my Companion the Surgeon: but
we having in so long a time not eaten any thing which was fitting for human
food, did Anatomize what was set before us at such that the Armenian observing
it, thought good to take away before we had half satisfied ourappetite for fear
we should surfeit our selves.

HERE we tarried three Days, waiting for a good Wind to go for Tarku, but that
not falling out in this time are determined rather to go by land than to stay
there Wind-bound, it being not above a Days Journey, yet very perilous for the
Tartars who continually lay in wait for distressed, and stranded Passengers, in
these unhappy Proceedings of the Cosacks, who made the Caspian Sea very unsafe
to sail.

ON Tuseday being the 30 of September we set forward, and after a very tedious
Days Travel through Boggs and Marshes we got to a Village inhabited by Nagaya^
Tartars: where we took up our nights rest in the Circas Quarter. Here we met
with a Friend of the Surgeons, whom we offered 8 Ducats to conduct us to
Derbent, which he undertook to do. Here I spoke also with Ivan Turken Agent to
his Imperial Majesty, who was a Turk born, but a Russian Proselyte, and had a
Brother at M^scou who was of the Reformed Religion and an intimate Friend of
mine. This said Gentleman entreated me to stay longer at Terku, but I declined
their kind offer yet was fain to accept of it for 2 Days having so charged and
overloaden my stomach with eating that I fell sick upon it.

ON the 6th. of October we set forward for Derbent in company with the Banians.
Now by the way you are to note that every day we suffered such hunger, a Man's
ransom was thrown into the water, which the superstitious Banians hold for a
special act of Piety and a Religious Injunction. By the way we met some Thousand
of Tartars, for whom we were not a little afraid, they being Nagayans and
noted Plagiaries.

AFTER three days travel we came to a Village called Andre Dereefad which was
subject to one Chapelle, a Tartarian Prince. We staid here till Monday
following being the seventh of October. Here I happened to spy a Persian who
had my Plush-Coat on, which he said he had bought at Terku. The Fur or Lining
cost me thirty five Rubbles at Muscou; and the Persian was willing to sell it
me again for five or six Rubbles, but I could not accomplish so much Money as
to purchase it. Here we also came to understand that my Shipsfolk who fled in a
Challop were stranded and taken slaves.

ON Thursday the tenth ditto, we came into Terku, where we had two Armenians
for our Friends; these also brought me to one of their Acquaintance for
Protection, where I was advised to keep my self very private, being a free
Prize for the Tartars. Here we also found Lewis Faber of whom I have already
made mention, as also Christian Brand one of my Ships-folk; who left Astrachan
three Weeks after us, and had been eight Days at Terku.

ON the thirteenth we left Terku, and hired a person for eight Ducats to
conduct us to Derbent.

ON the seventeenth we passed by Boynak, where I understood some of our Men were
in slavery, I sent our Conduct up to the Town (not daring appear there my felf)
with Letters to advise them to persist in the Christian Faith, if they were
pressed upon to embrace Mahometanism with promise of doing my best to procure
their Redemption. But my Squire the Courier, thought good to give us the Bag,
having already got his Money in hand, nor did I ever hear a word from them,
although I gave them directions how to write to me at Derbent. However when I
arrived there I found Cornelius de Vries, who had been my Gunner; and one Peter
Arentsz of Sceveling, who gave me a perfect account of the Ships-Company, how
they were taken Slaves, and whither they were carried, etc.

WE solicited by the Sultan of Derbent for the Redemption of our Men, who was
pleased to dispatch Letters on that behalf to the Prince of the Calmuc-Tartars;
but having sent two Posts, and all to no purpose or effect, I went to tender my
thanks to the Sultan for his Civility and Endeavors; to which he replied, That
he was sorry he could not prevail with the Tartars to answer my. Desire, yet
was willing to do us any kindness that lay in his power, if we could imagine
any mean whereby they might procure their Liberty, etc. I insisted further to
have some Horses for our use on the Journey which he granted; but there was none
to be had in all the Town, the Caravan being but newly set forward for
Scamachy. Yet finding another ready to depart, the Seamen went afoot in company
of the Caravan. I supplied them also with necessary Provisions, and told them
that I would stay a day, or two longer, to see if I could get some Horses and
then follow them. But it was in vain, for I could not get any, wherefore I
followed the Caravan and coming at Scabran. which is reckoned the half way, we
were informed that there were several Hackneys in the Town, which we hired.

ON the twenty ninth we arrived at Scamachi: where we found John Struys our
Sail-Maker, who was bought by a Polish Ambassador, whose Assistance I desired
in an Address to the Chan; it is true he seemed willing to do us such a favor
if it could have been done without much Trouble. Here I delivered a Request to
the Chan, and had Audience, wherein I made a plain demonstration of the Injury
our Men suffered by the Calmucs, etc. He promised me to do his best for them,
but all was to no purpose, so that I was fain to take up seventy five Abbas
upon security of a Banian Merchant, which was to be paid at Ispahan within
seven Weeks time and twenty five Abbas Use, or Interest; but in case of failure
of payment in Ispahan, to be paid at Scamachy within three Months with fifty
Abbas Interest; the Surgeon being my security. Here I also reck'ned with the
Surgeon, and gave him an Obligation under my hand for what I had received of
him, as also for what he remained security for me at Scamachy.

ON the fifteenth I left Scamachy having with me Cornelius the Gunner. P.
Arentsz staid with the Surgeon, and J. Struys, L. Fabritius and Christian
Brand with the Polish Envoy.

I had very much difficulty by the way to come to Ispahan, yet by the
Providence of Almighty God arrived here the tenth of March, and have Residence
for the time, in the Dutch Lodge: where I find Sr. Frederic Bent President for
the East India Company, to whom, as well as the Gentlemen his Assistants, I am
infinitely obliged to for many Civilities shown me. Cornelius the Gunner they
have sent away for Gameron. I also caused J. Struys and the said Gunner, with
another Foremast Man to sign a Declaration how they fled away from Astrachan
and left me and the Master ashore.

SIR, I have not else to write, but fearing by this prolixity to have tired
your Patience, I cease to be more tedious, and commit you to the Protection of
the Most High GOD, who that he would in Mercy vouchsafe us a happy meeting is
the only and hearty Prayer, of

SIR, Your obedient Servitor, DAVID BUTLER.

A TABLE Of The Names and most remarkable Things contained in the three Voyages
of JOHN STRUYS.
A.
A^ Mrack, what it is. 54. Animosities in Astrachan. 193. S. Anthony, how the
Russians say he came to Novogorod. 123. Ararat, its Situation and description,
and seqq. 214, Araxes [flu.] described. Ardebil a City in Persia described.
Argentero. 74. Argoftoli, a good Harbor. 98. Arno [flu.] 68. Ascension Island.
3^8. Asshur, a Festival Day among the Persians celebrated in memory of Hosseyn
with a solemn Procession. 263. Astrachan, it is Situation and Description. 177,
and seqq. Astypalaea, see Stampalia. An Attestation given the Author by a
Hermit upon Mount Ararat. 216. Auricular Confession in the Russian Church. 154
Ausere [flu.] 68.
B.
BAchal, a Town in Media. 238. Bachu, a place famous for Steel and Iron work.
280 Bairam, or Biram del Carban, the Paschal Feast of the Persians. 305
Banjans, their Superstition. 275. Baptism among the Russians. 153. Baronez, a
strange kind of Fruit found near Astrachan. 180. Basilius (Imp.) first
Establisher of the Christian Religion in Moscovia. 151. Baths, why used in
Moscovia. 147. In Persia. 212. The Bath of Tenos, where the Heathens were wont
to wash before they entered the Temples. 111. Battoki, a form of Punishment in
Moscovia. 156. Bears and Wolvs affrighted with Fire. 119. A strange Passage of
a hungry Bear. 121. Wonderful boldness of Bears ibid. Bear-baiting in
Moscovia. 129. Beleasar. 136. The greatest Bell in the World at Moscou, with an
account of its weight and Dimensions. 134. Bernardo Bragadino his admirable
Courage in an Engagement against the Turks 86, Bethzyrvan, Mountains in Persia.
283. Biloege, the Fish whereof Cavear is made. 199. Boa Vista [insul.]
Situation and Description. 5. Bocharen, a Place affoarding great plenty of
Furrs. 223. Bochdan, the Ambassad^ur for the King of Poland, his ill deportment
at Scamachi, desires to become Turk, etc. 244, and seqq. His churlishness to
the Author, ibid. Asks his advice if he might go for Holland by the consent of
the East India Company their Directors. 246. Boghze Dome, a Place appointed for
Burial of unsanctified Russes. 150. Boldea the Haven of Riga. 115. Bologne, a
City in Italy resembling a Ship. 72. Bonzi of Syam their Office, Habit, etc.
35. Bottarge, a delicate Dish prepared at Corfu, made of the Roes of Sturgeon,
97. Also at Xante. 99. Bouchadde, Tenedos so called by the Turks. 91.
Bouchourt, see Trachana. Boynak a Town in Tartary. 108. Brak, the Authors
Companion sold by the Semkal-Tartars for 3 years, and then by Reversion to
return to his first Patron, 234. His Wife ravished by the Tartars in presence
of the Company, 210. She becomes the Prince of Scemkals Concubine, 234. She
hinders her husband for going away, ibid. He goes away privately, and was never
heard of since, ibid. Butriato, a famous place for Fishing. 97.
C.
CAback [vide Kaback] Cabo Verdo Islands. 5. and seqq. Caffers, the Inhabitants
of Sierra Liones so called. 9. Calmuc Tartars an ougly People. 174. described.
ibid. Cambodiers several of them taken in a Junk, freighted with prohibited
Goods, and by the Loving Kindness of the Hollanders, turned adrift in a Boat
without Rudder, Sail, Oars or Provision, being but 40. Dutch Leagues from Land.
45. The same Junk perishes upon the Rocks, before the Fort Zelandia. 55.
Candia, described. 100. and seqq. Caspian Sea described. 122, 224. Caswin a
famous Town formerly the Royal Seat of the Kings of Persia. 304. Cavear,
whereof made, 199. Used in stead of Butter, during the Fast in Moscovia. ibid.
Casan, a City and Country in Russia, described. 177, and seqq. 166. Cephalonia
[Insul.] 98. Cerigo, an Island lying about 13 Dutch leagues from Candia. 99,
100. Chalse Schuran, or Dipping of the Cross, a Ceremony used by the Armenians.
248. Children, put to death at Madagascar, and why. 19. Chioggio, a City in
Italy opposite to Venice famous for Fishing and Gardens. 73. Chrysolodos, his
Tomb in the Isle of Pathmos. 79. Churches, in the City Moscou computed to be in
number above 1700. 135. Circas Tartars the Bounds of their Country, 204. Their
Persons described, ibid. The Women great beauties, ibid. Go with naked Breasts,
205. Their emulation in Habit, and freedom to converse with Strangers, ibid.
The Religion of the Circas Tartars and their Idolatry, ibid. Their Funerals.
206. Circumcision used at Madagascar. 21. Cochino, formerly called Ephestias
and then the chief Town of Lemnos. 91. Colomna, a beautiful Village in
Moscovia. 125, 158. Communion in the Russian Church, how, 154. Condea a Town in
Lemnos. 91. Congo, a good Corpse du Guard and Lanthorn for the Christians to
enter the Archipelago. 100. Corfu, an Island of great strength. 96. Cosac Krim,
an exceeding high Mountain. 173. Cosacks, their Division and Limits. 183.
Cothany, a Town in Media. 238. Crap, a Root used in Dying. 222. Crim or Cerem
Tartars, their Customs, Nature and Idolatry, 163. Ceremonies about the Dead,
usual Habits and Marriages. 164. Crocodiles used for Medicine at Syam. 29.
Cusmademianski, a City upon the Wolga, Czar of Moscovy sends to Amsterdam, for
Seamen. 114. Whence and Why he is called Czaar, 155. His Power and Sovereignty,
ibid. His Title, ibid. His Revenues and strictness of Justice. 156.
D.
DAgestan a Country of the Tartars subject to several Princes and Lords. 210.
Dagestan Tartars why so called, 2^7. The nature, form, and way of Living of the
Inhabitants, ibid, and seqq. More merciful than the Calmucs. 234. Date-Trees
how procreated. 341. Delos, an Island in the Aegean Sea famous for the many
Temples and Relicts of Heathenish Antiquities. 110. Den Duyvel van TAYOVAN, an
Animal in Formosa, so called by the Hollanders. 56. Derbent, the Key of Persia
on the Hyrcan Sea. 225. The Ruins and Relicts of the Walls thereof built by
Alexander the Great. 226. Watch Towers and great Slave-market at Derbent. 227.
Slaves unkindly used at Derbent. 228. Dian Manans, an imagined Deity among the
Madagascars. Dick Kop, A small Fish of a wonderful strength. 225. Don a River,
formerly Tanais, whence the Don Cosacks, runs not into the Wolga according to
the vulgar opinion. 194. Dwino, 136. Dydenof, a Town and Wharf on the Volga.
158.
E.
Earthquakes frequent at Xante, 99. Zantotini, 107. 2 great Earthquakes at
Zantorini, ibid. Several Earthquakes at Scamachi, where by one 80000 Men were
destroyed, Mountains and Villages removed, etc. 240. Easter, how celebrated by
the Moscovians. 158. Elephants used for Executioners at Syam, 47. Served in
Gold, 32. Wars about the white Elephant. 33. A merry passage about an Elephant.
63. Embro [insul.] The English take Saint Helena, 355. And the Ship Europa, a
Dutch East India Ship, ibid. Also the Admiral and Vice Admiral. 358. Enkurekan,
a venomous creature like a spider, but bigger than a mouse. 311. Epiphany
celebrated by the Armenian Christians at Ispahan. 325. Ervan or Urwan, a City
under Mount Ararat in Armenia. 213.
F.
FAsts, four solemn Fasts in the year in Russia, and the great Profaneness
therein committed. 154. Ferrara, a Town in Italy. 73. Firando in Japon. 59.
Flax, a great Commodity in Moscovia. 135. Formosa [Insul.] it is Situation,
Clime and Circumference, 55. Fertility and Products, ibid. Form and complexion
of the Inhabitants, 56.57. A Man with a Tail burned at Formosa. ibid. Habit of
Men and Women there. 58. Furrs, a great Profit to the Great Duke of Moscovia.
138.
G.
GAmeron, or Bendar in Persia described. 349. Garlic and Onions much used in
Russia 137. Garrisenda, a Tower in Bologne built crooked for a Proof of Art.
72. Genua described. 3. Gilan an eminent place for Silk. 223. The Bay of Gilan
it is compass. 224. Greece described. 92. Custom and usual Attire of the
Inhabitants. 92, 93. Grotta Sybilla. 70.
H.
HAdzi Biram Aly, a rich Merchant in Persia buys the Author. 229. The Author
saves him from drowning. ibid. His great kindness to the Author. 230. Hardiness
of the Russians in extremities. 137, 138. Hares, in great abundance about
Cothany. 238 St. Helena (Insul) 63. Hemp, a main Product and the staple
Commodity in Moscovia. 301. Het Hups te Gennip, the Ship on board of which the
Author was in great danger. 66. Honey, found in great plenty at Milo, 111. And
in Moscovia. 135. Hosleyn, a Persian Saint and Second Son to Aly a Feast
celebrated to the memory of him. 263 Hunting, a main exercise in Formosa. 59.
I.
St JAge [Insul,] Situation, 6. and Description 7. Japoneezes their Form,
Nature, Habit and Customs, etc. 62. Ilha del Fuego. 7. Ilha de Brava. 8.
Indrapoura Insul.] 24. Ispahan described. 315. Judia the chief City of Syam
described. 27.
K.
Kabacks', Alehouses or Taverns in Moscovia, farmed of the Emperor. 156.
Kabelang, a Province in Formosa. 58. Kaliklefthan. 252. Kamuschincha, a Russian
Town taken in by Craft of Radzin. 193. Kasschan, its Situation and
Description. 310. A Key made of an Emerald, shown in a Church at Genua. 4.
Keydar Peyamber, a very high Mountain in Persia. 301. Kieselarsche Kolthre.
201. Kissel-bassched; the Soldiery so called at Derbent, their unruly and ill
temper. 2^9. Kisiloseyn, a swift River in Persia. 299. Knutter, a form of
Punishment in Russia. 156. Kostar, a great River running through the Mountains
of Elbur. 236. Koctep, a village in Persia. ibid.
L.
LAzaro Mocenigo fights the Argerines, Tripoleezes, etc. 103. Killed. 105.
Laar, or Lar, a City in Persia described. 246. Leghorn described. 67. Lemnos,
attacqued by the Venetians and surrendered upon Articles, 92. Described. ibid.
Lifelanders, their Properties, Habits and Customs. 127. Linden-Tree its'
manifold use. 165. A List of the Head-Officers in the Venetian Navy as they
were engaged against the Turks. 83. Lorenzo Marcello General of thn Venetians
killed. 88.
M.
MAdagascar; Situation of the Island. 15. Customs of the Inhabitants, 19. Their
Marriages, 18. Funerals. 19. Religion, Superstitions, 21. Government. 22. An
odd passage, where a Dutch Captain meets with a King of that Country who had
formerly bin his Slave. 13. Fertility of Madagascar. ibid. Majo [Insul]
Situation and Description. 6. Malefactors, how punished in Moscovia 156.
Malhora, a rock near Leghorn. 67. Marco Bembo Admiral of the Ships of war in
the Venetian Armade hotly engaged with the Turks; 80. Takes the Capitana; 89.
Killed. 105. Mares-milk in great esteem by the Tartars. 182. Marriages of the
Madagascars, 18 Of the Syammers, 39. Of the Moscovians. 131, and seqq.
Merchants, eight murdered in a Wood of Moscovia 126. Metellino, see Mytelene.
Meynderts Island. 203. Middleton, an English Ship engaged with a Fleet of
Turkish Galleys, against which she valiantly defends her self. 79. Milo
[Insul.] 74 75. Eminent for able Seamen and Fishers, 111. The prime place to
Water at. ibid. Mochan, or Mokan, a great Heath in Persia, dangerous for
Robbers. 283. Moscou described. 130. Mulbery Trees in great plenty at Tenos.
111. Mummay Kobas, a most costly Balsem proceeding out of a Rock. 262.
Murderers delivered over to the Friends of the murdered Party in Persia. 262.
Muskar, a City in Media. 237. Muskettos, many of those Flies in Lifeland.
Mytilene, an Island in possession of the Turks. 76. A bold Attempt of the
Author and his Company to fetch off cattle from Mytilene. ibid. A description
of that Island. 109.
N.
NAchay, a little Fish of a wonderful strength. 225. Nagayan and Crim Tartars
described. 181. Nanguesaque, or Nanguesaky, a City in Japon, built by the
Portugueezes. 60. Merchandise and Traffic of that Place, ibid. A great
Hurricano that happened there, ibid. Situation and Description of Nanguesaky.
61. Naphtha, an oil running out of Rocks, how got. 237, 238. Napoli di Malvazia
attacqued by the Venetians. 106. Natens a City in Persia. 312. Naurus, see New
years day. 257. Naysobath, a fair village in Schirwan, or Old Media, where the
Holsteyn Ambassadors suffered Shipwreck. 237. Necromancy, much practiced in
Lifeland. 117. New years day celebrated by the Persians. 257. Nicsia, an Island
famous for the Temple of Apollo, w^ose Ruins still appear. 10^. Nieu meulen
[oppid.] 1^6. Nisen-Novogored. 161. Nisobath, [see Naysobath] Noah's Sepulcher.
332. Novogorod described. 123.
O.
OEtsjoege. 199. Onions and Garlic much eaten in Russia. 137. The great
Orchard near Tzurbag, how planted, 213. Variety of fruit therein. ibid. Oron,
the Primo Vizier comes down to see Engagement between the Venetian and Ottoman
Armada. 104. Osmin, a Province and Dominion of the Tartars. 210. Their manner
of choosing a Prince or Protector. ibid. The Author and his Company taken,
hardly used, made Slaves and brought to the Prince of Osmin. 210, 211. Taxed
for Cosacs and Radzinists. 212.
P.
PAdar, the Inhabitants of Koctep in Persia so called, much addicted to
stealing. 237. Pagods of Syam. 35, 36. Liberality of the Syamers to the Pagods
and Bonzi. ibid. Palm Sunday how celebrated by the Russians. 157. Palso Castro
a Town in Lemnos. 92. Paniegros a Polish Nobleman murdered in his Bed. 243.
Parmach, or Barmach, a Mountain where they get Naphtha, or Petroleum. 237.
Patany assists the King of Syam against Ava. 33. Pathmos, the City and Island.
93. Patriarch of Moscovia, his Office, Power, Habit, etc. 152. Peace, how
treated upon and ratified by the Kings of Madagascar. 23. Pelicans in great
abundance about the Caspian Sea. 201. Persepolis. 332: and seqq. Petroleum, see
Naphtha. Petzora, a montanous Country in Russia. 136. Pitsiora in Lifeland
described. Pisa described. 68. Pletskow in Lifeland described. 121: A
shank-bone of a giant to be seen at Pletskow. 122. Po [flu.] 73. Pochmelie, a
Russian Dish. 1^9. Poddowodda, what it is. 122. Polygamy allowed at Madagascar,
18. In Syam, 40. By the Crim-Tartars. 164. Porto de Canisos. 5. de Ribeirra
Corea. ibid. de Pray. ibid. Prattelino, a famous Palace in Florence. 69.
Q.
QUas, a Russian Liquor. 139.
R.
RAdzin, his Offspring, 183. The Reason of his Rebellion, 184. The first
Insolences he committed, ibid. His Treachery and Cruelty on the Confines of
Persia, 185. He submits and obtains pardon from the Czar, 186. Th^ows a Persian
Princess into the Wolga, 187. His strictness and Punishment of Adultery, 188.
Returns back for Don, 189. The Russians that follow him are demanded by the
Governor of Astrachan, ibid. Which he refuses to send back. 190. He gains the
Astrachan Fleet by Treachery, 191. His Power and Aw, ibid. His cruelty when
drunk ibid. The Increase of his Army, ibid. He refuses the Title of King, 192.
Sends Legates to the King of Persia, and their ill success, ibid. Sends out
Emmissaries into several Towns upon the Volga, 193. Increases his Fleet and
Army, ibid. Takes in Kamuschinka by craft. Revenues of the King of Syam, 34. Of
the Czar of Moscovia. 156. Rheno [flu.] 72. Rhesan a fertile Province in
Moscovia. 136. Riga described. Rostof, 136. Russes, their Form, Nature and
Properties, 138. Their Diet and usual Drink, 139. Their Beastliness when drunk.
140. Their great esteem of Brandy and Tobacco, ibid. Addicted to Calumny and
Jarrs, ibid. Their usual Habit, Painting or staining of the Face in practice
among the Female kind, 141. The Marriages of the Gentry, ibid, and seqq. Of the
Pesantry, 145. And of the Clergy. 153. Their Divorcements and the occasion of
the same, 146. Their Superstitious opinion about cleanness and uncleanness;
146, 147. Of their Baths and Hardiness, ibid. Their Peculiar Actions, Gestures
and Customs of the Russians from other People, 148. Of the Visitation of their
sick. ibid. Ceremonies about their Dead, 149. And the manner of their Funerals,
150. Of their Religion and Church Government, 151.
S.
SAbaksar. 165. Sakky, a Liquor used in Japon. 60. Samos, an Island in the
Archipelago, 93. Two Prizes taken there from the Turks, ibid. The Author and 6
more there taken and made Slaves. 94. Sariol Kurgan, a Mountain famous for the
Sepulcher of an Emperor and 70 Kings. 173. Sattiry Boggere, an Island at the
Mouth of the Wolga taken in by the Cosac- Rebels. 173. The Rebels erect there
a Watchtower. 185. Sauceages of Bologne how made. 72. Savona [flu.] 72.
Scabaran a Cape in the Caspian Sea. 224. Item a City in Media, famous for Rice.
237. Scalimene, Lemnos so called. 91. Scamachi, or Sumahi, a famous Mart in
Media it is Situation, 238. Described, 239. Very subject to Earthquakes, ibid.
Scirwan an eminent Place for great plenty of Silk. 2^3. Scorpions very annoysom
at Kaschan. 311. Scyro [Insul.] 110. Sierlan, an Island. 203. Sierras, or
Scyras described. 331. Skorodom, a part of Moscou so called. 135. Slave market
at Ervan, 213. At Derbent. 238. Slaves, how unjustly used by the Turks, 80. How
used at Derbent, 228. And in Moscovia. 138. Smeriglio, a blackstone of great
esteem, found at Nicsia. 109. Smiowa, a Mountain, 173. Smolensko, 136. Spoon
meat much used in Russia. 137. Stampalia, or Astypalaea one of the Cyclid
Islands. 109. Standia the Rendevous of the Venetians. 103. Stariza, taken in by
the Cosacks, and 1200 Soldiers killed 194. Stenko [ or Stephen] Radzin, see
Radzin. Storm at Sea near Xante. 74. Sultan of Derbent very favorable to the
Hollanders. 233. Sultanie, a famous Town in Persia described Swiatki. 166.
Syberia, a woody Country in Moscovia, famous for Furrs, 136. The Place of
exile for Men that beat their Wives too much. 140.
T.
TAfflis, a City in Georgia. 249. Taurus [Mount.] 299. Teil-tree [see Linden
tree] Temple of Jerusalem at Moscou. 134. Of Appollo, it is Ruins. 109. Tenedos
besieged by the Venetian Armade and surrendered upon Articles. 91. Described.
ibid. Besieged again by the Turks but in vain. 104. Tenos, the Castle blown up
with its own Powder. 110. Terky, a Moscoviam City its Situation and present
condition. 203. Terra Lemnia, or Sigillata, 92. Torstok a River and City in
Moscovia. 126. Tobacco, coveted by the Russians, 126. Forbidden by Proclamation
to be smoked. 140. Tortoises in great abundance at Balharu in Persia. 283. At
Ascension Island. 358. Trachana and Bouchort two sorts of Bread made at
Mytilene, very durable. 109. Troy, the Remnant of that famous City. 78. The
Author taken in a Vineyard near Troy and made slave by the Turks. Tweer a City
in Moscovia. 126. Tzanle, a beautiful Town in Persia. 284. Tzawaar, a Place in
Persia where every one is to show a Pasport. 282. Tzornoyar, a City in
Russ-Tartary. 176. Tzurbag. [oppid.] 203.
V.
VIathe, its Sterility but abundance of Furrs, Honey, and Fish. 136. Volske, a
Province in Moscovia rich of Furs. 136. Ustioga, a Province in Moscovia, famous
for plenty of Fish and Cattle. 137.
W.
WAter, consecrated by the Armenian Christians. 248. Wax a great Commodity in
Moscovia. 135. Whirlpools in the Caspian Sea. 222. Whore-market at Caswin in
Persia. 305. Wildgeese and Pelicans in great abundance about the Caspian Sea.
201. Wolf baiting at Moscou. 129. Great multitudes of those Beasts near Colomna
in Moscovia, 161. Wolmar [oppid.] described. 118, 119. Wolodomir, a fertile
country in Russia. 136. Wood: A Wood in Syberia whose end cannot be found out.
137.
X.
XAnte, an Island affoarding great plenty of wine. 74. Many Earthquakes on
that Island. 99. Great scarcity of Water. ibid.
Z.
ZAntorini, an Island subject to Earthquakes and Meteors. 107. Wine very cheap
on this Island 107. The Author left ashore and in great peril of being taken.
ibid. Zelandia, a Fort in East India. 63. Zemschi Precaus a Place in Russia
where any person that is found Dead is brought and exposed to public view. 150.
Zide Tzaybrail taken up and canonised after he had bin dead 100. years. 215.
His Sepulcher described. 290. The Revenues of the same. 296. Zierlan, or
Tzierlan an Island on the Caspian Sea. 203. Zouaschi a Nest of Turkish Pirates,
107. Taken by Lazaro Mocenigo. ibid.
ERRATA.
Page 117. l. 3. read, and shave all their Hair, except p. 52. l. 12. before.
ibid. l. 20. steel. p. 3. l. 27. about. ibid. valleys. 45.18. with. p. 71. l.
20. Gratitude left p. 153. l. 30. for than read thou.

If any thing else occurr that may obscure the sense which (by reason of my
absence from the Press) happens in some places, the Reader I hope will either
be pleased to pardon, or amend with the Pen, as also the Literal Errors which
my leisure at this time will not permit me to rectify.

NB. The Book-binder may also please to take notice that the Print of the
Massacre of Astrachan may be more fittly placed at page 373. than before the
Narrativs, according to the Directions given after the Elenchus, in the fore
part of the Book.


