THE Lord Bacons Relation of the SWEATING-SICKNESS Examined, in a REPLY TO
GEORGE THOMSON, Pretender to Physic and Chemistry. Together with A Defense of
PHLEBOTOMY In general, and also particularly In the PLAGUE, SMALLPOX, SCURVEY,
and PLEURISY. In Opposition to the same Author, and the Author of Medela
Medicinae, Doctor Whitaker, and Doctor Sydenham. ALSO A Relation concerning the
strange Symptoms happening upon the Bite of an ADDER. AND A REPLY, by way of
Preface to the Calumnies of Eccebolius Glanvile. By Henry Stubbe Physician at
Warwick.

Nec temere nec timide. London, Printed for Phil. Brigs, and are to be Sold by
Booksellers in London. 1671.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
YOu are to take notice that the Author whenever he names his Adversary has
chosen rather to affix a Black line, than to give him the Title of Doctor: not
out of any contempt, or that he would deny him what is his due and right,
though by PVRCHASE: but he could not be any way informed that he was any
Graduate, though he write himself M. D. nor do any of the College own any such
thing. As for what is said, that He purchased a DOCTORAL DIPLOMA to justify
his practice Legally in any place of the world. H. S. professes he does not
understand whether this import any more than a LICENSE to PRACTICE, which
loses much of its validity and repute by being a CONFESSED PVRCHASE: As for
DOCTORAL Diploma's, he never heard they were any where to be purchased without
taking of the Degree, and in that manner it may be purchased, it being usual at
Leyden and Padua to sell them, with this Flogy: Accipiamus pecuniam, and
dimittamus Asinum. If it be due to him, the Reader may supply the blank with
what is fitting, and term him either Mr. Thomson, or G. Thomson the DOCTOR BY
PVRCHASE.

Yours H. S.

TO THE Learned and Judicious President and Fellows of the Kings College of
Physicians in LONDON.
SIRS,
THat there are certain periodical revolutions in Nature, whereby the same
calamities, distractions^ and diseases renew themselves, and afflict mankind
over and over again, has been the ancient observation of prudent men.
Agreeable hereunto it is, that in our Age we see the contempt of Ancient
Learning revived; and experiment a new inundation of Goths and Vandals amongst
us, but not likely to be so famed as the former, for Civil prudence, and
Military conduct. Cassiodor.
But as they bear a great resemblance to those Barbarians, in demolishing old
Structures and Books; so herein they out-doe Theodoric, in that they promote a
Licentiousness of Experiments in Physic, which that wise Goth severely forbad,
out of tender regard to the welfare of his Subjects, in the loss of whom,
Princes themselves become Sufferers. When the Europaean Christians were reduced
to their greatest ignorance, and rudeness, they retained so much of sense as to
apprehend this evil; and to remedy it, and to furnish themselves with able
Physicians in difficult cases (in the more facile men, are less sensible of
their want) they erected Physic into a Faculty, graduated the Doctors, and did
subordinate the Apothecaries unto them, and left every practitioner punishable
lege de sicariis, or by some extraordinary penalty, under whom any patient
should dye, ^
if the traditions of our Art were not observed, but the Method, or Medicaments
found unwarrantable^ What Henry the eighth did in modelling your illustrious
College, was but an imitation of these Sage Constitutions, which (descending
from the Emperor Frederick the second, in 1221.) all Europe had submitted
unto: These the King professes to take for his example, and the motive he went
upon was, a regard to the benefit of his Liege-people; as our Law shows. The
event of which determination was such as demonstrated it to be highly
prudential: it gave such a luster and encouragement to Physicians, that the
profession became splendid for the number and quality of such as embraced it,
and added as much to the glory of our Nation, as it brought other benefit. YOU,
as well by your own merits, as the appointment of our Monarchy, are the great
Tribunal of our Faculty: upon YOUR SENTENCE, in difficult cases, we depend; To
YOU, we are referred, as the supreme Judges of our Methods and Medicaments:
It Is our Glory, it is our Security, to be your followers, and that which crowns
all our practice is, to be at last of YOUR NUMBER. But the innovations of late
years have taken off much from your renown and Authority; and though YOU have
in abilities equalled or transcended your Ancestors, yet has your Credit been
extenuated and impaired: which is so much the more to be resented, in that it
arose not from any evil effect of our late Civil Wars, but the insolence and
extravagance of more modern attempts. Others, contrary to our Laws, have
usurped YOUR OFFICE, pretending to reform the Ancient Rules, Methods, and
Medicaments, and giving encouragement to all manner of Empiricks and
Quacksalvers, so that the Faculty is in danger to be overthrown, and the Nation
to be subjected to all those inconveniences which the defect of able
Physicians, and the multiplying of cheating Mountebanks can introduce: and when
some years shall have removed or extinguished the present Physicians and
Surgeons which are eminent, scarce any County will yield one fit to be
consulted with in difficult Cases. All this mischief has its principal source,
original, and strength from the BACONICAL PHILOSOPHERS, and the impudence of --
Thomson proceeded so far as to decline Your Judicature, and appeal to theirs in
matters relating to the practice and being of Physic. Though the Man be
despicable, the President is not: Examples stick not where they begin; and from
as trivial a rise as this, I have observed, that the privileges of greater
Courts have been infringed, and others from non-judices advance themselves to
become Judges, where they ought not to interpose. This consideration, and not
any value I place on my Adversary, made me employ some of that little leisure
which I have, in contriving a remedy for this growing evil; and I concluded
that it might add something to your grandeur; if I descanted upon the
miscarriages of the Lord Chancellor Bacon, and in him showed what incompetent
Judges they are in Physic, either as to the stating of a disease, or recording
its cure, who are not perfect Artists, and accomplished in our Science,
whatever excellencies they have otherwise acquired, and what ingenuity soever
nature may have bestowed on them: In representing of his faileurs, I thought I
might deterr others from the like attempts, who are not Bacons, but Hogs, that
yield much Cry, but no Wool. As for the suppressing of Mountebanks and
Empiricks of lesser note, I think the most ready course would be to acquaint
the Nation with the History of the Faculty of Physic, the Laws made about it
in several Countries, the motives inclining Princes thereunto: the Edicts
against Empericks made by King John, and Charles the sixth in France, and
others elsewhere: as also the dismal effects which followed all over Europe,
after that Paracelsus and his followers had decryed the established Physic,
and introducing new terms, principles, methods, and medicaments, and imboldened
every Mountebank to make trials with his Arcana. This Course, I think, would
best undeceive the people, and make them cautious, willing to learn by the sad
examples of what others have suffered, and to pursue those remedies by which
they have been relieved. And it would incline the Parliament to pass those Acts
by which the Faculty may be supported, and all the rational Physicians in
England imbodied into one common interest, and mutual dependence; whereby it
will be facile for us to advance the Science to that height and usefulness
whereunto no other contrivance can bring it; and to secure not only our selves,
(and that Profession which is and will be an ingenious education and
subsistence for the younger Gentry) but also Learning it self from apparent
destruction. I should expatiate too much in this address, should I propose the
ways of advantaging Physic, and the most feasible projects for the carrying
them on: But I beseech you to believe, I bring along with me in this address
all that respect, all those inclinations to serve you, which become the most
affectionate of your friends, and particularly

Your most devoted servant HENRY STVBBE.
Warwick Ian. 12. 1670.
THE LORD BACON'S RELATION OF THE SWEATING-SICKNESS.
ABout this time in Autumn, Hist. Hen. 7. p. 9. take notice that this Book has
no Index.
toward the end of September, there began and reigned in the City, and other
parts of the Kingdom, a Disease then new: which, of the Accidents, and manner
thereof, they called the Sweating-Sickness. This disease had a swift course,
both in the sick body, and in the time and period of the lasting thereof: for
they that were taken with it, upon four and twenty hours escaping, were thought
almost assured. And, as to the time of the malice and reign of the Disease,
e're it ceased; it began about the one and twentieth of September, and cleared
up before the end of October, insomuch that it was no hindrance to the Kings
Coronation, which was the last of October: nor (which was more) to the holding
of the Parliament, which began but seven days after. I^ was a Pestilent
Fever, but (as it seems) no^ se^t^d in the veins or humors, for that there
follow^d no Carbuncle, no purple or livid spots, or the like, the Mass of the
body not being tainted: only a malign vapor flew to the Heart, and seized the
vital spirits; which stirred nature to send it forth by an extreme sweat. And
it app^ared by experience^ that this Disease was rather a Surprise of Nature,
than obstinate to Remedies, if it were in time looked unto. For, if the patient
were kept in an equal temper, both for clothes, fire, and drink, moderately
warm, with temperate Cordials, whereby Natures works were neither irritated by
heat, nor turned back by cold, he commonly recovered. But infinite persons died
suddenly of it, before the manner of the Cure and attendance was known. It was
conceived not to be an Epidemick disease, but to proceed from a malignity in
the constitution of the Air, gathered by the pre-dispositions of the seasons:
and the speedy cessation thereof declared as much.

I Shall not here transcribe all that I writ against the Historiographer of the
Royal Society: some thereof relating more to the particular faileurs of Dr.
Sprat, than the mistakes of the Lord Bacon: Indeed the error of that Virtuoso
was such in that case, that it is scarce imaginable how a man could be guilty of
it, and pretend to common reading: Those that I am now to insist on, are such
as peculiarly refer to the Lord Bacon, and argue his ignorance in Physic. And
although it may be said in his behalf (as I observed) that in an Historian we
are not to be critical for every punctilio, not relating to his main design,
yet I think it is but just to demand, that what he does write be true: And
although cases in Physic, no more than cases in Law, are to be determined out
of vulgar Historiographers, but Authentic records penned by Artists; yet since
the repute of my Lord Bacon is great in this Age, and made use of to the
prejudice of Our Faculty, more ways than one; and since my Adversary pretends
to justify the exactness of the account aforementioned, I shall recollect my
Exceptions against it, and then consider what he says in his defense.

I complained that the relation is defective in sundry material circumstances,
as to the Type, or description of the Disease; and as to its Cure.

He says no more of its Type, then that It was a Pestilent Fever, terminating
in twenty four hours, without any Carbuncle, or purple and livid spots, or the
like: wherein a malign vapor flew to the Heart, and seized the vital spirits,
which stirred nature to send it forth by an extreme sweat. Whereas it seized
upon them with a violent heat, and incredible anxiety about their stomach and
head; and insatiable thirst; and the sweat which ensued was noisome and
stinking. This appears not only out of Polydore Virgil, and Hollinshed, but
such P^ysicians as writ of it, and are alleged by me: to which I add, the
Authority of Wierus, Joh. Wierus observat. l. 2^ de Sudore Anglico, sect. 8.
and sect. 14. Signa morbi hujus -- breviter talia sunt, Frigus and horror,
sudor faetidus cum magna angustia and caloris sensu circa cor and p^ctus, and
praec^rdia, etiam palpitatu cordis, and calor. Rubor and tumor faciei, cum
dolor capitis: multi etiam dolor lumborum teneantur, alii ventris, alii
stomachi: alii aliis in partibus dolores percipiunt.
who wrote an excellent discourse of it, and having related the Type of it
agreeable to what our Records declare, he adds, that in Germany it began with a
chilness and shivering, which continued half an hour or more, and with great
pains about the diaphragme and groyn, palpitation of the heart, sudden debility
of strength, so that the patient could scarcely stand on his feet: sometimes it
seized them with a Giddiness, and pain in their heads; and sometimes (though
seldom) they vomited up black blood, or choler: Also, that in the beginning of
the disease, the patients hands were swelled and stiff. I added out of
Septalius, Ludov. Septal. de peste. l. 1. c. 21.
that the Urine in that disease was commonly livid and putrid; that some pissed
blood, others did void blood at their noses, and even ears and eyes. In fine,
the Type of it is thus described by Carolus Valesius Dubourghdieu; Carolus
Valesius Dubourghdieu de peste, c. 14. p. 227. This bo^k also has no Index
Pestis hujus symptomata erant lipothymia, virium languor, oris ventriculi
morsus, anxietas, cephalalgia, pulsus creber, celer and inaequalis: denique
sudor graveolens toto corpore emanans. Nec inter Ephemeras censeri poterat,
licet viginti quatuor horarum flexu defervesceret, cum largissimus ille, and
faetidus sudor, non tantum spiritus accensos, sed etiam humores putredinem
concepisse argueret, qui nimirum maxim naturae adhuc robustae and lacessitae
impetu pellerentur. I more willingly cite such Authors as I mentioned not
before, to the end that the Virtuosi may be more ashamed of that prodigious
error which they committed in that History of theirs. Erasmus gives this
relation of it; Describit hanc pestem Erasmus harum calamitatum spectator, in
epistola ad Carolum Utenhovium; citante Forresto, in Schol. observe. 7. lib. 6.
and Ca^ol. Val^^, ubi supra.
Non aliud malum horribilius, nec contagium periculosius, habet tamen illud
boni, quod non excarnificet hominem diutinis cruciatibus, intra duodecim horas,
interdum intra pauciores aut tollit hominem, aut certam vitae spem praebet:
atque initio quidem, ut fit, festino, affligit sudore, sed igneo, odoris
teterrimi: visum est ex amne Phlegetonteo emissum hoc malum. Vngues potissimum
excruciat, alas ita comprimit, ut etiamsi velis, non possis attollere. Qui
fervoris erant impatientes, and auram largius admittebant, hi fere subito
extincti sunt: rursus alii cum animadverterent, id compluribus infaeleciter
cessisse, dum in diversam tendunt rationem, in idem tum exitium inciderunt: nam
occlusis rimis omnibus, and excitato igne copioso, opertique stragulis, quo
magis tutiusque sudarent, aestu praefocati sunt. Praesentius tamen exitium
adferebat admissum frigus: tandem reperto temperamento multo plures ab eo morbo
convaluerunt, quam extincti sunt: tamen tanta lues, nondum eo tempore invenit
nomen, nec ullum efficax ab art medica remedium hactenus repertum est.

These defects are in the Type of the disease: and in relation to the Cu^e,
it is said by him, that Nature did discharge it self of the malign ^a^our by an
extreme sweat. I observed that to be directly cont^ary to what is recorded by
others about it, which is manifest out of Ca^us, Forrestus, Erasmus, Sennertus,
and others that relate the disease. I shall here add Wieru^, J. Wi^rus, ubi
supra. sect. 9
who says, Sed praesertim magna cura est adhibe^da, quando aeg^r sub
invasionem mo^bi e vestigio calefa^tum lectum ingreditur, and stragulis, ad
evitandum frigus ambiens tegitur, ne stragulis nimium oneretur: recordo^ enim,
quod multi ^ stragulorum pondere nimio fuerint excalefacti, suffocati and
mortu^ fuerint. -- In like manner writes Cornelius Gemma. Nec te praeteribo heu
nimirum dira mortalium lues, He speaks of its original in relation to Germany,
where it first appea^ed at that time.
cui Sudoris Anglici, vel (...), nomen ab ipsa symptomatis specie indiderunt.
Orta est haec anno 1529. circa aestatem post humid^ssimam coeli constitutionem
ut a patre piae memoriae (qui and eundem morbum passus est tum temporis,
evasitque faeliciter) ipsius audivi. Cornel. Gem^ Cosmocrit. c. l. 1. c. 8.
Primum vero ex Britannicis locis terras maritimas Hollandiae, Zelandiae
pervagata, Antverpiam venit, ac celerrime in Flandriam, totamqu^ Brabantiam
sparsa, uno die sudoris infanda eluvie hominum vel multa millia suffocabat. His
aderat ea demen^ia, ut sese lectis and linteis insui paterentur, omni art ac
vi eliciendum sudorem arbitrati: Heu nimis immemores Hippocraticae voces, qua
sic ait: Si talia purgantur, quaqualia purgari oportet, confert ac facile
ferunt; sin minus contra. Imo interea dum alter alterum strangularet, qui
praesentes aderant, mutuo adhortabantur; ne se negligerent, vigente morbi
fecia, nec victi pretio, aut precibus se ante tempus liberent. Verum quando ad
illos ordo pervenerat, ut sudandi tempus videretur, consuti similiter, and
violenter operti clamitabant misere, obtestabantur deum atque hominum fidem,
sese dimitterent, se suffocari injectis molibus, sese vitam in summis angustiis
exhalare. Sed assistentes, has querelas ex rabie proficisci Medicorum opinione
persuasi, urgebant continue, usque ad viginti quatuor horas, id enim erat
sudandi spatium praefinitum, ante cujus circuitum evasere quam paucissimi:
Tertia mortalium pars errore proprio atque insania misere strangulata est.

Vitaque cum gemita fugit indignata sub umbras.
The same is avowed by Laevinus Lemnius, whose discourse I will also
transcribe. Laevin. Lemniu^, de compl^xion. l. 2. c. 2. fol. 110, 111.
Ad febrem ephemeram sive diariam referri debet Sudor Britannicus, cujus morbi
symptoma seu accidens est Cordiaca syncope, vel animi defectus, qui ex stomachi
morsu contractus, non minori affectu hominem conficit, quam si cor vitae fontem
halitu contagios^ forinsecus ingruente, opprimi contingat: quod observatum est
anno 1529. mense Septembri in pestilenta Ephemera, quae ex aeris contagio
exorta totam Belgicam invasit magno terrore, animique deliquio and palpitatione
cordis. Cui hoc accessit incommodi, quod Empirici quidam praeter artis
rationem, nec observatis naturae viribus, duodecim horarum spatio in sudore
aegrotos violenter continerent. Quum autem aer vitiatus infectusque hinc malo
seu ephemerae febri causam prebeat, symptoma vero atque accidens, quod
comitatur, ut umbra corpus, Cordiacus sit affectus, atque animi deliquium, tum
sudor ipse Crisis statuitur, quo naturae robur excussa madida olentique
fuligine, morbum discutit, quocirca necesse est moderatus is sit, nec quatuor
aut sex horarum spatio productior, pro virium imbecillitate and robore:
immodices enim vires dejicit, ac spiritus vitales depopulatur, Quod autem
morbus hic Britannicus dicitur, vel Sudor Anglicus, hinc enatum ominor, quod in
ea regione populares frequentius illo, corripiantur, partim ob operosas
lautasque mensas, ac ciborum affluentiam, qua illos distendi contingit, ut
Germanos and Belgas potu, partim (ut superiore anno a me observatum est ipso
etiam Solstitio aestivo) ob aerem turbulentum ac nebulosum, densaque caligine
passim offusum, quo fit, ut concepta intus and foris morbi causa atque origin,
non sine sanguine and sudore cum illo colluctentur, quasi cum valido and
praeferoci host certamen sit initum, quem summis viribus excussisse laborent,
hinc corporis animique defectus and deliquium, hinc spiritus languidi and
collapsae vires, hinc intercepta voce occlusisque spirandi fistulis, vitae
propemodum interitus atque exanimatio. -- This being the judgment of all
Physicians that write of it, and agreeable to the tradition of all Historians;
I do not doubt to record the contrary report thereunto for a fundamental error
in order to the cure. I farther observed, that whereas the others direct, that
that the sick party, if dressed in his clothes, should immediately lie down in
them, without adventuring to disrobe himself: this circumstance, though of
extraordinary importance (as appears by those Chronicles I cited, and other
writers) was totally omitted by my Lord Bacon: and that great caution of not
putting the hand or foot, or any part of the body out of bed, or into any cool
place, is not sufficiently expressed in that assertion, that they ought to ke^p
themselves in an equal temper, both for clothes and fire. Yet is this
observation so considerable, that all severely inculcate it, as being
absolutely necessary to the recovery of the sick: and so strict were the
Physicians herein, that Wierus says, I. Wierus, ubi supra, sect. 15.
for this cause he could not observe the pulse, or urine of the sick, till the
declination of its violence. No less imperfect is that general intimation of my
Lord Bacon, that they were to keep themselves with drink moderately warm, and
temperate Cordials, whereby natures work be not irritated with heat, nor turned
back by cold: as any man will see, who consults Caius, and Wierus, and others.
Another omission of my Lord Bacon's was, That he forbids not the patient to
sleep during the disease; whereas I observed out of Cogan, Tho. Cogan's Haven
of health. p. 272.
If they were suffered to sleep, commonly they s^ooned, and so departed, or
else immediately upon their waking. Which caution is ingeminated by Wierus, I.
Wierus, ubi supr^, sect. 10.
Quamdiu durat vis sudoris faetidi, nec manus detumescunt, nec symptomata
cessant, oportet a somno abstinere, eique resistere vel piis colloquiis, vel
aliis licitis mediis. In all pestilential fevers we are usually cautious how
the patient sleep, till the venom of the disease be somewhat driven out and
abated: and so in such fevers as are Cordiacal, and attended with fainting
fits, malignity increases, and diffuseth it self insensibly into the principal
parts during sleep.

As to the name of the disease, and under what species of fevers it was to be
reduced, the Physicians could not agree in those days: nor whether the sweat
it self were symptomatical, or critical; for though all that recovered did
recover by sweating, yet all that had the disease did not sweat (such dyed) and
if it were symptomatical, yet the evacuation was of that nature, that it seemed
agreeable to the Rules of Physic, (...), l. 2. ^. ^3.
neither to stop it, not yet to help it, but only to continue it: and if it
were Critical, it was to be continued only, in like manner; and nature not to
be assisted, or vigorated, beyond what was necessary. It being our Aphorism,
Hippocr. Aph. sect. 1. aph. 20. ^um notis V^lles^.
Quae judicantur, and judicata sunt integre, n^que movere, neque novare, neque
pharmacis, n^que aliis irritamentis, sed sinere. But though they had these
controversies amongst them, yet I do not find this to be one; Whether that the
Fever or Pest did consist in a vapor afflicting only the vital spirits?
Sennert. de ^ebr. l. 4. c. 15. de sudore Anglico.
Cum enim eam sudores copiosissimi, and multa pessima symptomata comitata sint;
inde facile colligere est, spiritus non solum incensos, verum and ipsos humores
ac calidiores affectos and corruptos esse. Et licet viginti quatuor horarum
spatio haec febris solveretur: non tamen ideo ad Ephemeras referenda est, sed
inde potius maxima inter naturam and inter pessimum morbum colligitur pugna. So
Wierus, I. Wierus, ubi ^upra. s^ct. 7.
though he hold that it seized first on the vital spirits, yet avowes, that the
mass of blood was also corrupted by the pestilent venom: Nor can any man doubt
it, who considers but the Type and Symptoms of the Disease, which I formeriy,
and now again have represented, as also the precedent season of the year. And I
could not but smile at the reason given by my Lord Bacon, to show that the
pestilent fever was not seated in the veins or humors, nor the Mass of the
body tainted. Because there followed no Carbuncle, no purple or livid spots, or
the like. For there are many pestilential diseases recorded, in which the mass
of the blo^d and humors are infected, and yet there are no such symptoms
ensuing, as this Lord specifies. Such was the disease called Coqueluche, or
Morbus Arietis, and Catarrhus Epidemius, in the year 1580. which overran all
Europe, and of which sundry Authors have written: such were the pestilent
pleurisies, pestilent plearipneumonies, and pestilent peripneumonies,
dysenteries, worms, small pox, of which our Physicians give us large accounts:
and in the Histories of sundry Camp-feavers, being pestilential, and infecting
the humors and mass of blood, you may often read how none of these cutaneous
eruptions were observed: no it is not constant in the Hungarian, or spotted
fever, that they appear. Neither is there any thing more true, (...) de (...)
c. 24.
than what Massarias lays down. Etsi diximus and peticulas and caeteros
decubitus propria esse signa fere febris pestilentis, tamen id Sciendum est,
neque id generaliter verum esse, neque hujusmodi symptomata illis propria and
inseparibilia esse: Siquidem ex una part nonnunquam evenit, ut in febre
manifest pestilenti, ac forte caeteris maligniore, neque papulae, neque
tumores, neque ulla naturae depulsio conspiccatur: ex altera autem ut non solum
in simplici febre, sed etiam ut placet Altio and multis, qui id confirmant
verum esse, sine febre interdum compareant and maculae, and alia id genus
symptomata, quae ab omni pestilentis affectus ratione sunt aliena, and nullum
periculum afferunt. In fine, How often does every practitioner see, that those
purple or livid spots do not appear till after the party is deceased? And when
they do appear, it is a Question with me, Whether they argue so great an
infection in the mass of blood and veins, as my Lord intends, seeing they have
their original from the bones, Heuricus ^^rentius in Petr Paaw de p^ste, c. 4.
p. 72. This book (...) no Index.
and thence rise up to the skin, pyramidally. Iacobus Bontius -- cadaver
cujusdam qui exanthematibus hisce laborarat, dissecuit, invenitque ab ossibus
ipsis initium sumere ea, incipereque a latiori basi, pyramidisque instar
assurgere, ac tandem in summo cutis in conum desinere. And this doubt of mine
is confirmed unto me, by sundry reasons, which may be seen in Isbrandus ^
Diamerbrook. Is^r^a Diem^r^brook de peste, lib. 1. c. 14. p. 19. edit. ultim^


The Lord Bacon concludes his Narrative with a passage so ridiculous and
absurd, that so gross an opinion is enough to extenuate his judgment in
Physic, and convince any man, that he had little insight into those studies.
It was conceived not to be an Epidemick disease, but to proceed from a
malignity in the constitution of the Air, Vide Valle^ium in praef. comment. in
Epidemia Hippocr. Ruland. de febre Hungar. c. 8. qu. 1. Fernel. de morb.
occult. lib. 2. cap. 11. ^ul. Palmar. de Febre pestilenti, c. 2. Ludovic.
Septal. de peste, lib. 1. c. 2. Neucrahtzuyn de Purpura, c. 9. page 106.
Zacchia. qu. medico-legal. lib. 3. tit. 3. Qu. 1. sect. 23. Mercatus de febr.
l. 9. c. 1. Anton. Sarracen. de pest. not. page 6, 7, 8. Th. Jordan, de pest.
phaenom. tr. 1. c. 2.
gathered by the predispositions of the seasons. As if Epidemical diseases, and
diseases from the constitution of the Air, were contradistinct; and that none
of the former could arise from infection, or corruption of the air: The opinion
is so false, and universally known to be so, that it needs no refutation.

Having premised these things for the better understanding of the present
Controversy, (most whereof were set down before in my Animadversions) I now
come to consider the Defense which -- Thomson makes in behalf of the Lord
Bacon: and I find it so defective, that of all the Exceptions I have brought,
only two are controverted; the rest are passed by in a profound silence, by my
talkative Antagonist.

The first is, as to the Cause of the Disease, that It consisted in a malign
vapor, flying to the heart, and seizing on the vital spirits, which stirred
Nature to send it forth by an extreme sweat. The second, that The proper cure
of the Sweating, Sickness, consisted in extreme sweats.
p. ^^.
To the first, -- Thomson's reply is, The material cause of this truculent
disease, proposed by him is, a malignant vapor, i. e. Gas sylvestre, an
incoercible spirit, which by reason of its subtilty, resembling the vital
spirits, c^uld readily mix it self with them, forthwith infecting the same,
especially those about the heart; whereby the plastic power of the Archaeus,
as an efficient cause, the the perfect Idaea, or image of this specific
disease is pourtrayed, part of the vital spirits, being, as it were tinged by
the intermixture of these contagious particles, and part remaining in its
integrity, being exasperated at the presence of such an hostile intruder,
stirrs up nature, i. e. musters up all the faculties, forces, or strength
belonging to the (...), I suppose (...) should be (...).
or Archaeus, and withal summoning the Latex, or Lympha, to be assistant to
the ablution and ablation of this fermenting, malign impurity, which is sent
forth by an extreme sweat. The inward procuring occasional excitative cause was
a pestilent venom, a tabefying matter, immediately lodging in the degenerate
juyces about the stomach and spleen (H^lmont's duumvirate) not in the veins or
fictitious humors, which, sending forth fetid putrefactive particles, annoying
the Archaeus, caused an indignation, or fretting disposition, at presence of
that which is altogether Exotic, and incongrucus with nature: whereupon thus
put upon the stress, it exerts all its power and faculties to the expulsion of
such a virulent Guest, performed most conveniently by large sweats, before
which, there must necessarily precede a fever, from the collision,
conglomeration, tumult, and confusion of the vital spirits thus assaulted; as
is frequently observed to fall out, when any extraneous thing to Life gets
into the flesh, to wit, a thorn or splinter: so that a fever is but a
consequent of the fury and rage of the Archaeus, and a precedent of the
expulsion of the (...) the matter of the disease.

In this discourse there are so many un-intelligible canting terms, that to
speak well of them, a man must be a Virtuoso: for that kind of men, being
obliged by their constitution to be very civil one to the other, will bestow
the Elogies of Learned and ingenious, upon the most ridiculous speaker that
ever opened his mouth amongst them. The turning of a malignant vapor into Gas
Sylvestre, and making them synonimous, is an unpardonable error in the
Helmontian Philosophy, which makes the Gas and vapor to be distinct things in
nature. Itaque Gas distinguitur a vapore, Grem^s Arbor integr. and ruinos, lib.
1. c. 6. de meteoris, sect. 2. sect. 5.
quod in h^^ sal assurgat cum mercurio, and habeat sulphur inclusum; Gas vero
sulphur extravertit atque subdividit. The plastic power of the Archaeus are
empty words, and more difficult expressions than ever poor Aristotelian used.
The whole paragraph is nothing but jargon and nonsense, yet suiting to the
revocable Hypothesy of this Age. The juyces in the stomach were not degenerate;
seeing that the disease did invade the most youthful and healthy. His placing
of the infection in the degenerate Iuyces of the Stomach and Spleen, and Latex,
(another canting term) is contradictory to what the Lord Bacon says, that the
malign vapor did fly to the heart, and seized the vital spirits, and not the
mass of blood, or other grosser juyces, called Humors. Oh most excellent
Advocate, and Baconical Philosopher! If it did not invade and affect the blood,
how came those sanguinary evacuations? It Is to no purpose to reply, that the
blood and other humors (which composed that fetid sweat, and occasioned the
heat, thirst, and other symptoms) were only secondarily affected; for then in
the declination of the disease, there must have been Carbuncles or spots,
according to that Judicious Historian. I think the Galenis^s give a better
account of it, when they say, that a particular venom, or peculiar kind of
superlative putrefacti^n, did at that time infect the air, which, encountering
bodies predisposed to sweating-diseases, by the heat and moisture of the
preceding year ((...), Hi^po^rat. sect. 3. aphor. 6. Lang^^s ep. m^d. l. ^^.
ep. 19.
Quando aestas est similis very, tum sudores multos in febribus exp^ctare
oportet) or perhaps by celestial influences, occasioned that disease: whereof
the Cure was to be learned (it b^ing a new disease) from the observation of
that course by which Nature did ease it self: for of all the venenate qualities
which, by infection of the air or diet, are engendered and commixt with the
constitutive parts of men, scarce one produces the same s^mptomes, or is cured
the same way by which another is. Thus some spotted fevers have been cured by
fluxes, others by sweat and urine: some have had t^eir criti^al motions, others
have been so malignant as to admit of no such periods, or delays: And hence it
is, that very eminent Physicians have not restrained the name of Plague to any
one form of disease, but left it unconfined. In this disease, since none
recovered but by sweat, and most recovered that were sweated moderately,
(according to the relations given) it was their business to promote Sweat, and
therein to show themselves subservient to nature: and herein the latter part of
my Lord Bacon's account agrees with that of the Ph^^^cians: viz. To keep the
Patient in an equal temper, both for clothes, fire, drink, moderately warm,
with temperate cordials: though it be most false, that Nature was stirred to
cast forth the venom by extreme sweats: for such dyed; and therefore such
emotions must have been the consequence of Nature, erring through a virulent
irritation, or fainting under a putrid exolution. As for the comparison betwixt
this venom or Gas (which -- Thomson understands not what it is, being ignorant
in his own principles) and a thorn or splinter, it is most absurd: for those
occasion only symptomatical Fevers; these venenate aerial or dietetical
poisons, produce originary and real fevers; they are intimately commixed with
the mass of blood and humors; and as in fermenting Wine or Ale, the
incoercible Gas hinders not the purification and generation of those generous
liquors, so neither would it here: but it is rather like those ferments or
mixtures which corrupt the Wine or Ale several ways, according to their
several natures, but are not comprehended under the name of Gas peregrinum and
sylvestre. Io. Becherus physic. subterran. l. 1. sect. 5. c. 2. sect. 29.
But I will not give my self the trouble of instructing these ignorant
Baconical Virtuosi: it is an endless work: it is enough that Helmont supposes
that the Gas endures not the Sulphur, whereas these noisome Sweats must have
had much of that, if the Chemical writers may be believed.

As to the reason which my Lord Bacon gives why it was not seated in the veins,
or mass of blood; because there were no purple or livid spots, nor carbuncle,
or the like. In defense of that, all that -- Thomson says, is, That the reason
did well become him: (which I easily grant, since he understood not Physic)
for in reality, the effects of this Anomalous poison was most eminent in the
Serum or Latex, a concomitant of the blood, a great depraved quantity whereof
was collected in the body, through the then unaccustomed ill natural texture of
the air, etc. This is all that he says to the purpose: whe^^in, for proof, he
gives us his own assertion; which the most illiterate Mountebank or Virtuoso
may do: and it is contrary to all those presumptions which the History of the
disease does suggest unto us. Besides, if the Latex or serum be a concomitant
of the blood, (as he says) How is it true that the disease was not seat^d in
the veins? Is not the blood there mixed with the Latex? If it were in the
Serum, How are the Humors of the body free from infection? since that is one
of them. A Lawyer that should thus defend his client, would deserve to be cast
over the bar: What your Baconical Experimentators may adjudge -- Thomson unto,
I know not: but no intelligent person can favor him.

The next point is, Whether the cure of the disease consisted in extreme
sweats? My Adversaries words are these; You cavil at our Lord, because he
says, Nature did strive to send forth its virulency by an extreme Sweat:
Whereas your beloved Authors tell you, all that recovered, were recovered by
the continuance of a moderate sweat. This (say you) Experience and Observation
taught them; but 'twas but Galenical, and that may be certainly verified of you
to be the Mistress of Fools; for (...): None but a pyrotechnist can explore as
he ought healingly. I pray Sir, what but Nature should strive to send forth the
virulency? Does not Hippocrates tell us what is infallible; Naturae ( i. e.
vitales spiritus) sunt morborum medicatrices; which you ought to imitate in
deed, and not as you word it: then the Quarrel would quickly be at an end
betwixt us. But the Extreme Sweat (it seems) stumbles you: But why should that?
An extreme disease must have an extreme remedy: This Hippocrates does also
dictate. In extremis morbis extrema exquisite remedia sunt optima. Malo nodo,
malus cuneus. But let us know a little strictly what is meant by an Extreme
Sweat, and a moderate, in relation to this truculent plague. The extreme sweat
(i.e. very large) was, according (...) the story, mortal. The Moderate
salutary. Which I deny, (...)^ quatenus mere Sweats: for, according to my
Observation this twenty three years, all malignant pestilential Fevers, the
Pest it self, and the Griping of the guts, which holds a fair proportion with
the Sudor Anglicus, did all receive a most certain and expedite Cure, best by
extreme large sweats, if the strength were kept up; otherwise no sweat, more or
less, is of any significant benefit. Quicquid fit virtute naturae, fit (...),
non autem (...). Whatsoever Evacuation is attempted by Nature robust, directly
supported, is performed plentifully, impetuously, and incontinently, not
dribling by piece-meals.

In this discourse I shall pass by that ignorant comparison betwixt the Griping
of the guts, and the Sweating-Sickness, betwixt which there is no affinity that
I can learn: and perhaps Spigelius in his book about Semitertian fevers, may
give the best account of that disease: it is one, I confess, I never saw, but I
dare avow, it is not of the nature of the Sweating-sickness; though it may so
happen, that the Griping of the Guts, as well as other diseases, may be not
only malignant, but pestilential. He is a Baconical Philosopher, and therefore
may write any thing. It is also observable, that I gave him no ground for that
demand, Whether nature did not eject the virulency? and Whether we ought not
to imitate Nature? No Galenist or sober Physician, did ever deny these things:
and the latter assertion is that, on which all our practice is founded. It Is
for the Virtuosi, who approve and talk of Commanding Medicaments, (which
overruled nature) to deny it: or for the followers of Van Helmont, who teaches
that it is an imbecility of a Physician to attend or permit any Crisis or
concoction of a disease. We are willing to be tried by that Rule; yet not to be
reconciled to -- Thomson. I must also take notice of the contempt which he
expresses for the Experience of the Galenists, in comparison of that of the
Pyrotechnists: whereas very few of these Philosophers by ^^re, have so much
judgment as to make an exact experiment: But those of the others are as certain
and accurate (understand me not of all) as humane nature, and the mutability of
humane affairs are capable of. I now come to the principal controversy,
concerning the benefit of Extreme sweats in this disease. I confess it is hard
and strange in a Peripatetick, that I should be pressed with arguments against
matter of fact; this is a weakness of judgment, says A^istotle. But though all
the writers else do dissent from my Lord. Bacon herein, (and it is brutish to
call the credit of so many attestations into dispute) yet I shall show some
regard to the reasons alleged. That the remedies of a disease must be as
exquisitely extreme, as is the disease it self, may, with some interpretations
and restrictions pass: for there is a caution to the contrary (...). Extreme
evacuations are dangerous; and no man puts the Life of his Patient, if the
disease admit of any delay; which some plagues have done: so that there is
judgment to be used, and observation, to warrant that practice, such as my
Adversary is not capable of. But however, this does not specificate the remedy,
or inform us whether we ought to bleed, or purge, or sweat, in extremity. A
Squinancy or Apoplexy are extreme diseases, yet no man in his wits, would in
them rely upon the most potent sudorificks. So that I am obliged to desire my
Adversary to apply that general proposition to his conclusion for violent
sweats^ for I cannot. But he says, that Extreme sweats have been observed by
him to be the most expedite cure for all malignant pestilential fevers, the
pest it self, and the Griping of the guts: and for this he alleges the
Experience of twenty three years. Had our Author been one of those
Rosicrucians, who pretend to have lived about three hundred years, his
Experience concerning the Sweating-sickness, might have imported somewhat: but
since he never saw that disease, nor has had any trials to cure it, it is most
impertinently argued, that because some other malignant and pestilential
diseases, the plague it self, or Griping of the guts, are cured so sometimes
(for it is no more) with success, therefore the Sweating sickness ought to be so
cured. I dare say, an hundred Galenists have taught us to cure the Plague by
extreme sweating. I shall only mention Sennertus, Petrus Paaw, Palmarius, Van
der Heyden, G^rdinius, Isbrandus a Diemerbrook. Concerning pestilential and
malignant fevers, the assertion is false, or must be regulated by many
considerations, before it can be admitted: As to the cure of the Griping of the
Guts, I do not hear such a character from London, of his Cures thereof, or the
success of his p^pper-drops, to endear his Method unto me. But after all this,
he concludes me by a third reason, which, if it were true, I would submit
thereto. viz. Whatsoever evacuation is attempted by Nature robust, directly
supported, is performed plentifully, impetuously, and incontinently, not
driblingly, by piece-meals. Therefore, since the Sweating sickness was an
effect of robust nature, ejecting the venom of the disease, the sweats must
have been violent, and the Physicians ought to have procured such. But I cannot
find any solidity in the Argument. Quicquid fit virtute Naturae, fit (...) non
autem (...), Is no Aphorism of Hippocrates, though you read it (...), nor true
amongst Physicians. The Sweating sickness is an instance to the contrary: and
so are those diseases which are terminated by a slow bleeding at the nose,
which if sufficient to put an end to the disease, needs not to be impetuous.
Neither is it necessary that all the evacuations of invigorated nature be
extreme: there is a practical rule in Hippocrates, which does not direct us so
much to the quantity, as quality of what is evacuated, and the benefit which
the Patient finds upon it, and the strength with which he bears it. Quae
prodeunt, non sunt astimanda multitudine, Hippocr. sect. I. ^phor. 23.
sed ut prodeant qualia oportet, and ferat facile. Those evacuations in morbid
bodies, which are either produced by Art or Nature, are not so much to be
judged of by their multitude, ^s by their being suitable to the disease, and
beneficial to the parties. It is true, that small evacuations, Vall^sius in
Aphor. 23. sect. 3.
as drops of bl^od from the nose, and spots in malignant and pestilential
fevers, and small and partial sweats, ^re of a dangerous prognostic. Yet it
is not so necessary that the evacuation be great, as that it be appropriate to
the disease, and well undergone by the Patient. For, Prosper Alpin. de praesag.
vita and mort^, l. 7. c. II.
let never so much come away (as in dejections of sincere humors) yet if it be
not such as the disease requires, it is evil, if not pernicious: And if it be
not undergone with strength and benefit to the patient, certainly the
evacuation is prejudicial. But if those Humors be evacuated, which are the
cause of the disease, and the Patient bear it well, such evacuations are not
hurtful; whether they be greater or less: If they are less, the benefit is
less, yet are they beneficial: and if they be greater, if the Patient bear them
well, how great soever they be, they are not excessive. There are times when
even critical evacuations call for our aid to moderate and abate them: that is,
when they transcend the strength of the patient; and the vital indication being
always urgent, we must not suffer the party to dye by his Cure, any more than
by his disease. But neither is it true always, that Nature operates thus
violently; and there happen frequent circumstances, in which the Physician
ought not to correct her deficiency, but otherwise make the best benefit he can
of it: This happens in Symptomatical evacuations, in diseases that are of
difficult judicature, whereof, as some are noxious, and to be stopped; so some
are beneficial, yet not to be promoted: these give hopes of recovery, but of a
slow one: and where it is apparent that the disease will b^ (...), slow and
difficile in its own nature, ^r. V^llesius m^^hod. med. l. 2. c. 13. Sep^al de
peste l. 5. c. 20.
it is madness to promote those excretions, which may weaken nature, but not
depel the distemper: those small evacuations and otherwise unseasonable, in
such diseases, have their advantages, and they which under them escape with
difficulty and danger, would unavoidably perish without them. This is a known
case in Physic, which to insist farther on, were to teach -- Thomson the
Method of Physick^ which is not my present intention; I only recommend this to
these Baconical Experimentators, that they would Understand before they Judge;
which I am sure my Adversary does not.

I have now fully and perspicuously replied to all that He has said in defense
of the Lord Bacon, which is the principal part of his book: I might leave the
rest to be replied unto by Dr. Chr. Merret, as a more fitting Antagonist for
him, than I am: the match being pretty equal betwixt them two. Yet I shall
cursorily show the ignorance of this man, in one other important passage of his
Book.

He is pleased infinitely with talking of Van Helmont, p. 45.
as one that instructs in real entities; his philosophy is most veriloquous and
Authentic. I shall take the liberty to tell him, that I esteem best of that
Philosophy (in reference to Physic) which is most useful and beneficial to the
health of men; and this I desire to see evidenced by practice: and I farther
judge of an happy practice, not by the plausible reasons he gives, nor the
pretty curiosities with which he sets off the preparation, or efficacy of his
Medicaments; nor by the confidence with which he boasts his own performances;
but by the esteem he gains in the world, and multitude of patients, who will
resort unto him that does the greatest cures: so sweet is life. But I have
assurance from those who knew and observed Van Helmont, that he was no great
nor happy practitioner: and I am confirmed in this opinion, by what I. I.
^echerus relates concerning him, who (though he have otherwise some esteem for
him, yet) reckons on him as an idle Theorist. Concerning Van Helmont, I know
not well what to say: I. I. Becherus physic. subter. l. I. sect. 4. c. I. sect.
7.
It is said, that he could not cure a common fever; and that he dyed of a
burning fever, because he would not make use of any Physician, whose faculty
he had so reviled and contemned, choosing rather to dye helpless. Doctor Krafft
[one much celebrated by Becherus] told me, that being in Brussels, he enquired
after Van Helmont, and demanding of some persons which had lived long in the
same street that he did, where his house was? they could not tell him, and
protested they had never heard of his name: whereat he was surprised, as
deeming it impossible, that a Physician, who, like another Aesculapius,
performed so miraculous cures, and to whom multitudes might be presumed to
resort, having lived so many years in one place, should not be so much as known
to his next neighbors, amidst whom he had lived. Indeed many complain, that
the Theory which he lays down is not found in Practice to answer expectation,
which has occasioned the death of many Physicians and their Patients: as
appeared in the late plague upon the Rhein, where a dapper Priest and his
brother, having by chance met with Helmont upon the Plague, they read it over
so studiously, that they retained it all in their memory most exactly, and
thought it was impossible but that the Practice would be ^uch as would justify
the Theory. From Holland they came to the infected places, and desired leave to
act the Physicians in the cure of the Plague: which having obtained, in a few
days they both dyed. It is manifest hence, that many things may be with great
plausibility disputed by a subtle tongue, and wordish pen, but few appear good
upon Experience. As little is to be said in the behalf of Phaedro,
Scheunemannus, Severinus Danus, and Paracelsus: and Henricus Lavaterus (and
others) shows, that the performances of Angelus Sala, H. Lavate^us, Defens.
Galeni^. adv. A. Salam. p. 81.
(though one of the best of the Chemical practisers) did not gain him credit in
Switzerland, but that his famed extracts proved fatal to many persons of
quality there. There is not any thing so lying as a Chemist; and the Medicines
they boast of, and the Laboratories they talk of so much, are commonly found to
be delusory braggs. I shall not prove this out of Agyrto-mastix: nor insist
upon it, that Mr. Odorde did pretend to as great Arcana as any of the
Fraternity: God had been pleased to communicate unto him a Method in the
plague, Odorde's poor man's Physician, p. 89.
to preserve thousands from the grave, which he promised to administer
publicly and freely to all that should desire it. Yet did he and his wife dye
thereof, in 1665. They will write books of Theories, Processes, and
Medicaments, yet never make or try them. Thus Faber of Montpelier writ much in
Chemistry, but most notorious untruths. An eminent person told Becherus, that
being excited with the renown of the man, and a curiosity in Chemistry, he went
from Italy into France on purpose to converse with him; but could not find that
he had so much as one Furnace, or was at all versed in the practice of
Chemistry. So Agricola, who writ upon Poppius, I.I. Becherus ubi supra.
was put to public shame by an Apothecary, for writing so many untruths. So
that it behooves the people to consider, not so much with what impudence a man
vaunts himself ('it is an usual sign of a proportionable ignorance and imposture)
but to examine rather, as I do, the solidity of their aiscourses, and efficacy
of their Medicaments: it is not a casual cure that makes a man knowing: it is not
a sudden alleviation, which lasts not long, and perhaps throws the Patient into
a worse disease, or destroys him in a short time, that argues the goodness of
his Medicines. No, the constitutive qualities of a Physician, are skill in the
real causes (or such as are as effectual as if they were so) and the signs of
diseases: the diagnosticks and prognostics, and a Method of curing
(authenticated by the History of Medicine) and Medicaments, such as the
Experience of Sage practisers recommends unto us, (to which end he must be well
read in the History of the Materia Medica, and not set up with two or three
praxes) these render him accomplished: He that understands Humane Nature best,
and the operation of the non-natural and preternatural things upon it, is the
person to be employed: not everry one that can proclaim a catalogue of
diseases, (which oftentimes are of necessity to be cured several ways) and
boast of effectual, pleasant, and universal medicaments, is to be regarded.
It Is not the most acute, experimental Philosopher, that is the best
practitioner: many Theoremes are plausible, which practice refutes: this was
the death of Van Helmont; thus Des Cortes died of a pleurisy, Iac. du Bois, in
praef. scripti adv. Wittichium
when, through a prej^dicate novelty, he refused to be let blood. It Is not
great ingenuity and parts employed in florid, or different studies, that make
any man a competent judge of a disease, or the operation of a Medicament: The
Lord Bacon is a great instance of this truth, and the instance of the
Sweating-Sickness, convinces us of the vanity of him, and the Comical wits, in
their pretenses to discourse of, or reform what they so little understand.

I had thought to have prosecuted some other points, by him agitated, and to
have demonstrated the vanity of the courses he takes, and Medicines by him
recommended: and to have vindicated the ancient Physic and Medicaments
particularly, and given an Historical account of the inconveniences that have
befallen this last Century, by reason of these Pseudo-physicians: but I have
not leisure now to do it; nor is my Adversary so considerable, that I should
take so much pains to expose him: what I have writ here, is enough to show his
intolerable ignorance and folly, and represent him as unfit to be entrusted
with the life of any man.

A POSTSCRIPT.
I Think I cannot better conclude this Treatise, than by representing to --
Thomson, that account which he himself gives elsewhere of the
Sweating-Sickness: for thereby it will appear, how out of an ambition to
contradict me, he opposes himself: yet is even that as little agreeable to
truth, as it is to the relation of my Lord Bacon.

G. T. Of the true way of preserving the Blood, page 24.
Here I cannot but make an animadversion upon that truculent disease which
formerly raged in England, to the destruction of some thousands. It had its
original undoubtedly from a degenerate Latex turned into a malignant Ichor,
which caused a tabefaction, or colliquation of the Blood and nutritive juice,
which issuing forth in a copious measure symptomatically, witbout any Euphoria,
or alleviation, What resemblance is there betwixt this disease, and that of the
Griping of the Guts?
quickly consumed the stock of life. The attempt made at first to cure this
malady, by stopping the sweat by astringents and cooling things, proved not
only frustraneous, but also very mortal, for the malignity being thereby more
concentrated, wanting a Momentaneous vent through the universal membrane, it
forthwith preyed upon the Archaeus, extinguishing the lamp of Life in such sort
as a Mephitis, or subterraneous damp does obfuscate, and at length put out the
flame of a Candle. Now the proper adequate remedies that took effect in this
feral evil, were Eustomachies, as likewise counterpoysons, that did immediately
resist the venom by obliterating the Idaea thereof, by corroborating the
enormon, exterminating the intoxicated Ichor, and ill-condition'd Latex,
through the habit of the body, carrying it that way quo natura vergere studebat.

This Baconical Philosopher here directly contradicts what he would seem to
assert against me: viz. His Author and he say there, that the mass of blood in
the veins was not infected (for then there would have ensued spots and botches)
but only the vital spirits. Whereas here he says, that It had its original
doubtless from a degenerate Latex, turned into a malignant Ichor, which caused
a tabefaction, or colliquation of the blood and nutritive juice. And
undoubtedly he is deceived, in fixing the original of that disease in the
Latex, whereas it depended, and had its beginning and being from a particular
venom and corruption of the Air; for, notwithstanding that the
unseasonableness of the preceding year, might have depraved the bodies of men,
yet did both arise, spread, and cease so suddenly, that it is evident its
original and continuance was derived from another cause. Whereas he says it
was Symptomatical, it is a sign he understands not what he says: for
symptomatical evacuations (at best) are neither to be promoted, Sennert.
Iustit. medic. l. 3. part. 3. c. 10.

Fr. Valles. Controv. medic. l. 15. c. 3.

Prosper Alpinus de praesag. vita and morte, l. 6. c. 3.

Ludov. Septal. Animadvers. l. 3. sect. 60, 61.


nor provoked, but only continued: whereas such as did not of themselves sweat,
were to be forced in this case, to sweat moderately: otherwise they dyed. I
profess I do not know yet the nature of that disease, whereunto to reduce it,
or how to speak of it, in the language of a Physician: they that saw it, were
as much perplexed with the notion of it, as with the Cure. That any Physician
did then go about to cure it, as my Adversary reports, by stopping the sweat by
adstringents and cooking things, is an attempt I cannot believe, till I see
some good Author for to averr it: it being contrary to the most received rules
of Medicine: And it is certain, that in England (at least the first time) the
cure is not said to have been performed by Eustemachies and counterpoysons,
that did immediately obliterate the Idaea of the venom, corroborate the
enormon, and exterminate the intoxicated Ichon, and ill-conditioned Latex,
through the habit of the body. For, the Patient was to lie still during the
whole twenty four hours, Th. Cogan's Haven of health. p. 273.
and so cast the clothes on him, as in no wise to provoke the sweat, but so lie
temperately, that the sweat might distill out softly of its own accord, and to
abstain from all meat, if he might so long suffer hunger, With this relation of
T. C 's. do agree both Polidore Virgil, Hollinshed, and H^ll, in their
Chronicles of Henry 7.
and to take lukewarm drink. -- Out of which, it is manifest, that they did
not use such means as -- Thomson relates: and if small beer warmed may pass for
a cooler, the use thereof was more beneficial than he will allow of. But
whatsoever were the Method at the first time of that sickness, in the time of
Dr. Caius, (though they were cautious of giving any thing, if the Patient did
sweat, till some hours were past) yet did the Physicians use temperate
cordials, but moderately given: and such as he would have termed somewhat
cooling, but that so powerful and prodigious effects as were then seen, ought
not to give credit to Galenical Medicines: yet had they no other in those
days, vulgarly used. In Germany, when the diseased party did not sweat, they
gave them treacle. and other Galenical medicines to enforce them: when he did
sweat, then did they give them manus Christi perlated, jelly of currants,
berberies, and the like, mixed with the conserves of red roses, borrage, and
marigolds; and if the patient could not refrain drink, then was such a Iulep as
this prescribed;

R. Of the waters of Sorrel, Wierus observe. l. 2, de sudor^ Augl.
Scabious, and Carduus Benedictus, of each three ounces: of the Syrup of
Sorrel, and that of Syrup Citron-juyce, of each an ounce and an half. m.

This direction is irreconcilable to what my Adversary writes: yet were such
Galenical medicines effectual in that strange disease: And to see with what
indiscretion this Pyrotechnist mentioned the cure of this distemper, one
Tyengius was famous in Holland for his success therein, whose method is thus
described.

Petr. Forest. Observat. l. 6. obs. 8.
Quod ad curationem attinet, and venaesertionem, and purgationem, ab initio
statim exhibebat; sed prorumpente sudore ab iis abstinebat, ne motum naturae
impediret: and magna cum laud (uti scripsit) utebatur ^ali potione;

R. Hordei mundati, florum nenupharis and violar. ana m. ss. Carduiben.
pimpinellae, borragin. bugloss. passul. enucleat, ana. p. j. ficuum numero
december, lentium excorticat. vij. laccae ablutae and mundae v. tragacanthi iij.
Zedoariae, dictamni, rad. tormentillae ana j. f. decoctio in aqua nenupharis
and bugloss. q. s. and post frigidationem exprimatur.

This potion (which these Mungrel Chemists would call a detestable shop-drench)
did he give as a temperate cordial to his Patients, to allay their thirst, and
gently continue the sweat: He gave it warm, causing them to suck frequently a
few drops, or so, through a reed.

I have been more particular in this, to convince the Baconical Philosophers,
how different Cures the Physicians in several Countries, were put upon in a
disease which seemed to be uniform and the same, so that it is not the knowledge
of the general Types of diseases, (I dare speak so, notwithstanding that Dr. C.
M. called me intolerably ignorant for it; but 'twas he was so) nor the
collecting of sundry receipts and Arcana, that accomplish a practitioner, but a
more laborious study in the grounds of Medicine, skill in the diagnosticks,
prognostics, Method of curing, and the History of Epidemical diseases, and
particular cases, together with the Experimental accounts of our Materia
Medica, and the Art of compounding Medicaments occasionally, which must perfect
him in his profession. It Is to such the world has been obliged in its
extremities hitherto; and it is the felicity of our Nation, that the College at
London is composed of such, and such our Universities do breed: and were all
the books in Europe to be consumed by fire, it is the works of such men I would
intercede for, and rescue, whilst all those of the Lord Bacon, the Baconical
Philosophers, and Van Helmont, should be consumed by the flames.

There are other faults in this account of G. T's. that I might insist on, as,
that the intoxicated Ichor should issue forth in a copious measure
symptomatically, without any euphoria or alleviation: Which is absolutely
false. For, though violent sweats were mortal, the more moderate, though
copious, did not only alleviate, but recover the Patient, if all circumstances
besides were duly observed. I might reflect upon the canting language and
jargon which he uses: He that writes in that manner, does prudently, to
dedicate his books to such as are not befitting Judges of what they contain.

FINIS.
AN EPISTOLARY DISCOURSE CONCERNING Phlebotomy. In Opposition to -- G. Thomson
Pseudo-Chymist, a pretended Disciple of the Lord VERVLAM. Wherein the Nature of
the Blood, and the effects of Blood-letting, are enquired into: and the
practice thereof EXPERIMENTALLY justified (according as it is used by Judicious
Physicians.) In the Pest, and Pestilential diseases: In the Small Pox: In the
Scurvey: In Pleurisies: And in several other diseases.
By HENRY STVBBE, Physician in Warwick.

Hippocrat. l. 1. Aph. 2. VASORVM inanitio si talis siat, qualis fieri debet,
confert, and been tol^rant: sin minus, contra. Inspicere itaque oportet and
regionem, and tempus, and aetatem, and morbos, in quibus conveniat, aut non.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXI.

TO THE Glory of His PROFESSION, THE Ornament of this NATION, AND His most
honored Friend, Sir ALEXANDER FRASIER, Knight, Principal Physician to His
MAJESTY.
SIR,
WEre it the Mode of this Age to confer Divine worship upon Physicians, or to
erect them public Memorials, more Countries than England would be your
Idolaters, and besides what an infinite number of the Nobility and Gentry would
honor you with, our Royal Sovereign would erect a Statue to you, as the
Ancients did to Aesculapius and Higia, PRO SALUTE SUA ET SUORUM. It Is in your
Happy Practice that we see what perfection great Learning and long Expeence can
advance a consummate judgment unto: The most unlimited desires whereunto
Ambition can transport any of our Faculty, are but to equal Doctor FRASIER. So
much we may think of: So much we may wish for: But we must reckon those
thoughts amongst our extravagancies, and despair as much of atchieving them, as
the greatest impossibilities: I do avow it in despite of Envy, Malice and
Ignorance, that the discovery of the Longitude, or North-west passage, is a
more feasible design. These are not the customary Complements of a Dedication:
Whosoever apprehends that I can flatter, understands not me: and He is
unacquainted with Your worth, who imagines You can be flattered herein. The
judgment of the most intelligent Prince that ever swayed the English Scepter
has put an end to all suspicions of this nature; and His Illustrious Elogy
has rendered all Panegyriques needless unto you. I profess I should condemn my
self as intolerably criminal, should I surmise that any Address from me could
add to Your Glory: But those who receive no Accessionals from our Applications,
and Praises, do notwithstanding permit us thereby to testify our Respects and
Gratitude: And I beseech you to believe that the presumptuous Declarations of
these Truths, is the result of those Sentiments. I esteem it amongst the
peculiar Felicities of my Life, to have been favored by a Person of so
transcendent Merit, and who disposes not of his Kindness promiscuously: I am
redevable unto You for some place in the regards of his Sacred Majesty, and for
some Effects of his Royal Bounty: 'Twas the Character You gave of me, which
procured me that Employment, in which I was designed HIS MAJESTY'S PHYSICIAN IN
THE ISLAND OF IAMAICA. Sickness did there incapacitate me from acknowledging
that Heroical Generosity of my Prince with any considerable Service; But I
shall always retain a due sense for what He has done, as well as for what He
has pardoned; and this shall ever be an incentive unto me so to qualify my
self, that I may be able to repay Him all that Loyalty to my KING, and
obligation to my PATRON can require.

Amidst these Protestations, give me leave to tell Sir ALEXANDER FRASIER, that
I am not now so esloigned from the World, nor so fixed on my retirement, as
that it is indifferent unto me whether He continue Me a place in His Memory:
It Is certain You afford no room there to what is vulgar, and trivial: yet I
cannot but beg to be indulged in the vanity of this request: and I assure You I
bring no common inclinations to serve You, neither would I by ordinary
Testimonies express that passion wherewith I am,

SIR, Your most humble and most devoted Servant, Henry Stubbe.
Warwick Febr. 14. 1670.
SIR,
IN obedience to your Commands, I have read over the Treatise of -- Thomson,
concerning Blood-letting: I never underwent a more difficult task in my life:
And had the Virtuosi imagined with what reluctance and constraint I should
undertake such a work, they would have abandoned all their other stratagems,
and imposed on me this penance, as the most severe. I profess, I am not so
understanding in the Greek, Latin, or English Tongues, as to comprehend his
Language: yet I think I am not so much in default therein as He, who, according
to the peculiar fate of the modern Baconists, has either outlived his
Learning, or never was endued with any. That He should pretend to read, or
understand Hippocrates, is a vanity equal to that with which Ecebolius
professes himself to be versed in the writings of Aristotle: G. T. Vindic. of
the Lord Bacon. p. 3^.
and when he blames the Method which the Galenists have used above this sixteen
hundred years, would not one imagine that the birth and flourishing renown of
Galen had preceded those Centuries: whereas you must place him in the second
Century, during the Reign of Marcus Aurelius, Lacuna in (...) Galeni.

I^. Vossius de Philos. c. 12. sect. 19. Suidas in voce (...).


Commodus, Pertinax, and Severus, or you will contradict the account which
Galen gives of himself, and the relations of other Historians: and at such time
as he arose, the world was prepossessed with Methodists and Empiricks. But I
wish his greatest errors lay in his ignorance of these things. Alas! he
understands not any thing of the Rudiments of Physic; and to inform him, one
must write an entire Body of Physic. Were it not for a few hard words borrowed
from Van Helmont, such as En^rmon, Archaeus, Daumvirate, etc. and his
extravagancies about fortifying the vital spirits, ejecting the venom, or
spina in diseases, and that by a diaphoresis generally, by the means of certain
Arcana, (more famous for the death than recovery of his patients) the man would
have nothing to say: Let D. M. take notice here, that there private Arcana,
such as the Quacks pretend unto, concealing the Medicam^nts: and others by that
name published in Print, in Crollius, Schroder, and others.
And do we wonder at the unfortunate cures for which he is blamed? or that more
than one at White-chappel, should suffer by his ill-advised Pepper-drops?
'Twere strange, should one that neither understands humane nature, nor the
types, times, motions, and terminations of diseases, should ever (except by
accident) do any good; not that He should frequently do harm. But a fool may
commit more faults than a wiser man than I, and of more leisure, can discover.
I shall confine my present address to the point of Phlebotomy; wherein he so
traduceth the Hippocratical Physicians, In his P^e^^ce to the Reader, he says,
He doubts not, the time will come, yea, is not far off, that a Phlebotomist (as
he has characterized him) will be looked upon as little better than a
Broachotomist, a (...)-throa^.
as so many murderers, and particularly declaimeth against the most judicious
Assembly of our Faculty, that Europe ever beheld; and who, if they be culpable,
are misled by the practice and precepts of that Author Hippocrates, whom he
himself often cites, and to less purpose than I might in this controversy
allege him.

Some years since, I designed to write an enquiry into the original, and nature
of the Blood, and the usefulness of Phlebotomy in several diseases: in which,
abstracting from the single opinions of Writers, I purposed to illustrate each
poi^t by practical principles, and ample Histories, out of intelligent and
creditable Physicians, concerning the bad or good success with which Blood has
been let in diseases, according to the several Ages of the diseased, and the
nature of their maladies, whether Epidemical, Sporadical, or of a less general
constitution. But the Controversies I have been involved in, have so encumbered
me, that I have not been able to pursue those intentions, nor have I any
preparations almost in order thereunto, as yet digested into writing. But this
Antagonist requires not all my strength; a less powerful Assault will suffice
to overthrow Him.

It Is not any kindness to him, but indulgence to my self, that I do not pursue
all his errors, even in the generation of blood; or go about to convince him
of the several mistakes which he is fallen into, for want of reading more
modern Writers, and their discoveries. Beyond Helmont, or in contradiction to
him, the man neither does, nor will understand any thing: And even in that
Author he seems so little conversant, that he sometimes mistakes him, and
generally represents things with more obscurity and intricacy, then they are
expressed in the originals of Van Helmont or Grembs.

Of those that have opposed Phlebotomy, these are not the first, which this
Century has produced: long ago Galen complained of Erasistratus, Galen. de
Sangu. miss c. 2.
(the sisters son of Aristotle) that he was (...), fearful to let his Patients
blood; before him, Chrysippus Cnidius, Medius and Aristogenes, did reject the
usage: Also Apaemantes, together with Strato, are recorded to have contradicted
the practice of Phlebotomy, by Arguments: The strength of that faction in
Physic, was such at Rome, in those times, that Galen spent several books
against the followers of Erasistratus upon this subject. But above all that
ever intermedled, I will give this character to -- Thomson, that never did any
presume more upon so weak grounds: Nor ever was Confidence so poorly mounted,
and so pitifully be-jaded.

After much trouble and enquiry, the sum of all, he says, in this case,
amounts to this.

The promiscuous mass of Blood which flows in the Veins and Arteries, he
divides into three parts: the one is called by him the Latex; the second Cruor;
the third Sanguis, or most properly Blood.

G. Th. of the Blood, p. 19, 20.
The Latex, so called by Helmont, by some Lympha, by the Greeks (...), is a
diaphanous clear liquor, (...), fabricated in the second digestion, by virtue
of a ferment there residing. It is the inseparable companion of the Blood, and
closely p^rambulates with it through all the wandering Maeandrous pipes in this
Microcosme. It is the matter of Urine, and Sweat, Spittle, etc. and renders
several other considerable services to the body.

Ibid. p. 22.
The goodness or pravity of the Latex, depends much upon the blood, as it is
constituted; for, albeit it is no essential part thereof, yet is it altered for
better or worse, according to the channels it passes through, the lodging it
takes up, and the condition of its associate: notwithstanding that it may be
sometimes impaired in its due excellency, and the blood withal remain very
pure and sincere.

^bid. p. 1, 2. and 34.
The second part is called Cruor, from (...), i. e. Crudus concretus: It is the
more crude impure part of the blood; the purer part of the chyle being digested
into a saline juice, is carried into the milky vessels, and veins, and mingling
at last with that ruddy liquor, is called Cruor, and at last becomes perfect
blood. It undergoes manifold guises, and is often the subject matter of a
multitude of diseases, being sometimes changed into an Ichor, Tabum, or Sanies.

The third part is properly called Sanguis, or Blood, (...), Ibid. p. 2.
it is a most pure sweet Homogeneous, Balsamie, Vital juice (for the most part
of a bright Red, or Reddish color) made by the Archaeus, by virtue of ferments
implanted in the ventricles of the heart, lungs, veins and arteries, causing a
formal transmutation of the Ckyme, or milky substance into this sanguineous
liquor, ordained to be the seat of Life, and and the principal matter for
sense, motion, nutrition, accretion, and generation.

It is for good reason called Balsamum, seu Condimentum totius corporis,
^orasmuch as it has a sanative power, Some peoples flesh will not heal upon
the least cut, notwit^standing this Sanative quality in the Blood.
sweetly uniting all the parts of the body, for the conspiration of the good of
the whole.

It is a great preservative against putrefaction, as long as it remains in its
integrity, for consisting of many saline particles, ^et are several glandules
sweeter to taste, than the sanguincous, fleshly parts of Animals.
it seasoneth whatsoever it touches with a pleasing sapour.

It is the proper habitation of the vital spirit, the immediate instrument of
the soul, What becomes of the duumvirate then? And may I not ask, if the
Spirits be not the immediate Instruments of the Soul?
in which it shines, displaying its radiant beams every way, that sensation,
motion, nutrition, and all other functions may be exquisitely performed.

God and Nature never intended other, Ibid. p. 5.
then that the blood should be Homogeneous, If God and Nature in^en^ed the
blood for so pure and homogeneous a liquor; why did they produce man with such
a fabric, that the chyle ( several ways tinged) should mix with it in the
sub-clavian veins?
pure, plain, symbolical with that single principle of the Universe. Now these
Peripatetick Philosophers deliver to the world, that the contexture of this
vital juice is made up of Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, and Blood, which united,
produce this compounded body, which we call Sanguis: How grossly erroneous and
dangerous this Tenet is, most Learned Helmont has made evident.

Wherefore we conclude with that noble Philosopher, Ibid. p. 6.
that Blood is an Univocal substance, divisible only by some external
accidental means, as the Air, or Fire, which cause a various texture, and
different position of its Atoms, whereby it seems to consist of parts which
are not really inherent in it, as is manifest in its degeneration from its
native color, sapour, consistence, and goodness, which it had before it became
corrupt in the pottinger, or underwent the torture of fire. Both of which do
strangely larvate and disguise the puniceous Balsome, giving occasion to the
Galenists to frame their four fictitious humors, no where really existent.

This being the foundation of all his declamations against Phlebotomy, before I
proceed any farther, it may seem requisite that I should make some
Animadversions thereon;

I might take much notice of, and dislay his errors, as to what he says, that
the Latex is by the Greeks called (...): this is the first time I ever read it
called so: the usual terms being (...), C. Hofmann. de Ichor, sect. 12, 13.9.
Th. Scheuck. de sero sangu. c^ 1.
(...), and (...). The notion (whatever Helmont say) is not new at all: an
hundred Galenists have mentioned and treated of it, as the vehicle of the blood
and nourishment. But that cruor should come from (...), crudus concretus, is an
opinion singular to the Baconical Philosopher. That (...) does signify cold, I
know well: and that cruor properly signifies the the blood of dead people, or
the mortified blood issuing from putrefied wounds, I no less understand; though
Authors frequently confound it with Sanguis; But that his Latex, and the
Lympha, so called by moderns, are the same, is news: for, it is not held that
the Lympha, in its peculiar form, was pre-existent in the Arteries, and, as
such, Glisson. de hepa^e, c. 45. Charleton. O^c^^. Anim. (...). 9. s^ct. 7.
did accompany the Blood through the Maeandrous pite^, but is generated as it
is discharged into the Lymphaeducts, and from them is re-mixed with the blood:
And, if it were, yet would not the definition of this Latex agree with it: for
the Lympha is no inseparable companion of the blood; as appears by its peculiar
vessels: it is seldom a diaphanous clear liquor, being commonly tinged with
Glisso^. Ana^ ^epat. c. 45.

Quip^e tota (...) Lympha, (...) expe^ientia, compertum est, de^sior, minusque
pellucens, and interdum I^ctis instar albescons, oliq^on^o susflava, and
nonnunquam loturae ca^ni^ simdis. Vide Charlton, ubi supra.


several colors, oftentimes whitish, sometimes yellow, or, as it were stained
with blood. And whereas this Latex is devoid of all sensible qualities, those
who have experimented the Lympha, do not find any such thing, but a variety of
tastes: Nor is it true that the Serum which accompanies the Blood is such a
Latex as our Helmontian describes; it being never (to my taste) free from a
salsuginous sapour, (though it retain that with a great Latitude) nor devoid of
color, so as to be clear and diaphanous: and it is very seldom seen, that the
said Serum will not Centies facto experimento, vndi semper serum ipsum non modo
leviter i^crassar^, s^d agglutina^^ ^ie^^^qnt mem^^aneum. H. Barba^. diss. de
sangu. and sero. page 16.
coagulate, unless preternaturally) upon a gentle fire: so that it is no more
to be termed a Latex, than the whites of eggs beaten to the like fluidity: In
like manner that in the Lymp^aeducts will T^. Bartholin. Spicileg. p. 71. M.
Begdan^ apolog. adv. O^ Rudbek. ^ect. 116.
coagulate, as Bartholin observes, and others.

As for the Cruor, that there are graduations of the Blood, as to its crudity
and impurity, is no doubt amongst the Galenists: and that it may oftentimes
transcend the state of due maturation, and so become degenerate, is as easily
granted, as that it should come short of its desired perfection; and when this
Blood degenerates any way into a Tabum, or sanious matter, I must tell him,
that Aristotle and his followers acquainted us therewith, before that Helmont
was ever heard of, Vide Hofman. de Ichoribus, sect. 71, etc.
whose Cruor bred in the Liver, and distinct from the Blood, impregnated with
vitality, is such a piece of nonsense, as ought not to be mentioned in this
Age, but to Baconical Philosophers, who, not only connive at, but applaud any
Hypothesis.

Concerning the Blood, when I read the Elogies he bestows upon it, as the Seat
of the Soul, by which sensation, motion, nutrition, generation, are performed;
I thought upon the opinion of Aristotle, and his zealous sectators amongst the
Physicians, who have denied all Animal spirits, fixed the principality of the
Members in the Heart, and from thence derived even the nerves. If ^. T. will
defend the generality of his Assertion, I assure him that Hofman, Van der
Linden, and Harvey, will be more serviceable to him than Van Helmont: But this
consideration has little influence upon the present Controversy: that which
follows has nothing of Truth in it: that the Blood is an Homogeneous, ^r.
Willis de ^erment. c. 6. Kerger. de fermenta^. sect. 1. c. 11.
pure body: for nothing homogeneous can ferment: But it is most evident, that
the blood is in a perpetual fermentation, and that it is such a liquor, as is
constantly generating, constantly depurating, and constantly expending it self:
so that naught but Imagination can represent unto us such a thing as pure
blood: and I hope the specious pretenses of a Real Philosophy, will not
terminate in Speculation and Fancy. When the blood either naturally issues
forth, or upon incision of a vein, it represents unto us different Phoenomena
oftentimes in several porringers, and in the same porringer different
substances; sometimes a supernatant gelatine, and mucus, a coagulated mass,
consisting of thinner, and a less fibrous crimson, and a grosser, and more
blackish-red body, interwoven with fibers (both which may be washed away from
the fibrous part) and a serous, fluid liquor, sometimes limpid, sometimes of a
bilious, or other color, in which the concreted mass of blood does float: All
these, with other Phoenomena, (in a great variety) are to be seen in the
aforesaid cases: and even the Blood of the same b^dy, Evenis capiti^ nunquam
^alem m^c^aginem affluentem vid^mus, cre^^ius and venis brachi^, ^ pedum autem
venis creberrim^, and in majo i eopia. (...) fund^m. medic. de (...). p 259
as it issues from several veins, furnishes us with matter for different
observations. Now in a liquor so pure and Homogeneous, as our Disciple of the
Lord Bacon imagines the Blou^ to be, though we should suppose the Air to
corrupt it, as it issues into, and settles in the pottinger, yet would the
corruption thereof be uniform: which, seeing it is not, I take it for
demonstrated, that it is Heterogeneous: And that being granted, it matters not
whether the four humors (so frequently mentioned by Physicians) be actually or
potentially in the blood: Whether they be the constitutive parts thereof, or
whether it be one entire Liquor, made up of Heterogeneous parts, which, in the
bodies of sundry individuals, produces such Phenomenon, as if it did consist
of such Alimentary Humors, and degenerates occasionally into those others that
are Excrementitious: In order to our practice, it is all one for it to be so,
and to appear so: and our documents are nevertheless useful, though they seem
not rigorously true. The Galenical Physicians are not herein agreed; nor is any
man confined in his sentiments, about this subject: It Is malapertness in this
Bacon-faced generation, to dispute these points, since the phenomenon of
diseases, and the operation of Medicaments does correspond with this
Hypothesis, and are as adequate thereunto, as humane nature (which is not
capable of an exact knowledge, and ought to acquiesce in what is useful) can
adjust them. Nor is it any more of disparagement to Physic, that should be
built upon so tottering a foundation, then that the Temple of Diana, one of the
wonders of the world, should be situated upon a bogg.

Hitherto I have examined his preliminary discourse of the Blood, and its
concomitant Latex, and have made it evident, that this person understands not
what he asserts, nor what he rejects: and indeed such is his ignorance, that
after so much study, having rolled every stone, and searched out every scruple,
to be informed concerning the truth of the Galenick, p. 87.
and Helmontian way, he understands neither Nature nor the Galenists, nor Van
Helmont. I now come to examine his Arguments against Phlebotomy, which, if they
be so weak and inconsiderable, as not to justify so extraordinary an
impudence, let him blame himself not me, who do not intend (if possible, in
such a confused, obscure Treatise) to injure him in the recital.

His first Argument against Phlebotomy.
Had they but considered how this vital moisture [the Blood] ebbs and flows in
goodness and pravity, p. 6, 7^
upon slight accid^ntal occasions of any exorbitant passions, as fear, sorrow,
anger, etc. the manifold impressions of the ambient Air, ill Diet, immoderate
exercise, diverse excessive evacuations, and long retention of any excrement:
did they rightly understand how blood, like Mercury, may be polymorphised, and
changed into different shapes, and at length be retroduced to the same state
and condition, as when it was in its primitive essence: certainly then these
Dogmatists would never be so forward to pierce poor man's skin, rashly let out
and throw away that substantial support of life, foolishly and falsely
apprehending that to be totally corrupt, and deprived of what it was in its
former being, and in no wise capable to be retrograde, and return to it self
again; because it seems to their eyes when it appears abroad discolored,
invested with a contemptible apparel, as yellow, p 18.
green^ white, blue, etc. -- supposing it to be corrupt, and so unfitting to be
retained within the verge of life. It is no such matter, I can maintain: for
this superficial alteration proceeds from the Air, spoiling it of its pristine
goodness, not that it was really corrupted in the vein. For the demonstration
of this, I will undertake, upon forfeiture of a great penalty, to open the vein
of a Cacochymic body, emitting about two or three ounces of the visible
aforesaid degenerate matter, then stopping the Orifice, make use of proper
remedies to this Individual, whose habit I doubt not so to alter in the space
of about a fortnight, that no such putrid matter as they improperly call it,
shall be found in any vein whatsoever opened; which may fully satisfy any
sober enquirer after truth, that the corruption was never really existent in
that, whilst it was in the vein, which, in so short a time is thus
redintegrated: for Corruption being an absolute privation of that formal
essence of the thing: and since there is no retrogradation in this kind, that an
E^s losing its form by dissolution, should assume it again, Nam a privatione ad
habitum non datur regressus: it infallibly follows, that this juice thus
restored, Technic^s, by Art, was never truly corrupted, as they would have it.
Hence it follows, that the fair pretense of the Galenists, that the juice drawn
out of the Patient, forasmuch as it is corrupt in the porringer, is happily
discharged: appears a mere imposture, contrived on purpose to stop the mouth of
those who scruple and question Phlebotomy.

This is the principal Argument which he has against Phlebotomy; yet does he
so handle it, as that the only evidence it carries with it, is, that the
Author is a most illiterate person.

It is very ignorantly done of him, to make as if the Galenists in general did
let their Patients blood, merely for a Cacochymy, or depravation of the blood,
as if it were a Rule amongst them, that Whensoe^er the blood is depraved,
vitiated, and corrupted, it ought to be emitted by Phlebotomy. Whereas there is
not any tenet amongst them more general, then that Cacochymicat bodies require
purging; the Plethorick, or such as are in danger to be surcharged with excess
of blood, require Phlebotomy; nor do they recede from this resolution, but in
urgent cases, and with deliberation: and many are so cautious herein, that if
the blood appear in the porringer to be of an evil color, Vallesius
method-medend l. 2. c. 4.
and very corrupt, they enjoin us to stop the vein presently, and not continue
or repeat the evacuation. I shall set down the words of Horatius Angenius. Hic
vulgarium Medicorum error detegendus est. Horat. Augen. de miss. sangu. l. 9.
c. 24.
Putant quo sanguis impurior fuerit, and a sua natura magis alienus, eo plus
detrahendum, and in hoc mirifice sibi placent, in vulgusque proponant admodum
utilem factam fuisse vacuationem, quod corruptissimum pessimumque sanguinem
vacuaverint. Tu vero cui in animo est humano generi prodesse, and Medicinam
inculpate exercere, contra facies; quanto enim magis sanguinem videbis a
propria natura discedere, tanto minorem quantitatem vacuabis, and aliquando
(nisi copia urgeat cacochymiae permista) a venaesectione prorsus abstineto. Nor
is this the judgment of a single writer; hundreds are of the same opinion: the
Learned L. Septalius Animadv. Medic. l. 4. sect. 2. is of the same judgment. In
sanguine detrahendo cavendum maxim, ne, quanto putriorem, and deterioris
conditionis sanguinem e vena profluere viderimus, tanto majorem quantitatem
effluere sinamus: quod plurimos facere observamus: tali enim existente
sanguine, and pauciores subesse spiritus constat, and vires facillime solent
collabascere. Even Galen and Avicen are alleged for it: Petrus C^stel. de
abusu Phlebot. page 73.
And it ought with less reason to be objected in England, because our
Physicians generally (as likewise are the Germans) seem not so prodigal of the
blood of their Patients, as to make a Cacochymie, much less, a (...), or total
corruption of the sanguineous mass to be the proper indication for bleeding:
nay, most that hold Blood-letting in great diseases arising from Cacochymie, to
be a necessary remedy, (not indicated by the depravation of the blood, but
violence of the disease;) they are cautious in the quantity which they take
away, because in such an habit of body the strength of the patient is seldom
great enough to bear much. Alex. Massaria Apolog. l. 11. disp. 11. c. 14.
Out of which it is manifest, that what he says about the impurity of the
blood in the porringer, that it is an excuse or imposture used by the Galenists
in defense of Phlebotomy: it is a fiction of his own, not made use of directly
by any but the followers of Botallus: the rest will give him other reasons for
their practice, than a Cacochymie alone, or total corruption of the mass of
blood.

A farther mistake it is in him, that he represents the Galenists as such
pitiful fellows, that should not know but that each corruption of the blood is
incorrigible, and therefore let it out. It is true, that we do hold, that it is
possible for the blood to be so vitiated, as to be incorrigible, and that one
may as soon hope to see the regress from a total privation, as it restored. This
has been observed in pestilential diseases sometimes, and in sphacelated
parts: and perhaps I may be allowed to reckon as such, the blood of that person
in Fernelius, Fernel. Physiolog. l. 6. c. 7.
which was universally coagulated in the veins; so as to be taken out as 'twere
branches of coral: River. obs. communicatae a Pachequo, obs. 46.
And that Woman's in the observations of Pachequus, whose blood in a continual
fever did issue out, upon Phlebotomy, as cold as Ice, or Snow: the like to
which, in the spotted fever is taken notice of, as a fatal prognostic by
Petrus a Castro. Petr. a Castro, de febre malign. page 90.
If ^lempius give me leave, I would reckon in putrid fevers, that blood to be
incorrigibly depraved, which does not coagulate, and is destitute of its
fibers, Fernel. Therapent. Univ. l. 2. c. 17. Sennert. de febr. l. 2. c. 1.
since Fernelius and others esteem of such as an evident testimony of the
highest putrefaction. It is also true, that we do hold, that where diseases are
ordinarily, or frequently curable, yet by accident from the idio-syncrasie of
the patient, or some other intervening cause, the blood may be continued in
such a vitiated estate, as to be incorrigibly corrupted, and yet its essential
form not lost; as in case of Cancers, Hypochondriacal and Scorbutical
distempers, Scirrhosities of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, Leprosies,
knotted Gout, calculous indispositions, etc. I might mention other cases, but
they relate not to the present controversy, and I have already said enough to
show the ignorance of this Baconist. To come nearer to the main matter; It is
true, that we do hold, that in many distempers, as in the Scurvey, putrid
Fever, and some others, the mass of blood is so putrified and corrupted, that
even that which is termed more stricktly Blood, is depraved sundry ways: for,
if the vessels that generate and convey the Chyle, and the Chyle it self be
corrupted, it is impossible but that which is produced and supplied daily out of
the Chyle, should participate of it pravity, and so much the more in that they
flow intimately commixed in the same Arteries and Veins: But that in such cases
we hold the Blood to be so depraved, as to have lost its formal essence totally
and irrecoverably, is most notoriously fall: and any man may see hence, that
this Ignoramus understands not the Galenical way, but deserted it, before he
had acquainted himself therewith. This he might have learned from Galen, in his
Comment upon Aphor. 17. ^. 2.
We do hold that the blood and associated humors may come to a partial
putrefaction, and yet be recovered again: and it is this recovery and
redintegration that we design by our practice, and if we cannot effect it
totally, yet that we aim at, is, to concoct the several humors, so that what
there is of them that is alimentary, and agreeable to nature, may be mitified
and retained, and the rest so digested, as that it may be with ease and safety
ejected the body, and so the Mass of blood regain its former luster and
amicableness: This being the grand intention of the received Method of Physic,
it is one thing to debate Whether blood-letting, practiced according to Art,
(for we are not otherwise concerned in the Quarrel) be a suitable proper means
to atchieve our purposes? And another, to say, that we pierce poor man's skill,
and rashly throw away the support of life, out of a vain apprehension, that it
is totally corrupt, and depraved of its former being, and no wise capable of
being retrograde. This cannot be said without an apparent injury unto us: We
know the variety and fallaciousness of colors, and by our rules, can well
conjecture how far the Humors are vitiated, what may be concocted in order to
the nutriment and benefit of nature, and what maturated to a convenient
ejectment; And we do utterly deny the consequence of this Argument, though we
grant the Assumption: Viz.

If the blood be of such a nature that it may be recovered to its pristine
color and vigor, without Phlebotomy, then ought not men to use Phlebotomy.

But the Blood, like Mercury, may be polymorphised and changed into diverse
shapes, and at length be reduced to the same state and condition, as when it
was in its primitive es^sence. Ergo.

The Assumption I can grant, but not where such a practitioner as G. T. is made
use of. I doubt not but the followers of Erasistratus could effect it by their
Fastings, Frictions, Bathes, and other remedies used by such judicious men: I
grant, that robust nature does daily produce such rectifications of the blood,
in many that make no use of a Physician: But as willing as I am to gratify my
Adversary, I should not yield thus much to Helmont, or such as practice with
Arcana, and commanding Medicaments.

To the sequebe of the Major, I reply, that albeit that Nature may oftentimes
do miracles, yet are not miracles to be presumed upon: It is possible for the
sick to recover without any means, yet are means to be used; the omission
thereof is imprudent, and criminal, but the use thereof (if the Physician be
knowing and discreet) safe, and as secure as the condition of our mortality
permits any thing to be: A few days or hours of the increasing distemper will
more impair the strength of the sick, than the loss of a little blood, which,
in the condition it is, adds not to the vigor or nutriment of the diseased;
the damage will be easily repaired, and perhaps all this nicety will be to no
purpose, for, after a multitude of vexatious (sometimes dangerous) symptoms,
Nature may produce in the almost exhausted patient, a violent eruption of
blood, and thereby terminate that malady which might have been alleviated, or
allayed before. Fluxus sanguinis largi ex naribus solvunt multa, Hippocr. Epid.
sect. 1. l. 2.
ut Heragorae. Non agnoscebant medici. The Blood for which they are so
sollicitous, Nature her self is not so careful to preserve it, but that
frequently in the beginning and progress of diseases, she alleviates her self
by discharging it out of the nose, and that in greater quantities of more
florid blood than the Lancet would take away: This evacuation is of all the
most facile, the most easy to be regulated by the Physician (since he can stop
it when he will) and the most innocent in the beginning and increment of
diseases.

Sanguinis eruptiones and haemorrhagiae hanc habent praerogativam prae aliis
evacuationibus, Fienus de signis medicis, par. 2. c. 1. sect. 8. and Francise.
Rubeu^ Nocturn. exe^cit. in Histor. Medic. ^xc^c. 6. p. 98, 99, 100.
quod ipsae etiam in principio and in aliis temporibus, etiamsi non adsint
signa bonae coctionis, possunt esse magis utiles, quam aliae evacuationes, quae
^ere semper sunt malae, ex eo quod sanguis semper per apertas parts fluunt,
and semper libere and commodum exire possit, nec eget praeparatione and
concoctione, sicut alii humores, qui per alias evacuationes excerni debent. --
In evacuatione, quae per venas apertas fit, nullam merito expectamus
concoctionem; Prospe^ Alpin. de praesag. vita and mo^te, l. 7. c. 2.
and hinc Medici secta vena in morbis acutis in principio mittunt sanguinem;
hinc and spontinae sanguinis vacuationes bonae erunt: Addatis, sanguinis
eruptiones copiosas, nedum utiles fieri, propterea quod sanguis malus una
excernatur, sed etiam quoniam ejusdem sanguinis evacuatio universum corpus
refrigerat, caloremque transpirabilem, and corpus difflabile facit. Quare hac
ratione excretiones sanguinis optimae erunt, quae in statu apparent, plene
cocto existente morbo, sed neque ea, quae cum cruditatis signis fiunt, erunt
plane abhorrendae and timidae. -- In fine, that prudence which obliges us to
self-preservation, obliges us to the most probable courses in order thereunto:
and What can seem more rational, than that which NATVRE directs us unto, that
whereby she so happily mitigates and concludes diseases, that which so many
Ages have recommended unto us, and in the use whereof, not only Greece and
Rome, but all Nations universally, as well ^arbarous as Civil are agreed on?

And thus much shall suffice for an answer to his first Argument: I now proceed
to the second.

p^ 32
The Blood is the support of Life; and we are taught by Divine Writ, that in
the Blood, that Spiritus rubens is Life.

I answer, That the Scripture, in the places aimed at, cannot be understood
literally, and properly: for then the words infer, that the Beasts have no
other soul than the blood, Deuteronomy. 22.23. only be sure that thou eat not the
blood; for the b^oud is the soul, and thou may not eat the soul with the
flesh. Thus it runs in the Original, though our Translation renders it Life.
And so Levit. 17, 10, 14. in which last place it is said, that the blood is the
soul of all flesh. Nay, in Genesis c. 9. v. 5. Concerning man, it is said, The
blood of your souls will I require. It remains then, that deserting the literal
sense, we fly to some that is Analogical: And hence it is that most Divines
take the word (...) for Life. Thus Exodus 21.23. Thou shall give life for life,
is not incongruously rendered instead of Thou shall give soul for soul. Thus the
Civil Lawyers frequently style Loss of Life by the phrase of Animae amissio.
But however these passages may be popularly current, yet in Philosophy and
Physic, when we would speak distinctly, and argue firmly, it is not to be
allowed of for Truth, that the Blood, or Spiritus rubens, (as our Helmontian
most non-sensically terms: for, as great a Pyrotechnist as he would seem, it is
past his Art to demonstrate, that it is a Spirit, or Chimically to educe a
Spiritus rubens out of it) is Life: Scaliger de subtle. exercit. 10^. sect. 5.
Fernel. Phisiolog. l. 5. c. 16.
for Life is nothing else but the union of the soul with, and its presence in
the body: or, to declare it by its effects, it is the conservation of all those
faculties and actions which are proper to the animated creature; as Death is
the extinction of them. Out of which it is evident, that Blood is no more
properly called Life, than it is possible for the Definition of Life to be
acmodated to Blood: that is not at all. But since common discourse does allow
us often to fix the principal denomination upon the chief instruments; and that
the Scripture explains it self, Levit. 17.11. and what my Adversary in one
place calls the LIFE, in another, he terms it, the ^rin^ipal sup^ort of Life:
let us consider how far that is true: That the Blood is not so much as a part
of the body, Valies. (...). philos. c. 5. p. 102. Fe^n^l. Physiol^g. l. 2. c. 1.
(but the Aliment thereof) is the assertion of most Authors; it is not
continuous to the rest of the body, but floateth as Liquor in a vessel: and in
vulgar speech, no man takes the loss of blood for a mutilation, or dismembring:
and there are sundry distempers and phenomenon, which conclude in favor of the
spirits, (or what is Analagous to them) and the Nerves, to assert their
pre-eminence above the Blood, and its Vessels: and whatever may be said
concerning Generation, (which is very disputable) it is a certain mistake in our
Helmontian, to make the Blood the principal matter for sensation (whereas
sanguine persons are not the greatest wits, and the senses are most quick in
women during their lyings in, after a great effusion of blood, as also in dying
persons) or motion, which is not in paralytick members, though the Blood flow
unto them continually, as it was wont before. Plempius fundam. medic. l. 2. c.
1.
I add, that there is not any convincing Argument to prove that the Blood is
animated: I confess the conjunction of the soul and Body, and operations
consequent thereunto, are most mysterious unto me: and I think it no less true
that our Life is a constant miracle, then that we are at first wonderfully
framed: nor can I determine what particular use the soul makes of all the parts
and ingredients of our humane bodies: But this appears unto us daily, that the
conjunction betwixt the Soul and Blood, and the dependence of our Life thereon,
is not so great, or intimate, as that upon the effusion of a little, no, nor of
a great deal of the blood, Death, or any debility, extraordinary and durable,
should ensue unavoidably: and if it happen but sometimes, it is apparent
thereby, that it is but accidental, and not a proper consequence of that effect:
It Is manifest, that the operations of the Soul are not restrained to one
determinate proportion of blood in every body: nor to the same in any: albeit
that there seem requisite in all Animals, that there be some blood, Botallus de
^^^gu. mi^^. ^. 34.
or what is equipollent thereunto: It Is also mani^est, that this Blood, (for
which some are so sollicitous) does continually expend and waste it self in
nutrition, (and that even the nourished parts are in a continualexhaustion) so
that without supply, it would degenerate unto choler, (except in those
miraculous fasts) and diminish to little or nothing: as appears upon great
fastings, and several diseases. It Is no less manifest, that upon great
evacutions of blood, by wounds, or otherwise, when the Blood has been so
exhausted, that very little can be imagined to remain, yet in a few days the
veins and arteries do fill again, Id ibid. c. 33. sect. 7, 8. and c. 35.
and nature is so replenished and vigorated, that this lost blood seems not
only as good, in order to the functions of life, but better, in order to health
and strength, since the production of this last (in the end of diseases) is
accompanied with convalescence, whereas the precedent did not hinder the
indisposition.

Out of what has been said, the Answer to this Objection is facile: viz. The
Blood is not so the seat and residence of the Soul, nor so absolutely necessary
to Life (granting all that can be desired of us) as that some of it may not be
let out, without present danger, or irreparable detriment: so that, if the
motives for Phlebotomy be cogent, or so probable, as to render the Action
prudential, no difficulty can arise from this scruple. It is written in Deuteronomy.
24.6. No man shall take the upper or nether millstone to pledge; for he takes a
man's life [or soul] to pledge. Here the millstone is called the life or soul of
a man, as much, and as properly, as ever the Blood is any where else: But,
though there be a prohibition for a man to deprive his poor neighbor thereof,
as of the support of his Life, yet undoubtedly none was ever interdicted by
virtue of this precept, to help the distressed Miller to pick and dress his
Milstones.

His third Argument is this.
Moreover, one would think, p. 7.
it should put a stop to their prodigal, profuse bleeding, if they did but
consider, with what difficulty Nature brings this Solar Liquor to perfection,
how many hazards of becoming spurious and abortive, it pusses through; how
easily it is stained by an extraneous tincture; how often intermixed with
something allogeneous and hostile to it; how many elaborate circulations,
digestions, and refinings it undergoes, before it be thoroughly animated, and
made fit for the right use of the immortal Soul.

One would imagine by this Objection, that the Generation of the Blood, were as
difficult a work, and required as much of solicitude, as the Philosophers
stone; and that the least error would disappoint the process, and eject the
poor soul out of its tenement and mansion. But there is not any such thing; he
that considers the perpetual supply of Chyle, by the Ductus Thoracicus, and
with how much ease it is transformed a great part into Blood, by the similar
action of that which pre-existed in the veins, (together with the concurring
aid of the Heart, and sanguiferous emunctory vessels; and the previous
alterations in the stomach and intestines) will imagine neither the production
of Blood, nor the reparation of it, to be so tedious and hard a matter: Nor is
it true, that the Blood is so easily stained with hostile tinctures, since it
is a liquor that is in perpetual depuration, and has the convenience of so
many out-lets to discharge it self by. Neither will every crudity, in the
immature Chyle, or blood, render the blood unfit for the use of the immortal
soul: there is extraordinary, and unimaginable difference betwixt the blood of
one person and another, (as appears upon distillation, burning, and mixing it
with other liquors) yet are all these within the latitude of Health, and with
equal perfection, exercise the operations of Life: Nor does every allogeneous
mixture vitiate or deprave the blood; for the Chyle, Blood, and Flesh, retain
some particles of the original food taken into the stomach: hence it is, that
sheep fed with pease-straw (though as sat as others) yield a flesh differently
tasted from other mutton: the like is to be observed in the feeding of other
Animals generally: Nor is this more evident in other Animals, than it is in Men;
for not to mention those Medicaments, which, by the alteration they make in the
Urine, do demonstrate they have passed along, and been once mixed with the
blood; as Cassia, Rhubarb, Annise-seeds, etc. Domin. de Marchettis, Anatom. c.
9.
In fonticulis observavi, quod si praecedente die aliquis allium aut cepam
comederit, pus quod in fonticulo est odorem allii aut cepae obtinebat: sanguis
autem qui per fonticulum expurgatur, non nisi per venas expurgari potest; unde
possumus dicere, quod sanguis acutum odorem detinere possit. The like
phenomenon is to be observed in wounds and ulcers, which feel detriment,
according to the various food and drink of the patient. Domin. de Marchettis;
Anatom. c. 10. Paraus chirurg. l. 16. c. 49.

Simon Pauli de febt. malignis sect. 11.


Nay, in pleurisies, and other wounds, it has been taken notice of, that the
purulent matter has discharged it self by the veins, (re-mixing with the
blood) into the intestines, and by urine. The Blood of some persons in perfect
health, has been observed to stink worse than rotten eggs, even as it was
issuing from the arm, upon Phlebotomy; yet when it was cold, it did not stink,
nor seemed to differ from the best blood, except that it was of a more
beautiful red than is usual. I conclude therefore, that in this Argument many
falsities are contained, and there is nothing of such ^orce, as to deterr a
prudent Physician, who understands the rules of his Art, and those cautions
which are suggested to us in Phlebotomy, to let his Patient blood, and emit
some of this solar Liquor.

His fourth Argument.
They should never attempt, p. 89, 90.
yea rather abhor, to enervate in the least, by the Lancet, the strength, with
its correlative blood and spirits, without which there is no hopes of attaining
a desired Cure. For it is a most established verity, taught by Hippocrates,
that Naturae sunt morborum medicatrices, the most assured means of sanation, is
to keep up the vital pillars, without which, all falls to ruin. So that Van
Helmont is without controversy in the right, when he says, utcunque rem
verteris, ignorantiae plenum est procurata debilitatu [anare velle. i.e. make
the best you can thereof, It savours of gross ignorance, to assay to heal, by
bringing one into a weak condition. And p. 84. de febr. Satis sit, satis sit
Medico (says the same Author) quod aeger alioquin inexcusabili debilitate
labascat, per morbum, medias, inappetentias, inquietudines, dolores,
anxietates, vigilias, sudores, etc. neque idcirco fidus auxiliator debet
debilitatem addere debilitatibus; fraudulentum est sublevamen quod venae sectio
affert; ejusque tam incertum est remedium quod nemo medentum hactenus ausit
polliceri sanationem inde futuram. One would think it is enough, and too much,
for the poor sick man to be brought low with the disease, fasting, want of
appetite, restlesness, pains, anguish, watchings, sweatings; wherefore, in such
a case, whosoever is a trusty supporter, ought in no wise to add weakness to
weakness: all the succor the Lancet can afford is deceitful, and all the
address thereby is of such uncertainty, that no Physician dare venture to make
a promise of a perfect cure by this means, and to keep one from a relapse.

I must except against the authority of Van Helmont, in the case, as of a
person whose credit is sufficiently taken off, by what I have alleged
elsewhere: I must not be concluded, but by the judgment of (...).

Arist. Ethic. l. 10. c. 9.

Io. Franc. Ripa, tract. de peste. c. 7. s^ct. 17.

Arist. l. 8. Phys. c. 3. t. 22. and 1 de ort. and inter. c. 3. t. 59.


understanding practitioners: and in Physic, I must not allow him to have been
an intelligent person; and it is notorious, that he was a man of no practi^e,
and consequently no fitting judge of the efficacy and inefficacy of
Medicaments. It is a saying in the Civil Law^ plus valet umbra experti senis,
quam eloquentia juvenis: And those Philosophers, who would, upon certain
prejudicate opinions, and pretenses of reason, determine of Medicinal cases,
are exploded even by Galen: nothing is firm in Physic, but what is confirmed
by an happy experience: and it is an imbecility of judgment (says the great
Stagirite) to desert experience, and adhere to reason. If Helmont was neither
conversant in the Experiments of others, nor did himself experiment the
inconveniences of Phlebotomy, what does his Assertion or Negation signify in
the case? Besides, it is but a single testimony against the Experiments of
judicious men in all Ages and Countries. As for his Reason, it is most infirm.
We must not add imbecility to imbecility: even this is notoriously false in
Physic: for, by the same reason, we should not reduce them to a slender diet,
no nor so much as sweat them; for after much sweating, every man feels himself
weaker for the present; the same may be said of vomits and Emeto cathurties (so
much commended by my Adversary) that, during their operation, they add to the
imbecility and sickness of the Patient: upon this reason, none might scarifie
a Gangrene, cut of the sphacelated part, or make use of several vexatious
operations in surgery. Besides, who would not allow us to create him a
little trouble or weakness, (easy to be repaired) thereby to recover him from
a greater evil? there are some times when the lesser of evils becomes eligible,
and puts on the qualification of being Good: Steph. Roderic. Castrens. quae ex
quib. l. 4. c. 7, 8.
there are some times when we are directed to cure one distemper by introducing
another. But to proceed; I do deny that Nature is debilitated by bleeding in
diseases, if the rules of our Art be observed: for, we daily see, that after
bleeding, Nature does with more ease and speed discharge her self of the
disease; and usually thereupon ensues signs of concoction in the urine, a
pronity to sweat, and an inclination to solubility of body, and a more strong
pulse: which, as they are our daily observation, so they do demonstrate, that
Nature is not weakened thereby. Heretofore it was usual, after consideration of
all due circumstances, to let the sick bleed, even till he swooned away: and
that with very good success, in those Fevers called (...). Iodoc. Lommius de
curand. ^ebr. conti^. c. 3.
Sub quo casu Hippocrates atque Galenus veniti non sunt, donec animus
deficeret, semel detrahere sanguinem. Quam ipsi rem ratione and experientia
ducti tentaverunt. Profusa namque hac inanitione primum homo in contrarium
agitur statum, celerrime ex de fectu animi refrigeratus: With this opinion of
J. Lommius, does Citesius ag^e^, de ufu Phleb^t^m. c. 4.
post autem alvus subinde prorumpit, vel bilis ubertim evenitur, vel certe
copiosis sudoribus corpus perfunditur, atque hinc alios protinus contingit
convalescere; alios plurimum juvari. This they practiced in the beginning of
such Fevers, and the practice did so far ennoble Galen, that 'twas proverbially
said of him, that He stabbed Fevers. He relates of himself, that he took away
at once from a Patient six pound of blood, and presently put an end to the
Fever, the party not finding any diminution of his natural strength thereupon.
Galen. de sang. miss. c. 14.
But this kind of excessive Phlebotomy has been long discontinued by
Physicians, not that they could absolutely condemn it, but out of cautiousness,
lest the ill success afterward should be imputed unto them: yet some
Countrey-surgeons do still continue it. I knew one in Warwickshire, who would,
in the beginning of any Fever, bleed the Patient thirty or forty ounces, or
more, in case he did not fanit: and, really, with great success in rustic
bodies. A Captain in the Parliament-Army assured me, that when the spotted
fever was in the Camp, their Surgeon did, in the beginning of the distemper,
bleed them till they fainted; then put them to bed, giving them a good Cordial,
so they sweat, and recovered presently. He himself was served so; the
Surgeon bled him in the open field, the blood fell on the ground, to the
quantity (as he guessed) of a quart, when a Lipothimy approached, he put him to
bed, and giving him a Cordial, he fell into a sweat, and was recovered
perfectly in very few days. There is no doubt but the practice was justifiable
in men of a convenient habit of body to bear it, and where neither the climate,
(which Cite^^us de usu P^leb^^om. c. 5. Rolfinc. meth. medic. spec. c. 4. sect.
2. c. 11.
o^tentimes is particularly repugnant to large Phlebotomy) nor idiosyncrasie,
(which Rolfinc. ubi supra.
sometimes happens) or evil diet preceding, or the particular malignity of the
venenate disease, nor the prejudicate opinion of the people do contraindicate.
It has authority from Hippocrates, Galen, Avicenna, and many others: Nature
does seem to direct us thereunto, by her own excessive evacuations in that
kind, by which diseases are frequently acted: Dilect. Lusit^n^ de venae
sectione cap. 14. Artic. ^.
and no evacuation is to be accounted immoderate, which is beneficial. By this,
and expurgation, even to Lipothymy, in the first beginning of several diseases,
men were cured presently, nor did the maladies proceed to those times which in
the usual method they make their progress through. In my Exercitations against
Dr. Sydenham (as yet unfinished) I have entreated largely of the several
methods of curing, which I shall not now transcribe. As for that way of
bleeding which is now generally in use (though practiced with a great latitude
in several Countries, and by several Physicians in the same Country) it is
most manifest that if due circumstances be regarded, and all other medicaments
dexterously administered, it is so far from debilitating Nature, that it adds to
its strength, mitigateth the present symptoms, prevents the violence of the
future, and concocteth the disease apparently. I will not undertake to justify
the demeanor of each particular Physician, any more than I will answer for
their intellectuals and skill in Physic: It is not the reading of Sennertus
and Riverius, with a little knowledge of the new discoveries in Anatomy, and a
few Canting terms about Fermentation, texture of bodies, or such like
knick-knacks and Conundrums of the novel Philosophers which accomplish a man
for practice: These men will never come to be ranked with Vallesius, Mercatus,
Fernelius, Dure^us, Rondeletius, Massarius, Septalius, Claudinus^ Crato, or
Rulandus. If Experience be our Guide, le^ us inform our selves by the Histories
of such as they have given us of Epidemical and pestilential diseases, and of
particular cases, as also the cures, and following them let us come to
practice, and, not deserting our own reason, let us be cautioned by them: These
others for want of judgment to consider each circumstance cannot make an
Experiment, G. Fletcher's History of Russi^, c. 28. p. 279.
or relate it: whilst they extenuate the credit of the ancient and modern
Physicians that are not Innovators, (though more observing and experimental
than themselves) they do it only to excuse their ignorance in that kind of
Learning, and whatever they have of the Lord Bacon^ they have this of the Russe
in them, that they neither believe any thing that another man speaks, nor
speak any thing themselves worthy to be believed. For such as these, or any
else that do not practice Phlebotomy according to the rules of Art, I cannot
make any Apology: nor do I think that their errors ought to extend so far as
to disparage all Physicians who demean themselves prudently and discretely:
Notwithstanding all our care, some Patients will dye; no Physician can secure
all men from what their frail condition has subjected them unto: If our Method
and Medicaments be such as the general rules of Medicine, and an Experience
generally happy do warrant, P. Z^cchias Qu. Medico legal: l. 9. consil. 40.
it is as much as can be expected from us; and the Imperial Laws allow of this
defense, though they punish the immethodical and novel Experimentators, and the
Ignorant. Sicut Medico imputari eventus mortalitatis non debet, Vide. I. Franc.
Ripio tract. de pes^e, c. 7.. 64, 65, 78, ^04^
ita quod per imperitiam commisit, imputari ei debet: pretextu enim humanae
fragilitatis delictum decipientis in periculo hominis innoxium esse non debet.

To conclude this Argument, I say, that although it often happens that diseases
are cured by sole Phlebotomy: Evenit ut saepius missio sanguinis sola
curationem perficiat -- Misso sanguine saepe sponte naturae expurg^tur corpus
alui profluvio, Valles. Meth. Med. l. 2. c. 3.
vomitu, aut sudore succedente -- Yet no wise Artist will rely upon that alone,
but with the addition of other auxiliary medicaments: Herein Spain and France
are pretty well agreed: Vide Riolon. de circulat. Sanguin. c. xx. Vallis. meth,
medend. l. 4. c. ^.
And as no wise man will undertake to cure by bleeding alone; so it is most
foolishly done of our Helmontian to demand, or expect it, as he does here.

I come now to his fifth Argument.
The means to let out bad blood without removing the efficient cause thereof,
Page 105, 106.
is no direct method of healing.

Now Phlebotomy lets out bad blood without removing the efficient cause
thereof. Ergo, Phlebotomy is no direct Method of healing.

The Major is proved thus: Whatsoever suffers the cause to remain, can never
remove the effect: For manente causa manet effectus.

Now Phlebotomy suffers the cause to remain, Ergo, it can never remove the
effect.

The Minor is made good by frequent experience: If the cause of bad blood were
cut off, the Fever or Scorbute depending (according to Dr. Willis) upon the
degeneration, Sal and Sulph. therein, would quickly cease: but we plainly see
the contrary; for after the veins are much depleted, the disease becomes more
truculent, and oftentimes mortal; which could never be if this depraved blood
were any other than a product or an effect of an essential morbisick cause. The
same agent which in sanity sanguifies regularly without any considerable
defection, in sickness becomes exorbitant, sending out a vicious juice into all
parts: be it good or bad, it still springs from a root, which continually feeds
the branches: so that it cannot be other than great folly and wrong to the
Patient, to let out that juice, though it seem never so corrupt, when another
of the like condition must needs enter into its place, derived from the shop
the duumvirate, where it first receives a previous rudiment, which ought in all
reason rather to be reformed, than to give vent to those easily evanid
particles inseparably joined with this ruddy liquor, how ill soever
represented. If all contained in the reins (supposed to be corrupt) were
discharged, yet as long as the ferments principally of the first and sixth
digestion deviate from their right scope, He should rather have regarded the
^co^d then sixth digestion.
there would in a short space be a succedaneous repletion of a matter equally
contemptible, yea worse, in respect of an enervation of strength, than before.

This Argument, though our Helmontian rely so much upon it, is a pure
Paralogisme.

First, He supposes that we use Phlebotomy in all diseases, as a direct method
of healing: which is not true, except in some maladies, as Apoplexies,
Squinancies, Haemorraghies or great eruptions of blood, some Atrophies, and
sometimes in Fevers: in which it is frequent with us, to rely solely or
principally upon Phlebotomy: yet even here we would think it very improper to
admit of our Phlebotomy to be styled our direct Method o^ curing, because it is
but a part of our Method, which will include, if not some other prescriptions,
yet at least diet. In many cases we use Phlebotomy as one part of our Method,
but not as the principal: as when we use it antecedently to other remedies
Pharmaceutical and dietetical, to prepare way for, or facilitate their happy
operation. I am not now to write Institutions in Physic for the documentising
of this Disciple of my Lord Bacon, it is enough that he may learn any where
almost (as in Vallesius, Mercatus, Claudinus, and Plempius) that we propose
more than one scope to our selves in Blood-letting; neither is it ever (except
in diseases arising from a partial or total Plethora) our direct method of
healing: If it be but a part and necessary or useful part thereof, we are
sufficiently justified. Thus his Major is enervated: for if he would have
opposed the modern practice, he ought to have urged it thus.

The means used to let out bad blood without removing the efficient cause
thereof, is no direct Method of healing, nor an useful or necessary part
thereof.

This is manifestly false, as I shall show anon. As to his Minor, That
Phlebotomy lets out bad blood without removing the efficient cause thereof.
This would the Ancients deny, who bled their Patients in many cases until they
swooned or fainted, with great success^ and we must say it is not absolutely
true, there being no Practitioner (I believe) but has seen some cases in which
sole Phlebotomy has effected the cure: he may see many Instances of this in
Botallus, and that in diseases where the body was undoubtedly cacochymical: I
have seen Agues tertian and anomalous perfectly cured with once bleeding in
women with child: and in children I have seen some Atrophies so cured, that the
principal cause of their recovery was to be attributed to their Bleeding: the
like I have observed in several Chronical diseases, even in inveterate
quartanes: as also others have done: nor is there any thing more common almost
in our Cases, than the relation of several diseases absolutely cured by single
Phlebotomy; which I shall not transcribe here, but in my large discourse of
Phlebotomy (in Latin) I intend to represent all such cases at large, with
their circumstances, and the History of Phl^botomy with all that variety of
success, which judicious Practitioners relate of it in several diseases, and
persons. I add now, that No man can be an accomplished practitioner who is not
versed in the History of Diseases, and particular cures: for the general rules
and directions make no more a Physician, than such a knowledge in Law would do
a Lawyer; the res judicatae import more with us than they do in Law^cases; and
as Reports of the Judges in special cases must be known by a complete Lawyer,
so must our Book-cases be our presidents, and regulate our practice. Brune
Se^^^^lius de mor^^ incurabit, p^ 57^
Duobus enim tanquam cruribus innititur Medicina, neque solis theoreticis
rationibus contenta, insuper etiam practicas experientias particularium
requirit, and indefessam ad singulos casus intentionem.

Thus is his Minor false, as was his other Proposition: and it should have run
thus. But Phlebotomy lets out the bad blood without removing the efficient
cause thereof, or conducing thereunto.

But he proceeds to defend the Minor thus. If the Cause of bad blood were
removed, then would the effect cease: but oftentimes we see that
notwithstanding such a depletion the disease continues, and if it be not
mortal, yet it becomes more truculent. Here he commits the same error that
before, expecting a greater effect from Phlebotomy than we propose generally to
our selves in it: we do it sometimes for revulsion of the matter flowing to any
part, as in some Pleurisies, Squinancies, the Colic Bilious, and Rheumatismes,
etc. wherein we never rely solely upon bleeding, and though oftentimes the
effect transcend our expectation, yet do we not presume upon it. Sometimes we
let blood for prevention of future diseases, as in great contusions and wounds:
Sometimes we let blood only to prepare way for future Pharmacy, Valle^. meth.
medend. l. 2. c. 3.
Ita plerumque in febribus mittitur sanguis, qui non superat naturalem
mensuram, neque simpliciter, neque in hoc homine, sed quia nisi mittatur, ob
febrilem calorem, qui adest, and succorum putrescentium mistionem,
corrumperetur, ac fortasse malign; and cutis rarefactioni, and ventilationi,
and vasorum relaxationi ad futuram expurgationem necessari^, impedimento esset.
Itaque mittitur, non quia multa subest copia, sed quia ea quae subest, tunc est
inutilis, and noxia, ac proinde, facultate ferente deponenda, etsi causa morbi
non inclinet ad ideam sanguinis, modo non ab ea plurimum evariet, i. e. Thus in
fevers we usually let blood, not that the blood abounds above its due
proportion, either in general, or in reference to this or that individual; but
because the blood which flows in the veins is infected with a feavourish heat,
and would be corrupted thereupon, and by reason of the intermixed humors now
inclined to putrefaction, and that perhaps joined with malignity, for the
prevention thereof, and least that plenitude and depravation of the Blood
should hinder that transpiration in the habit of the body, ventilation of the
blood, and laxity in the vessels, which is requisite for the subsequent purge,
do we use Phlebotomy: not imagining that there is any superfluous abundance of
blood, but that there is then in the body some that may well be spared, and
which, if the Patient has strength to bear it, may with prudence be let out to
prevent so great dangers as are imminent, and to secure unto us the good effect
of the subsequent Physic. And if the disease do sometimes increase upon
Phlebotomy, it behooves wise persons to distinguish whether those symptoms
happen by reason of bleeding, or only succeed it in course, the disease being
in its increment: for this makes a great difference in the case: as also
whether amidst those symptoms (which are in due course most violent in the
progress and state of the disease; whereas we bleed usually in the beginning
only) there be not some that yield signs of concoction and melioration, which
if they do, as we may justly attribute those hopeful consequences in part to
Phlebotomy, so we need not be amazed at the present truculency of the disease;
which affrights none but the ignorant: If notwithstanding all our care, and due
administration of Medicaments according to Art, the Patient do dye, yet is
neither Phlebotomy nor the other Physic to be blamed, but we ought rather to
reflect upon Physic, that it is a conjectural skill in the most knowing men,
and that we are not as Gods to inspect into the bowels and secret causes of
diseases, that besides the special judgment of God upon particular persons, all
diseases are not curable in all individuals, either by reason of the variety of
dis^empers complicated, which interfere with and contra-indicate one to the
other, or for some unknown idiosyncrasy, or other intervening cause which
defeats our Methods, as well as it disappoints the Arcanum of Pepper-drops. I
must here take an occasion to remind this Helmontian, that he does ill to
disparage Phlebotomy, by reason that after it there may follow some truculent
Symptoms, and yet to reject that imputation where his Dietetical rules are in
dispute. P. 168, 169^ Volles. in Hippocr. de victu in morb. anot. l. 3.
When he gives his vinous and spirituous liquors in Fevers (a practice not
peculiar to the Helmontians, but allowed, with regard to due circumstances, by
Hippocrates not only in diaries but acute-feavers: so Galen would have told
this Ignoramus) if any seemingly frightful Symptoms appear, as extraordinary
heat, an inquietude, a little raving, a swerving from right reason, the Patient
must not be startled in a vulgar manner, but be satisfied that these are but
the effects or fruits of an Hormetick motion in the Spirits excited and
increased by good liquors, easily united with them for the routing and pu^ting
to flight every way whatsoever does disturb its vital government. -- Though
Hippocrates say it is good in all diseases, that the Patient retain his senses;
though he reckon inquietude and restlessness in the sick amongst evil signs,
yet our Helmontian dissents from him whatever time of the disease it be, and
whatsoever other circumstances attend thereon: ^. 169.
For oftentimes madness, deviation from the right understanding, a Lethargical
or sleepy disposition suddenly break forth. Nihil est quod tam magnifice
prodest quod non aliquo ex modo obest. What matters it, if the heat be
magnified (besides the main purpose) to some small trouble, if ten times
greater benefit accrue to the sick. It is impossible any Physician should
perform his duty as he ought, if he boggle at the foppery of heat and cold,
merely momentany and transient, often deluding our senses. Surely he that is
thus negligent of the Animal faculty in its principal operations, may bear with
a pitiful Galenist for not regarding much the loco-motive strength, whilst he
is as sollicitous as any Helmontian to support the vitals: and let any one
judge which is most likely to impair the vital faculty, a little blood-letting
duly administered, or such an increase of the feavourish heat, restlessness,
deliriums, phrensies, lethargies, as our Author here despises.

I must not yet dismiss him: not that I intend to laugh at his six-fold
digestion (he might as well make a dosen of digestions) but it is necessary
that I tell him that the production of good or evil blood does always depend
upon one root that feeds the branches: for it is possible that the stomach, and
pancreatick, or bilious mixtures in the guts may not be faultless, and yet the
blood of the Patient either not vitiated, the errors of the first concoction
being amended by the primigenial sanguifying Blood (for it is the Blood in the
vessels which principally sanguifies) or if it be depraved, Ballonius Epidem.
and ephemerid. l. 1. p. 101.
yet not so as to generate any disease, or abbreviate the life: for
cacochymical persons with a little can live more long, and more free from
diseases than those of a purer and more generous blood: Nor is it less true
that oftentimes it happens that the blood is infected with recrementitious,
heterogeneous and noxious mixtures from obstruction of the pores, or other
occasional causes, wherein the stomach and vitals (otherwise sound and vegete)
are only oppressed and distempered by accident, some of those impure humors
being discharged upon them: and in these cases repeated Phlebotomy alone may
cure: Vide Riolan. de circulat. sang. c. xx.
If the credit of Botallus will not satisfy him herein, let him believe his
beloved Hippocrates, a man who did extraordinarily practice blood-letting, so
as that the French do impatronise him to their Phle^otomy; he tells us this
story. A certain man amongst the Oeniada was sick when he was fasting,
Hippocrat. Epidem. l. 5. c. 11^ 6.
he felt as it were a great suction in his stomach, and a violent pain: and
after he had eaten any meat, as it digested, his pains returned, He grew very
tabid, and wasted away in his body; his food yielding him no sustenance, but
what he took came away in ill-concocted and adust stools. But when he had newly
taken any sustenance, at that instant he felt none of that vexatious pain and
suction: He took for it all manner of Physic, both emeretics and catharti^s;
but without any alleviation. But being let blood alternately in each arm (or
hand) till he had none left in his body [that was vitious] he amended upon it,
(...).

See Ant^n. Benivenius his medicinal observa^. c. 44.


and was perfectly cured. -- Read but that case you that are so timorous, with
the Comment of Van der Linden in his Selecta Medica c. xiii. and tell me if
upon Phlebotomy as ill blood always succeed as is let out. I could add more
parallel stories: But to demonstrate unto this Pyrotechnist that single
Phlebotomy will amend and enrich the mass of Blood, I propose this case, An
ancient Gentlewoman of a very strong and corpulent habit of body, but
frequently troubled with hysterical and hypochondriacal vapors, was taken with
a violent catarrh upon her stomach, together with great pains in her right and
left hypochondria, as if the liver and spleen had been tumified: sometimes she
complained of an insupportable acidity in her stomach, and sometimes a saline
humor molested her: Sometimes she fell into cold clammy sweats, sometimes her
sweats were so hot that she complained as if her skin were burnt: and even when
her stomach felt any alleviation, she complained of a burning fire as it were
in her bowels near and in the region of her liver: a perpetual sputation did
follow her. I being sent for, after several Medicaments prescribed
methodically, but with little or no alleviation, I proposed earnestly that she
should be let blood, notwithstanding she were above sixty years old: I took
away eight ounces or more: She found immediate alleviation: there seeming no
default in the blood or serum, I burned the blood in an arched fire, it came to
ignition, but flamed not at all: but crackled like Bay Salt, and after some
while a sudden eruption of ventosity made such a noise as equalled the cracking
of a Chestnut in the fire: She took a stomack-powder of Ivory, Pearl,
Crab's-eyes, etc. and was pretty well for three or four days, but upon a small
fright relapsed: I bled her again as before, and in that short time (in which
she had taken very little sustenance; but behold this blood (which looked no
better than the other) did burn with a vivid and lasting flame as well as any I
ever tried in my life, and without any sign of flatulency: She recovered
presently after with some further Medicaments, but not so as to be perfectly
well at stomach of a long time. I doubt not but if others would try that way of
burning blood, they would soon be convinced the Phlebotomy makes a great
alteration therein.

But I proceed to his other Argument.
This is taken out of Van Helmont, p. 107, 103.
whose Latin words I shall not transcribe now, but only the English.

Let them make it appear if this do not imply a contradiction, that a Fever
has the property to pollute the blood, and that this property can be taken
away a posteriori, by a posterous manner, to wit, by withdrawing what is
putrified. For if first the fouler blood be let out, they open a vein again:
all this while they overthrow and confound the strength, and so thereby wholly
disappoint a Crisis. But suppose sometimes a fresh ruddy blood run out, they
presently cry as cock-sure, that a whole troop of diseases is cut off at the
first dash, as if the resting place of the Fever did only extend from the
heart to the bending of the arm, and the good blood did take up its abode about
the liver.

This Argument proceeds upon a most gross falsehood in that part of it, where we
are supposed to place such a value upon the color of the blood as by the
goodness or ruddiness thereof we should esteem our selves as cock-sure that a
whole troop of diseases is cut off at the first dash: whereas no intelligent
Physician ever thought so: Ballonius Epidem, l. 2. p. 191
for we do say that the blood of all men is not alike, neither as to color nor
consistence naturally: and therefore in diseases we do not expect to see such,
nor intend to make any alteration to such a degree as transcends the natural
estate of the body: for it is our business to preserve each man his natural
habit, be it bilious, melancholy, or phlegmatic. We do also say that in
diseases the blood may be corrupted in its substance and vitiated, and yet the
color amended, or not altered. Ballonius Epidem. l. 2. p. 192
Saepe ad speciem and visum purus est sanguis, qui alioqui (...) malus est: ut
contra impurus cernitur specie, qui non ita (...) malus est. -- And Jacob.
Thevart his Scholiast does observe, that several times in (...) sanguis
laudabilis ipsa sectione apparet, Ballon. Epid. l. 2. p. 167.
and qualitatibus alienis praeditus est, est enim acriusculus and biliosus
nimis. Nay we are so far indefinitely from pronouncing a cure upon the ruddy
color of the blood, that in malignant Fevers we make a quite contrary
prognostic. Petrus a Castro de febre malig. puncticul. p. 90.
Pessimum signum est [in febre maligna puncticulari] and timoris plenum, cum
sanguis v^na scissa extrabitur, si purus, rubicundus, and inculpatus educatur,
venenositatem superare indicium est, aut putredinem in penitioribus cordis
latitare. In meipso olim observarem; nam ter per hanc febrem misso sanguine,
nulla prorsus nota putredinis apparebat, alii^ signis immani ferocitate
saevientibus. The same is asserted and illustrated by fatal instances in Simon
Pauli, Simon Pauli digress. de febr. malign. ^. 12.14.
which it would be too long to transcribe here. Having demonstrated unto him
these errors, I say further that we do not hold the blood to be putrified in
all Fevers, as in Diaries, nor (many of us) in intermittent: not to mention
others: and in those Fevers wherein it is said the Blood does putrify, we do
let blood often to prevent putrefaction, and not always to cure it by
Phlebotomy: and we do it in order to cure the putrefaction, we do not pretend
to emit all the putrified blood thereby, but only to alleviate nature of a part
thereof, that so she may better overcome the rest; especially being assisted by
other Medicaments. So that the whole assertion is false, if it import that any
intelligent Physician designs to cure a putrid Fever solely and directly by
letting out the putrid blood by repeated venae-section. I will not deny but
some in France and Spain have gone about to do it, but the practice is
generally condemned by Physicians of the best repute, and therefore ought no
more to be charged on us, especially in England, Valles. meth. medend. l. 4. c.
2.

Castell^^ de abusu venae-section. p. 60.


then the miscarriages of any bold Experimentor, or Baconical practitioner at
London upon the College of Physicians. This insolent Disciple of my Lord Bacon
understands not the rudiments of our Physic, nor knows what we aim at in the
use of Phlebotomy, there being sundry occasions why we use it, and sundry
effects what we expect from it. Neither is he less deceived in saying that
Phlebotomy (duly administered) overthrows the strength of the Patient (I mean
that strength which is necessary to the concoction of the disease) and so
thereby wholly disappoints the Crisis. For it is manifest that by those profuse
Phlebotomies of the Ancients the Crises were accelerated: and in ours promoted.
This is not only manifest out of Hippocrates and Galen, but confirmed unto us
by the certain experience of Forrestus, Forest. de sebre l. 12. in Scholio^
and those learned Florentine Physicians who composed the Academy there for the
renewing of the Hippocratical and Galenical Method in opposition to the most
prevalent Avicennists. Novae Acad. Florentinae opuscula adv. Avice^^. p. 43,
and p. 55.
Nos igitur Galeno sisi (quoniam sic conducit magis, dum vires ferant)
sanguinem misimus plurimum, nam bilibre pondus and trilibre in acutis febribus:
aut magnis aliis morbis superavimus; atque id non nodo impune, sed and tanta
aegrorum tolerantia, ut nil supra eligi potuerit. -- Quam rem abunde nobiscum
experientia nosti (ut nos quoque aliquantisper experientiam oftentemus) ut qui
praeter caetera, Ibid. p. 99.
quorum Paulo ante mentio fuit, and venae qu^que sectione abunde usi sumus,
atque id citra discrimen: quin et exactam illam vivend^ formulam, veteribus
quidem familiorem, neotericis vero ne nomine quidem ipso notam, instituimus.
Quo factum est, ut jam crises multae appareant, ac velut novus naturae ordo,
aegris faelicissime faveat: Cum antehac vel pharmacis agitata, velintempestivo
victu impedita, nullas ostenderet, aut admodum raras, easque non nisi in
rusticis atque infima plebe, qui nec pharmacorum multitudine, neque ciborum aut
potionum, fa^igari, aut impediri quirent. I have more willingly cited this
passage because the renown of that Academy was such that it gave a check to the
grandieur and pr^v^lence of the Arabian Method, and the truth of what they say
cannot be questioned by any that knows the persons, and the revolution they
brought about in Europe: and hence we may learn the reason of that difference
which seems frequently to occur betwixt the ancient diseases and their critical
motions and terminations, and what we generally find: It arises not from any
such great change in the nature and types of maladies, as some have ignorantly
writ of late: nor as this Bacon-face talks, because we reiterate moderate
Phlebotomy: but because we do not follow at all the Method of Hippocrates and
Galen in the curing of diseases: However we pass for Galenists and
Hippocratical Physicians, yet in truth we are not such: our practice is made up
most out of the Arabian Method, and Medicaments, and is a mixture of the
Grecian and Sarracenical Physic, together with those accessionals which
improved Chemistry has introduced: P. Castell^^ de abusu Phlebotom. p 6, 7.
and since we disturb Nature with our vomits and minoratives in the beginning,
and neither bleed, diet or otherwise Physic our Patients according to the
ancient prescriptions, do we wonder to see another face and issue of maladies
than was heretofore? Or, does not he rather deserve to be wondered at, that
should expect in so different circumstances for resembling effects? I believe
our Helmontian with his Emeto-cathartis, and exquisite Arcana (so far
transcending all the shop-medicaments, or received Chemical preparations) does
see as few Crises as any Phlebotomist: and may not I then retort upon him, that
he by his practice wholly disappoints a Crisis? Nay, does not he tell us, that
in his way? there will be no need to stand gaping for a crisis, p. 101.
since that may be anticipated, and all secured before that time, if there be a
regular procession: And may not the present Galenists justify themselves in
the same manner, since they can better warrant their process and Medicaments;
by a longer succession of Experiments happily made by judicious men, then this
ignorant Helmontian Innovator?

Another Argument of his is this.
If it be so that striking a vein often in a long tedious disease, p. 110.
is a preparatory for a sharp Fever, as Doctor Willis and I both herein jump
right in our observation: then am I certain that Phlebotomy repeated in an
acute sickness, is a door set open and an inlet for a long infirmity, so that
this mode of defalcating the vigor of the Spirits does for the most part (as I
have strictly heeded many years) disarm and plunder Nature in such sort that it
cannot resist the Assaults of every petty infirmity, witness those multitudes
who after sharp conflicts fall either into relapses, or Agues, Scorbute,
Dropsies, Consumptions, Atrophy, Jaundise, Asthmaes, etc. which might be easily
prevented, if a mature regular course were taken to give convenient
Emeto-cathartics, Analeptics, Diaphoretics, which safely and speedily cleanse
the Stomach, keep up the strength and breath, that we need not fear any
mischief from this late invention, Redundance of Sulphur, or Salt in the blood,
no more than choler, phlegm, and melancholy in the Ancients.

p. 108.
The observation of Doctor Willis is this: de febr. p. 75. Prae caeteris vero
observatione constat, quod crebra sanguinis missio Homines febri aptiore:
reddat. i. e. Now above all, it is certainly known according to observation,
that often bleeding makes men more apt to fall into a Fever: Again he follows
it close. Hinc ^it ut qui crebro mittunt sanguinem, non tantum in febres
proclives sint, verum etiam pinguescere soleant propter cruorem succo Sulphureo
plus impregnatum: i. e. Hence it comes to pass, that they who often breath a
vein, are not only prone to fall into Fevers, but also are wont to grow fat by
reason the blood is full of Sulphur. In another place to this purpose he drives
it home. Qui sanguinem habent sole volatilisato been saturatum ij sunt minus
febribus obnoxii: hinc etiam qui saepius sanguinem emittunt ad febres aptiores
sunt. They whose blood abounds with volatile Salt, are not subject unto
Fevers: for this cause, they that use Phlebotomy often are more liable to
Fevers.

p. 109. G. T. understands not what a procatarctick cause is: it is here a
causa (...).
From hence -- G. T. forms this Epilogisme. Well then the Doctor and I agree
thus far in the main, that frequent bleeding procures Feavours; which is
sufficient to back my Assertion, that Phlebotomy is no good method of healing,
since it is plainly a procatarctick cause of Fevers. For whatsoever means
exhausting the strength (as I can demonstrate this course does, more or less,
sensibly or insensibly) inviting or making way for Fevers, instead of
preventing of them, is not to be approved of or allowed in curing the Scurvey
or other diseases: unless we do act like Tinkers, some whereof are reported to
amend one hole and make another: for how can it possibly consist with the
honor and credit of a Physician, quem creavit Altissimus, to go about to
correct the blood by often letting it out in a Chronick disease, and likewise
withal to usher in, or as it were to be a Pander to the introduction of an
Acute fever, which in a short space dissipates that strength which this
Phlebotomical harbinger has in part worsted?

In this Argument there are so many defaults (which are obvious to be seen)
that I must recommend again to these Baconical Philosophers, a Caution I have
more than once given them; which is to omit in all their discourses those
vexatious coujunctions, Causals and Illatives: It Is mere pedantry for them to
be tied up by such particles, the idle foppery of Grammarians, and Logicians,
and men of common sense. The Reason, if reduced to form, runs thus.

That which inclines unto a Fever is not a proper remedy in a Fever.
But frequent blood-letting inclines to Fevers.
Ergo.
The Major is false every way, whether it be supposed that Phlebotomy produce
such an effect per se and directly; or by accident, and only in some persons,
in some circumstances. For were it true that Phlebotomy did directly and
wheresoever it is used introduce a Fever, yet it may so happen that a Fever
may be expedient to some Patients for the prevention of greater evils, and
sometiems for the curing of them: and in these cases it is as much prudence in a
Physician to acquiesce in, or run the fortuitous hazard of a lesser or less
dangerous evil, as it is for Statesmen in the Body politic. Nature does often
cure one disease by introducing another: and commuting the more dangerous into
another of lesser hazard: as any intelligent Physician knows, who understands
the Metaptosis and Metastasis of diseases. I am not obliged to read to these
Disciples of my Lord Bacon a course of Medicine. Vide Steph. Roder. Castren:
Ou^e ex q^uibus. V^lles. in Epidem. l. 4. p: 448. in historia Alcippi. and
ibid. p. 401. in hist. femulae emptitiae. Hieremias Thriverius Brachelius in
lib 4. Aphor. 57.
There is an Aphorism of Hippocrates to this purpose. Quia convulsione ant
distentione nervorum tenetur, febre superveniente liberatur. Upon which words
Hieremias Thriverius does thus comment. Alio modo febris convulsionem tollit ex
plenitudine, alio rursum modo distentionem: convulsionem enim curat, quia
plenitudinem discutit; distentionem vero quia insigniter universum corpus
incalefacit: forte etiam distentio convulsionis genus nescit. Quicquid autem
sit, utrique febris confert, ac potissimum diaria, imo and putrida minus
periculi affert, quam ipsa distentio. Frustra ergo conflictantur in ea
questione Neoterici, an putridam febrem convenit excitare in convulsione ex
plenitudine, V^lle^. controvers. Medic. l. 8 c. x. Hieron. Rubeus in C. Celsum.
l. 5. sect. 4
aut flatulento tumo^e. Which that it may be lawfully and prudentially done
(but not by every fool) is a judged case amongst us: and were it not lawful,
the Argument would by a parity of reason extend to several operations in
Surgery. It is the judgment of Celsus long ago, with which I conclude. Sed
est circumspecti quoque hominis, and novare interdum, and augere morbum, C.
Celsus de Medicina l. 3. c. 9.
and febres accendere; quia curationem, ubi id, quod est, non recipit, potest
recipere id quod fu^urum est.

The Major being thus false in that sense which was most pertinent to his
purpose: it is most ridiculous in the other: For who will not immediately laugh
at him that should thus determine? That which may in some persons, and in some
circumstances incline unto a Fe^ver, is never the proper remedy of ^ Fever?
And how can this Bacon-face upbraid us herewith, who does himself prescribe to
his Patients in Fevers the most generous liquors of the subtilest smack, p.
169.
exhibited largely, without insisting upon the nicety of any danger from
heating? and yet his Sack and other generous liquors may engender Fevers, and
other distempers in the healthy. In fine, Whoever rejected the use of a thing
for the abuse, or condemned peremptorily any cause for accidental
inconveniences following thereon, but such a Dulman as this Helmontian, and
his brethren the disciples of my Lord Verulam.

'To the Minor I reply: that for the observations made by this insipid
pretender to Pyrotechny, I regard them not at all: he has not judgment enough
to make one. Novae Acad. Florent. opuscul. p. 21.
Ego vero sicuti experientiam multi facio, dummodo commodum expertorem nacta
sit: Ita si unicuique qui se expertum dicat temere credidero, ridiculus
profecto habear: ut qui and fori circulatores ac loquales vetulas, agrestes
quoque sacerdotes in pretio habeam. Nam si quaeras, omnes uno verbo, quae
proponunt se expertos dicunt. It is true I have a great reverence for the name
of Experience, and the bare mention thereof commands an attention from me: But
it has been the peculiar misfortune of my education, that I have been taught,
not rashly to assent: nor to believe every thing that is told me, since there
is nothing but may be spoken by some body. I can be so civil, and so curious as
to give the Relator an hearing, how mean soever he be, but before I credit him,
I must consider whether the thing be possible? and withal (because my
knowledge is not the adequate Measure of possibilities in nature) Whether it
were done? If the thing did succeed, I inquire, Whether it will constantly, or
most commonly follow upon the like causes and circumstances? Or whether it is a
rare accident? In the two first cases, the knowledge thereof makes a P^ysician
the better Artist: the latter adds to his general Science of natural
Phenomenon, but not at all to his Art, except in cases as rare as the
Phenomenon related. In Artibus, inquit Galenus, duo sunt praeceptorum genera,
Io. Riolan. in resp. ad dubia Anatomica Barthol. p. 75.
unum eorum quae perpetuam habent veritatem: alterum, quae utplurimum ita se
habent, and tolerantur: quae raro fiunt, ibi locum non habent. At hodie multi
sibi placent in scribendis and obtrudendis observationibus raris, tanquam novis
Artium mysteriis: sed rara non sunt Artis. I do also consider the quality of
the Relator: Ar. Rhet. l. 2. c. 4 (...).
the vainglorious and ambitious are easily deceived, because they passionately
desire the thing should be so, and it is for the credit of such Observators, if
it be so: the young are easily imposed upon by the little experience they have
of things, the credulity that is in them naturally, and the good opinion or
hopes they have of the integrity of others; and because they are conceited of
their own knowledge (though the prospect of things be narrow) they are prone to
opiniatrity, and vehement in their assertions, though too unsettled, and
impatient, (as well as ignorant) to weigh any thing maturely and with all its
requisites. I do not weigh the greatness and opulency or Relators, but value
them as they are Artists, for such only can judge in their own Faculties: And
when controversies arise the Stagirite deluded me into an opinion, that the
most probable tenet was that which the most, or the most intelligent did
profess. This Pyrotechnist upon many reasons deserves not any credit: he writes
Books as Mountebanks paste up Bills, to invite custom: the Medicines he
recommends are such as by the sale thereof he would advantage himself: all he
publishes is in a subserviency to this end; and it is not his skill, but this
ignorance that is concealed in his Arcana: all that ever sweet William or
Andrew related upon a Quack-salvers stage deserves as much of heed and esteem,
as what -- G. Thompson talks. I do not ask thy pardon Oh! most illiterate and
dull disciple of my Lord Verulam, for dissenting from Thee. But I with
submission and deference beg leave for not adhering to Doctor Willis: No man of
understanding can condemn his practice: he has not altered the Authentic
methods, but given new and plausible reasons for an Ancient procedure: This
Character is due unto him, that scarce any man surpassed him in his thoughts,
when awake; and it is his peculiar happiness, that his Dreams are pleasant and
coherent. Amongst all that have written about Phlebotomy, and its abuses, I
never met with one that recounted this for one evil consequence thereof, that
it inclines men to Fevers: I find P. Castellus to reckon up twenty five evil
accidents which sometimes ensue thereupon: Claudinus propo^eth frequent
Phlebotomy as a remedy for s^^ness. Venae sectio omnino convenit; imo sunt, qui
nihil magis ad detrahendam corporis molem valere existimant, quem crebram
sectionem venae. Empiric. rational. l. 1.. 1. c. 4.
but this is none of them. Nor do I see that it is reconcilable to that effect
of Phlebotomy, whereby it refrigerates the habit of the body, and the common
distempers which follow the Abuse of it, are cold: If it be true that it
inclines people to be fat, and fat people are neither so hot, nor incident to
Fevers, as the lean and bilious (though otherwise more weak) there is reason
why my doubts should increase upon me. It might, with some color, have been
said, that excessive Phlebotomy did dispose to the Rheumatisme and Gout; but
not to Fevers; except by accident, that some persons having contracted a
grosser and more sanguine habit of body upon Phlebotomy, and ( such complexions
being most capable of any malignant or pestilential and contagious infection,
not by reason of their phlebotomy, but from the habit of body, which whether
natural or adventitious is liable to those casualties) falling upon any excess
or other occasional cause into the Smallpox, or Sanguine fevers, the
observation has been raised into repute. It is a thing I have not seen to
happen vulgarly: nor does any Author^ that I know, take much notice of that
other effect, how Phlebotomy inclines to fat: I have read in Ioannes Fuchsius a
Bavarian that such a thing has fallen once, Io. Fuchsius Compend. abus. p. 2.
c. ^^
or so, under his observation, in a Lady: and Doctor Primrose denies the matter
of fact, Primros. de vulgi error. l. 4. c. 50.
that Phlebotomy will make those that are inclined to be fat, fatter: though
persons that are extenuated and emaciated with sickness may by bleeding acquire
a greater corpulency: And certain it is that in those Countries where
Phlebotomy is most used, there are fewest fat men, and women: as Spain, France,
and Italy, or Egypt, in this last region, it is their particular study, and a
distinct profession, Prosper Alpinus de med. Egyptiorum, l. 3. c. 15, 16.
to make people fat, but it is by other courses then Phlebotomy. In short, I my
self have been let blood above fourscore times, and yet am lean: and so far
from being feavourishly inclined, that I never had any except the Measils once,
and Smallpox twice: and twice a tertian Ague: and I find no imbecility or
prejudice in the least that should induce me to repent what I have done, or
resolve against it for the future: But we must distinguish upon what is
produced by any thing as its cause, and what is only a concomitant thereof: If
it ten thousand times proves otherwise, we must not impute the growing fat of
one Patient to Phlebotomy indefinitely, but rather to some alteration the
disease (in which it was applied) has wrought in his body, to his Analeptic
diet, and course of life, subsequent thereunto; or to his individual temper.
And perhaps it may be not impertinent to add here, that as Distillation and the
burning of the blood of a Multitude of persons has convinced me that there is
no such deflagration of blood, as that learned Physician imagines, nor any
vital fermentation in the blood depending upon the Chemical ingredients of
Salt, Sulphur, and Spirit, etc. so neither is the Blood of corpulent persons (I
never tried the Obese; because they do not bear Phlebotomy; except once in a
Youth lately was extreme fat, and in danger of an Apoplexy, and it did not burn
with so vigorous and lasting a flame as that of many lean men, but by its
crackling gave testimonies of much Salt: yet the Serum was insipid) it is not
properly sanguine, but pituitous.

But to resume the discourse: I expected to have seen the Minor proved by our
Helmontian; but although I find that he says his observation did jump with
that of Doctor Willis, that Phlebotomy did incline to Fevers: Yet my Reader
may see that in the first part of the Argument, as I have urged it in his own
words, he reckons amongst the evil consequences of bleeding none that proceed
from an opulent and sulphurous blood transcending the dominion of the spirit
that remains after Phlebotomy, but such as argue an impoverishing of the blood,
or a cold indisposition. I will repeat it again, to show how justly I censure
his Logic, and so dismiss the Argument.

If it be so, that striking a vein often in a long and tedious disease, is a
preparatory for a sharp Fever, as we both herein jump right in our
observation: then am I certain that Phlebotomy repeated in an acute Sickness,
is a door set open, and an inlet for a long infirmity, so that this mode of
defalcating the vigor of the spirits does for the most part (as I have
strictly heeded many years) disarm and plunder Nature in such sort that it
cannot resist the assaults of every petty infirmity, witness those multitudes
of relapses, or Agues, Scorbute, Dropsies, Consumptions, Atrophy, Iaundise,
Asthmaes, etc.

The proof of the Minor here is not only defective: but the mischief is, Dr.
Willis de ^ebr. p. 197.
that Doctor Willis, who judiciously uses Phlebotomy, commends it in Fevers
both in the beginning and augment of those that are putrid, (and also in
Diaries) as the principal remedy ( inprimis conducit) and speaks in the place
cited by our Helmontian only of a customary letting blood in time of health:
Dr. Willis de ^ebr. p. 1^6. edit. 1662^
Whereas this Bacon-faced Pyrotechnist, says that their Wits jump in this,
that often striking a vein in a long and tedious disease is a preparatory for a
sharp Fever: Let any man read the place and see how he abuses that excellent
Practitioner, whose words are, Prae caeteris vero observatione constat quod
crebra sanguinis missio homines febri aptiores reddat, quare dicitur vulgo,
quibus sanguis semel detrahitur, eos, nisi quotannis idem faciant, in febrem
proclives esse. I am sorry he should seem to give a reason for a vulgar error:
for once or twice bleeding does no more create a Custom, or dispose Nature to
an anniversary commotion in the blood, than one Swallow makes a Summer: But
certain it is, (I speak of our cold Climates, not of those hotter where sweat
and transpiration often prevent those determinate motions of nature) that such
here as are very much accustomed to bleeding, keep certain times for it, their
bodies will require it at that time, and, if they refrain it, they will feel an
oppression and dullness, or lassitude, and may fall into a Fever, but Aches,
Rheumatisme, Gout are more likely, except other accidents concur to produce a
Fever: if the ebullition be no greater than to produce a Lassitude, it is
possible (in some bodies) that the Scurvy, Cacochymy, Cachexy, Dropsy,
Asthmaes, Cephalalgyes may ensue: for the morbifique ferment, like the scum
boiled into the broth; may mix inseparably with the blood, and vitiate for ever
that great sanguifier with an unexpressible pravity: But he that thinks 'twill
be so in diseases, when the Patient is phlebotomised, neither understands the
motions of nature, nor the effects of a sound recovery. Instead of Doctor
Willis this illiterate Baconist (who professes to be so well versed in the way
called Galenical) should have (as he argues) made his recourse to Avicen and
his followers, who are ( in many cases) fearful of Phlebotomy, least it should
produce an ebullition if choler, or crudity: which two inconveniences may
produce all that -- G. T. talks of. Thus sometimes Tertians have been doubled,
Hor. Augen. de miss. sangu. l. 4. c. 19.
nay turned into irrecoverable continual Fevers. But all the cases relating
thereunto concern not an intelligent Physician, who understands what is past,
present and to come, and knows when to presume, when to fear. But I intend not
to teach these fellows: it were better for the Nation, and them too, that they
were Cobblers, or day-labourers, than Practitioners in Physic: a Doctoral
Diploma, though purchased, will not sufficiently qualify them for the
profession; and as little does the title of Experimental Philosophers, and
Verulamians, avail them.

The next Argument of his that I come unto, and which is more than once
inculcated, as if he thought it a Demonstration, is this, as I may form it.

If it be not fitting, nor useful to bleed in the Pest, which is a Fever
(...), it is not fitting, nor useful to bleed in any ill-conditioned Fever
whatsoever.

But it is not fitting, nor useful to bleed in the Pest. Ergo.

The Consequence of the Major is thus proved. It is no less criminal to suffer
the Blood to spin out in any ill-conditioned Fever whatsoever, p. 82.
then in that which is so (...). p 99.
And, Albeit our Phlebotomists do extenuate the matter, setting a fair gloss
upon it, pretending that in malignant Fevers of the inferior clast,
Plethorick or Cacochymical indications do manifestly require their utmost
assistance before that inconsiderable venom lying occult: I must, by their
favor, be bold to tell them they will never solidly and sp^edily make a
sanation of any great Fever, or any other disease, till they handle it in some
manner like the Plague: for there is quiddam deleterium, a certain venenosity
in most maladies; as I can prove ex facto.

The Minor is thus proved. For whosoever at any time, p. 81.
upon what pretense soever of caution, attempts Phlebotomy for the cure of the
Plague, takes a course rashly to jugulate the Patient, unless some
extraordinary redemption happen. Certainly here Doctor Willis (who allows to
persons accustomed to bleeding, and in plethorick bodies, the humors being
very turgent, though seldom, and with great caution, to bleed) speaks by rote,
for had he Anatomised the Pest, investigated the nature of that atrocious
stroke, as I have, feeling the smart of it three several times, he would as
soon allow of piercing a vein in him who has taken an intoxicated draught, as
at any time in this case, where the Stomach alone is the place from whence the
poison is to be exulated. It Is no wonder if the Galenists strait enjoin
bleeding, where they find a seeming foulness in the less malignant Fevers,
when they dare be tampering with it in the greatest. -- The only noted Sluice
through which the poisonous matter of all malignant Fevers passes away, p. ^5.
is the universal Membrane, the Skin, on which the Stomach has no small
influence, governing this Catholic coat at its pleasure, in so much that no
successful sweat or eruption can be expected as long as the Duumvirate lies
prostrate under any insulting calamity. Wherefore the Arch-design of the
Physician is to cherish, corroborate, and remove all impediments of this
eminent part, that it may protrude, explode, or ejaculate from its bosom to
the utmost limits, whatsoever is virulent, closely supplanting the fortress of
life. Now whether bleeding be any competent Medium to atchieve this, let any
one indifferently versed in the knowledge of the Pest be Judge, wherein no
honest able Artist dare open a vein, because it will attract the Miasme
inwardly, hindering the extrinsecall motion of the Archaeus, for the expulsion
of what is mortiferous.

Before I come to answer particularly to the Argument, give me leave to
animadvert upon some passages in this discourse. As to the Du^mvirate, I do not
understand whether he be absolutely of Helmont's mind, or no, making the
Pylorus of the Stomach to be the place where the Soul is radically seated, and
whence it displayes it self principally in the management of the Economy of
the body; joining the Spleen with the Stomach as an Associate in that
Sovereignty. There is not any thing more foolish than the dreams of Helmont;
had our Baconist any understanding of humane nature, any converse with modern
Writers, the vanity of the Duumvirate would have been manifest unto him: I
advise him to read the Fundamenta Medica of the excellent Maebius, where he
treats of the Stomach and Spleen: where he alleges nothing for himself, why
should I insist on any thing. The general Archaeus of the Stomach and that
appropriate to each part seem to me to import no more, nor to be more
intelligible than the innate heat of each part, and that other influencing each
part and disseminated from the Heart: If the innate heat of each part be called
a particular ferment, it matters not much: I comprehend it as little still: How
the operations of Nature are performed I know not, nor ever shall understand by
Canting terms, or Similitudes: That the notion of Fermentation is equivocal, or
not to be accommodated to the Stomach and its digestion, Maebius fundam. med.
de usu ventriculi, p. 178.
but by a certain Animal heat, I think Maebius has evinced: and I cannot be
satisfied with the reply of Kergerus: Kerger. de fermet.. 3. c. 2.
and if the notion of an implanted ferment and fermentation be suspicious
there, where there is the most to be alleged for it, I may be pardoned for
scrupling to fix it elsewhere; but to be content thus to manage the Question,
as if it were branched into these Interrogatories.

Whether the Pest be a Fever (...)?

Whether in the Pest it be lawful and beneficial to let blood?

Whether all ill-conditioned great Fevers, and most maladies have in them a
particular venom, deleterium quiddam, and are to be cured by Corroboratives,
and Diaphoreticks, without Phlebotomy?

The distinct solution of these Questions will make the answer to his Argument
very facile: and I will not retrench upon the not-to-be-perceived Empire of the
Duumvirate, nor inquire by what means the stomach has such an influence upon
the Skin as to govern it as it pleases.

The first Question if I were to determine it out of -- G. T. in his Treatise
of the Pest, I would resolve in the Negative upon this reason. If the Pest be a
Fever (...), then is a Fever inseparable from it, and that term ought to be
put into its definition. But -- G. T. does not define the Pest by a Fever, and
grants that the Pest in some produces no Fever at all. Ergo --

His definition of the Pest is this. The Pest is a contagious disease, G. T. of
the Pest: c. 1. p. 8.
for the most part very acute, rising from a certain peculiar venomous Gas, or
subtle poison, generated within, or entering into u^ from without: at the
access or bare apprehension of which, the Archaeus is put into a terror, and
forthwith submitting to the aforesaid poison, invests it with its own
substance, delineating therein the perfect Idaea or image of this special kind
of sickness distinct from any other. He that can accommodate this Definition to
a Fever, or find anything of a Fever in it more than of the Colic, or
Dysentery, Diarrhaea, understands more than I; for even these have been
Contagious, as well as Epidemical: Perhaps he will reply, that the Pest is
always so: But in this, notwithstanding his boasting here he understands the
Pest, and (whereas Rondeletius and other Galenists dissected many that died of
the Plague) he did anatomise one that deceased of it, yet does he not know the
Nature of it: For the Pest is not always contagious, there being recorded many
cases in which the Pest has seized one person, Isbrand. a Diemerbrook de pest.
l. 1. c. 7. ^. 1. p^ 1^. edit. 1665. Amsterdami. and Zacchias Qumedico legal.
l. ^. tit. 3. Qu 1. ^ 13.14. G^ T. of the Pest. c. 3. p. 42.
and extended no further. However if the words Contagious disease do not
include a Fever (...), there is not any mentioned in the definition: and if
they do, then is also the Scabbado, and Leprosy, etc. a Fever (...), since
each of these is a Contagious disease. In sum, He grants that the Pest may
invade without a Fever, in these words. -- It produces a manifest Fever in
this man, and in that none at all, or hardly any sensible. -- These words do
not become a man that Holds the P^st to be a Fever (...), and carries on the
Hypothesis so far as to make all malignant, putrid, Fevers to participate
thereof, and bear some resemblance thereof: and (which is pretty) that almost
all maladies (either Fevers, Isbr. a Diemer^^ de Peste l. 1. c. xii.

So Van der Mye during the siege of Breda, relates causes of such as had the
Plague, and yet during the whole time of their Sickness had no Fever.

Van der My^ de mor^^s Bred p. ^1^ 1^^


or not) fall under the same predicament.

But I pass from -- G. T. inquire into the true nature of the Pest according to
the most learned and judicious Practitioners that ever attended in it. The most
accurate Isbrandus a Diemerbrook relates how many in the Pest at Mymmegen
(where he was Visitant) had the Pest without any signs of a Fever: nor was
this to be seen only in such as dyed suddenly, but in those that had Botches
and Carbuncles, yet went up and down and pursued their business, without being
any way feverish: of which number himself was one. And he with the allegations
of many Authors and Histories of Plagues justifies his Definition, in which he
forbears to make the Pest to be a Fever. In like manner Casper Hofman living
in Norimberg, C. Hofmann. Antifer^elius Le^m, 64.
when the Town was besieged and the Plague raging, had the Pest himself with a
Carbuncle on his shoulder, sed sine alio symptomate, and taking due care of
himself, without consining himself to his bed or chamber, he recovered: He
instances in others that escaped, I. N^rdiu^ in Lu^ret. l. 6. p. 527.
in the same condition. With these agrees Nardius, who was chief Director in
the Plague at Florence in 1630. Alex. M^ss^r. de pest. l. 1. ^inter opera) p.
498. and Forest. de ^ebr. l. 6. obs. x. Sennert. de ^ebr. l. 4. c. 1. Dudith.
inter apist^ Schoet. ^^ 52.
And the most learned Massarias who was Physician at Vicenza when the Plague
reigned there in 1577. Out of all which it is manifest that the Pest is not a
Fever (...), since there may be a Pest in which the sick party has not any
Symptom of a Fever: It Is true that many learned men do desine the Pest by a
Fever, and do hold that there is no Plague without one; but since they confess
that sometimes neither Pulse, nor Urine, or any Symptom discover the least
characterisme of a Fever, it is against common sense to assert what they do in
such cases. F^teor ^ebrem hanc pro putredinis ^ut d^ffl^tionis condition,
copia aut incremento, modo majorem, modo minorem exis^ere, quam in nonnullis
Synochum, Tertianam continuam, and Febrem quem. cunque ardentem incendio and
calore aequasse, non ego tantum, sed and Collegae mei, Doctores hujus urbis
Medici clarissini, aegri^ in publico No^^c^mio decumbentibus operam praes^antes
observarunt. M^nderer. de pestilentia. c. 6.
It is granted that usually the Pest is accompanied with a putrid malignant
Fever of a very uncertain T^pe; which sometimes appears not before the Botch
and its suppuration, sometimes it begins with the first attacque of the venom.
If what I have said be true, and that the Pest may be without any sign of a
Fever, or any sensible indisposition, I much doubt the reality of his opinion
who talks so much of the affrighted Archaeus, and the troubles which
essentially and inseparably befall the Duumvirate of the Stomach and Spleen upon
this invasion or insurrection of the pestilent venom: and I am more confirmed
in my jealousy, because I have read that some of them that have had the
Plague, have not felt any symptom about their Stomach, not so much as a
debility of appetite, but sometimes they have complained first of their heads
being discomposed, Sennert. de ^ebr. l. 4 c 1. de pestilent. P^^^us de Pest. l^
1. c. xii.
and most commonly of anxieties about their Heart. But it is not my intention to
write a Treatise of the Plague: it is a disease I never saw, though at
Fulham-pest^house and at Windsor I gave such Prescripts and Medicines in the
beginning of the Plague as did equal in effect any of the Arcana of this
Helmontian. As for the knowledge this talkative person should acquire by
dissecting one body, it is but little; it argues want of reason in him to
conclude generally from one case: the Glory of the Act is much abated in this,
that Bontius, and Rondeletius in the presence of many Students dissected
several; Rondeletius de febr. de febre pestilentiali.
and (which is more) this last denies the Carcasses of such as dye of the
Plague are not infectious; so does Fracastorius, Iordanus, Gregorius Horstius:
I allow that this last is not a constant truth, and that there are some
Observations recorded by which it appears that the Carcasses of such as dyed of
the Pest (before putrefaction) have been infectious. But to show with how much
injustice he triumphs over the Galenists for his having dis^ected one single
body, I shall let the World see that the Galenists (without proclaiming the
fact, Volcherus C^ister dissected many in the Hungarian Pestilential fever: so
did ^^ssenius, and Rul^ndus.
or causing a Picture of it to be cut) have done as much, and that the variety
of Pests, and the different effects they produce in bodies is demonstrable. At
Palermo in Sicily in 1647. there was a Plague, in which upon the dissection of
many bodies by a sort of fellows, all whose knowledge did not enable them to
cure a cut-finger, whose skill is but words, and advances nothing: these
Galenists did Anatomise them. Haec visa: vasa omnia venae cavae sanguine ita
nigro, Joseph. Mancusus pro se^ cub. vena def. p. 153, 154.
adusto, atrabilari, turgida ac repleta, ut fusi atramenti similitudinem prae
se ferret. Idem sanguis tum in cord, tum in faucibus repertus fuit, pulmones
atque hepar tumefacti, inflammati, ventriculus bile turgidus, nulla in venis
Meseraicis, nulla in intestinis laesio. Eadem haec uniformiter in singulis
^uerunt observata. If it be said, that 'twas no great attempt; because it was
no very mortal Pest; yet this is certain, that it lay in the mass of blood, and
that the Duumvirate was not so much concerned, as G. T. could have wished; nor
the blood in the vena porta altered according to Circulation: Well: that last
at Naples I am sure was as pernicious as ours at London; and there the College
of Physicians caused many to be dissected: I have not met with the Programme
published by them, but the Duumvirate gains nothing by what I do read. Nam
dissecta cadavera, C^rol. V^lesius de Bourgdieu de pest. p. 239.
hepar, pulmonem, intestina, nigris maculis interstincta, cor vero atro
sanguine concreto luridum praebuere, ut Medici Senatus Neapolitani programmata
die secunda Iunii edita promulgarunt. Neither does it appear that what this
Pyrotechnist saw in the body, after the man was deceased, was either the cause
or seat of his distemper when he first fell sick: the last strugglings for life
might express many liquors into the stomach, and vitals, and they upon their
commixture, settling, and refrigescence create, other Phenomenon than were
merely the effects of the Pest. It Is averred by C. Celsus, C. Celsus medicina
l. 1. pref.
Neque quicquam est stultius, quam quale quid vivo homine est, tale existimare
esse moriente, imo mort^o.

That I may the better decide the subsequent controversies, it will be
requisite I represent a more exact Definition of the Plague; and to do that
well, I must distinguish upon the word Pest, which is either taken in a general
sense, Coyttarus de purpura c. 7. p. 54.

Massari^s de p^st. l. 1. (inter ^per^) p. 497.


and so comprehends any Epidemical contagious disease of which many in the same
Country do dye, be it attended with a Fever, or destitute of one, be it
occasioned by any speci^ick malignity, or anomaly of the Air, or arise from
evil diet, or imported by contagion. Thus the Epidemical contagious and
pernicious Colic recorded in Aegineta, was a Pest: thus Squinancies, Catarrhs,
Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, Diarrhaeas, Bapt. Codronchius de morb vulgaribus.
c. ^

Io. Cr^to assert. de febr. pest. p. 13.


Dysenteries, the Measils, Smallpox, have been pestilential: nay the Garrotillo
or Strangulatory disease in Spain, Sicily and Naples, though it seized upon and
infected scarcely any but Children, was a Pest, and esteemed so by Aetius
Cletus and others Thus it was deem^d at Venice to be a Pest of which so many
once died, Aetius Cletus de ^ orb^ Strangulator. c 2.

Mer^atus, Consult. med. 14.

Dudithius inter Epist. Scholtzhii. Ep. 51.


though there were not any other Symptoms perceivable in it, but a tumor of
the testicles accompanied with sudden death. Legi superioribus menstibus
libellum Veneti ^ujusdam, qui ex^erientiam te stem citat, multos ex peste
mori^os esse, quibus testiculi intumescebant solum, nullo ^^aeterea symptomate
aegrotos illos invadente. I^ ma^ters not what is the (...) of the disease,
which way the venenate matter inclines, or what part it principally ^ffects; a
C^rbuncle in the throat (as in the Garrotillo) is as pestilential as a
Carbuncle on the hand, or toe, if it be as epidemical, contagious, and mortal.
Ballonius Ephemer. l. 2. p. 237.
So the Chin-cough may be pestilential upon the like qualifications: and I
believe that to be the disease whereof Ballonius speaks, that it was Epidemical
amongst the Children in France in 1579. He calls it Tussis Quinta, and admires
how it came by that name, and so does his Scholiast Mr. Th^v^rt: undoubtedly it
was transmitted from England, and thence came that name, which the French
mistook for Tussis Quinta, and Quintana: that is the disease I am sure he
describes: he says none ever writ of it: and I believe it to be true as to
foreign Physicians. Such mistakes will hereafter make work for Critics; who
will make strange glosses hereupon, as on the Milordus of H. ab Here, and the
Cerevisia Trihopenina in Mercatus; the first imports no more by unus ex iis
quos Angli Milordus vocant, Mer^at. de recto med. pr^^s^d. usu. l. 1 c. 2.
then one whom the English call My Lord: and the other intends nothing by
Cer^visia Trihopenina than Three-half-penny Ale, and contra distinguishes from
Cerevisia dupla, or double Beer. But to resume my discourse; I add that in such
times as there are diseases of sundry types, and several symptoms, so as that
they may seem to be different and sporadical diseases only, yet in case they be
malignant, vulgar, pernicious, they are to be accounted either as so many
Pests, or as one, under several disguises: for it is not always true that in
the time of the Pest all other diseases cease, Hippocrates Epidem. l. 3. cum
notis Vallesii. p. 279, 280, 281.
as is evident out of Hippocrates: Thus Pestilential Peripneumonies,
Squinancies, and Pleurisies did at the same time rage in Germany, (as Wierus
relates) near the Rhine in 1564. Wierus Obs. l. 1. de epidem. pleurit. etc.
And during the Siege of Breda amongst the Garrison at the same time, besides
the vulgar Plague many pestilential diseases, as Tenesmes, Vander Mye de morbis
Bredanis, p. 4, 5.
Dysenteries, Cephalalgies, and Catarrhs, which retaining their distinct types,
were withal pestilential: nor is it strange that I should reckon upon all
these as radically one disease; for in the vulgar pest, Ale^. Massar. de pest.
l. 1. inter opera. p. 510, 511.
such was that at Athens, there are reckoned up as one Pestilence a multitude
of diseases that, were it not for that common mixture of a pestilential venom,
must have been reduced to several heads. Thus in the spotted Fever at Lubec
did Neucrantzius observe that almost all manner of diseases were the effects of
that Pest: Neueranztius de purpura, p. 65.
Purpurae venenata qualitas intro concepta, ut tota specie nobis adversa, ita
ad morbos totius substantiae merito refertur. Quamvis enim ultro concedam
nullum fere morborum aut symptomatum genus dari, quod non in purpura sese
offerat: isti tamen morbi consuetis non cedent remediis: and in singulis morbis
ac symptomatibus peculiare atque abditum quid apparebit, quod experto and
prudenti Medico supra sortem istorum, sed simplicium, morborum esse, imo a
caeteris similibus totius substantiae morbis se vindicare, totoque genere
inimicam illam qualitatem, in qua essentialis morbi hujus proprietas posita
est, manifesto declarare videatur. Sic lues venerea nulli non morborum
conjungitur, qui tamen non illis consuetis remediis, sed alexiteriis junctis se
curari postulant, adeo ut plerumque fallant non solum aegrotantes, sed ipsos
etiam medicos, docente Fabio Paulino lib. 1. comment in pestem Atticam
Thucydidis, p. m. 37. Idem in Scorbuto Arctois locis medicinam facientes
experimur, qui cuilibet morborum and symptomatum conjungi solet, ut nullis in
reliquo corpore sceletyrbes indiciis morbi qualitas uni membro impressa
aliquando haereat, medicos non raro ludat, curationemque moretur.

Under the aforesaid Definition of Pests I include all those that are called
Pestilential fevers, such as the Sweating sickness, Hungarian and Spotted
fever, the Hectic and Semitertian pest, of which you may read in Schenckius:
Schenckiu^ Obs. Medic. l. 6.
for by the doctrine de Conjugatis, a Pestilent Fever is a Fever that has
the Pest. This is not merely a Logical Quirk; several Practitioners aver it:
and particularly Mindererus: R^ymond. Minderer. de pest. c. 6.
whose words in opposition to such as distinguish betwixt a pestilential Fever
and the Pest, are these. Febris pestilens (ut illorum distinctione utar) aut
vera est, aut non vera; si vera est, nil aliud est nise Pestis ipsissima, and
ut doctissimus Hieron: Mercurialis loquitur a vera peste inseperabilis: si non
vera, jam nihil vel parum commercii cum peste habebit, and sic pestilens non
erit, nisi ob similitudinem aliquam symptomatum (quod forsan Galenus voluit)
ita eam appellare placeat, and sic inter malignas annumerabitur: quod si gradum
intenderit and vere pestilens effecta fuerit, nil nisi pestis erit: alioquin
simile esset dicere hic Saxo est aut Suevus, ergo non Germanus: aut hic
Hetruscusest ergo non Italus. Vnde febres malignas (...) and aequivoce
pestilentes quandoque dici observandum. i.e. A pestilent Fever (to use their
distinction) is either really such, or it is not so: if it be really such, then
it can be nothing but the Pest it self, and as the learned Mer^urialis
observes, no more distinct therefrom than it is from it self: If it be not such
really, then it is not to be accounted pestilential, except you please to
nickname it so by reason of some resembling symptoms (which it may be was the
sense of Galen) whereas it ought to be reputed only malignant, above which
degree if it rise and become truly pestilential, it is nothing else than the
Pest: And to say otherwise is as absurd as to argue, this is a Yorkshire or a
Devon-shire man, therefore no Englishman. Id. ibid. Neucr^n^zius de purpura c.
x. p. ^50.
From whence it is evident that Fevers purely malignant are but equivocally
styled pestilential: and all that are pestilential are sorts of Pests. Thus
when Pestilential Pleurisies, Squinancies, Choleric passions, Lethargyes,
Erysipelas's do rage, they loose their usual denomination, and become so many
Pests (or the same) attended with a Pleurisy, Squinancy, Choleric passion,
Lethargy, or Erysipelas etc. And then those otherwise formal diseases become
but symptoms, and accidental consequences of the Pest which vary not the
essence thereof. Nor is it necessary to the truth of the Definition, that all
these Pests should be actually Epidemical, or afflict all sorts of men; or be
always equally mortal: for the spotted Fever is as much included here, though
it extend no further than one single person, Neucrantz. de purpur^, c. 3. p. 35

Isbr. a Diembrook de Pest. l 1. c. 1.. 3. etc. 2. sect 3. Minderer. de pest.
c. 6.


and so is a pestilential Catarrh, or Cough, as our Physicians include the
Plague (commonly so called) under Epidemical diseases, though sometimes it
extends not its contagion beyond one family, or destroy but one person. It has
happened that a Pestilential Peripneumony accompanied with spitting of blood
was more fatal than any vulgar Plague ever heard of: Schenckius Obs. med. l. 6.
such was that in 1348. written of by Guido de Cauliaco (who lived then) it
posted from the East to the West, Coyttarus de febr. purp. c. 5.
and scarcely left surviving then the tenth part of mankind, if so much. And
the Spotted Fever has sometimes been more pernicious than the Plague in
France: Again, I must say that sometimes even these Pests may not be pernicious
or mortal: Such was that Pestilent Epidemical Cough in 1580. which overran all
Europe, (...) Ob. ^. 6. obs. 3.

I^ Sporischius de febr. Epid. c. 4. p. 128. V^ll^^ola in append ad loc.
commun. c. 2.


yet, as sick as (...) were, there dyed not one of a thousand: yet does not
this derogate from my opinion, since not only those that write of it do allow
it to have been pestil^ntial; but even in the vulgar Plague, where it is
expected most should dye, at Millaine in 1576. and 1577. Septal. de Pest. l. 1.
c. 14. p. 23.


Septalius, who was Physician in it, records it, that many more survived than
died at that Uisitation: yet, says he, would I have no body to deny it the
title of a Plague, for it had all other signs of the Plague.

There is a great discrepancy betwixt the violence and symptoms of the same
pestilential disease in its beginning, progress and end; betwixt such a disease
(to appearance the same) when it rages at one time and at another, in one
season of the year and in another; upon some sorts of men above others, and
some Nations above others (though living together, and using the same diet and
course of life) whereupon circumspect Physicians maturely considering that this
variety cannot be always imputed to the discrepancy of diet, or difference of
seasonableness in years, or such like circumstances, they have allowed of a
great variety of venomes, or gradations of putrefaction, and esteem these
Pests, though they do agree in one generical nature, and some resemblance of
symptoms and effects, yet to arise from different poisons, or graduations of
putrefaction; and hence it is that no two Plagues are ever almost cured alike;
nor is it possible for to find out one universal Antidote against them all: As
in poisons some are Septic, and Arsenical; some of another nature, as the
poison of Scorpions, Vipers, the Serpent Dipsas, etc. of Napellus, Aconite,
etc. so in Pests, by the effects, it is no vain fancy in the Paracelsians,
Quercetan. redivivus. Art. medic. pract. p. 39, 40, etc.
and Quercetan, or Mindererus to guess that there is a variety of venomes in
qualities corresponding much with those known poisons, and analogous unto them.

His consideratis, observatoque variarum pestilitatum diversis locis ac
temporibus Mindererus de^ pe^^e. c. 3.
grassandi modo, magistra rerum experientia docebit, venenum pestis adeo esse
varium and diversum ut singulae propemodum pesti suae sit peculiaris juncta
mali^ia inferendae neci sufficien^, ^ujus discrimen a nocendi modo and
symptomatum varietate petendum siet. Diligentissime proinde haec venenositatis
and pestis animadvertenda, and curationem suscepturis observanda. Et enim si
pestis graves somniculositates, ingentes sapores Lethargos and comata invexerit
long aliter tractari sese postulabit, quam si vigilas inquietudines aut
ingentes cordis siccitates intulerit. Venenum enim pestilentiale modo Dipsadis,
modo Vipera, modo Cicutae, modo Naepelli aut alterius exhibiti toxici naturam
aemulatur, cui in curatione singulari diligentia attendendum.

Prout igitur his, per peculiaria ac cuique propria antidota succurrimus, ita
and pesti, modo per haec, modo per alia alexipharmaca obsistendum admonemus.

Et nos quandoque haec ipsa studiosius considerantes, pestem ab exhibitis
venenis aut animalium venenatorum citu; morsu ac percussione immissis vix
quicquam differ cognovimus.

Concerning the Spotted Fever was observed by that solid and circumspect
Practitioner Paulus Neucrantzius. P. Neucran^zius de purpura, c. 6. p. 69, 70.
An etiam purpurati veneni essentiae diversitas variare purpurae symptomata
poterit? Ita censeo. Namque ea late admodum patet, and universo ambitu
venenorum fere circumscribitur, variatque ut illa varia and prope innumera
sunt. Hinc plerumqu^ continuarum febrium indolem ementita; interdum anginae
malignae epidemiae, pleuritidis, colicae, alteriusve morbi specie, singulari
quasi partium delectu, affligere, atque hujus aut alterius veneni deleteriam
vim aemulari videtur, ut morbum hunc novis plerumque symptomatibus emergere
medici observarint. Vt enim in peste varietatem veneni memorant Authors, qua
eadem interdum Antimonii, interdum Arsenici, Napelli, aut alterius venenatae
materiae virus exprimit, symptomatum similitudine, and alexipharmacorum
diversitate: ut quae uni pestil^ntiae saluti fuere, succedentibus annis in
altera peste consuetos effectus negent; ita and in purpura ac malignis sebribus
eandem affectuum diversitatem, nec eadem remedia semper prodesse advertere
licet. Sed nec diversis solum temporibus purpuram diversos characteres
exprimere, sed in una and eadem Epidemiae constitutione, modo hos, modo alios
refer, credendum, eadem essentiali sed specialissima veneni diversitate; qua
ut specie ab altera variat, ita pro indolis suae condition diversa symptomata
procreat, aemula and hic (...) pestis constitutione, in qua in eadem tempestate
diversos specie morbos, qui ex illa maligna aeris impressione perniciosam vim
acceperint, grassatos fuisse notum, ex epidem. l. 3. sect. 3. I might
illustrate this further by the difference betwixt the Sweating Sickness, and
other Pests at one time, and another: But I have said enough to show that
notwithstanding my Definition, I do allow that Pests may not always be equal
or equally pernicious, or equally contagious, and yet retain their name: there
may be such different degrees of venoms, or that superlative putrefaction, and
yet the species not be varied. I speak dubiously about the terms of venom and
superlative peculiar putrefaction, because the case is intricate, what to call
it. I know the Philosophy of this Age, which consists most in Similitudes, will
more approve of venom; but if it be hard to defend Putrefaction in order to
the production of Pests, it is no less difficult to illustrate Contagion by
Poisons; and in reference to the practice of Physic in Pests, I think I can
demonstrate that the Galenical notion of putrefaction is the most utile. Some
men think they make a great improvement in a Science, if they illustrate it by
a new Metaphor, or introduce a novel term, the import whereof is no more
emphatical or perspicuous than the former; yet this must be deemed a new
discovery, and by the imputation of ignorance, Students are deterred from
reading the best Authors.

Thus we climb downward, and advance as much as he that turn'^ Done 's Poems
into Dutch.

It remains now that I proceed to define the Plague in that sense to which it
is in vulgar speech (...): and amongst the several definitions that are giv^n
of i^ by judicious and experienced Practitioners, I shall six upon that of
Mindererus, as the most ^x^ct and conformable to the reality of the Phenomenon.

Filindererus de pest. c. 6.
The Pest is a venenate malady, very deadly, and contagious, primarily
affecting the Heart, and commonly attended with a Fever, BOTCH, CArbuncie, and
Spots or Tokens.

This Definition whosoever would see well illustrated, let him ^ead the Author,
and also Isbrandus a Diembrook, Palmarius and Quercetan: not to mention others.
It appears evidently hereby that this Pest is but a species of that other more
general no^ion: It arises from a peculiar sort of putrefaction, or venom, and
though it have symptoms different from its contradistinct species, though it
be peculiarly called the Pest, Isbr. a Diemb. l. 1. c. 1.
the Sickness, the Plague, (...), il morho, la malady; and such as make it a
superlative putrefaction, to show that it is but of a different degree from the
others, may allege that sometimes malignant pestilential Fevers have turned
into this Pest n^turally, Schenckius obs. l. 6. and Hieron R^^era in C. Cells.
l. 3. c 7. p. 143. Riverius prox. l. 17. sect. 3. c. 1.
or upon an evil method of curing. Exact Defi^itions are no more to be insisted
on in Physic, than in Law; it is enough that they are commonly ^rue, and that a
judicious Practitioner knows when they hold, and when they fail. I have
demonstrated that the Plague (so called vulgarly) is not so pernicious always
as the Spotted fever, or pestilential peripneumony: it is not always
contagious. ^^br. a Diemb. l. 1 c 12.. 4.
Tales sunt illae s^bres, quas Galenus, 3. epid. comm. 57. and alibi,
pestilentes sine peste vocat, quales se non raro observasse testatur Amatus
Lusitanus cent. 7. curat. 27. Imo Quercetanus in Alexic. and Riverius s^ct.. 3.
de febr. cap. 1. dicunt hujusmodi febres non semel visas fuisse cum verae
pestis indiciis ( puta Anthracibus and Exanthematibus) and tamen a vera peste
long diversas suisse, P. Zacchias though he do hold that the Pest is most
commonly contagious, yet he proves it is not necessary it should be always s^.
Quest. Medico. legal. l ^. tit. Qu. 2 s^ct 21, 22.
quia non erant contagiosae. Has febres Saxionia and Riverius appellant
Pestilentes sporadicas; Crato and Liddelius, pestilentes privatas: alii
pestilentes spurias. -- I shall add a passage of Crato, which is not that to
which this Author refers, but which He, who lived so long, and was so competent
a Judge by the Experience of many pestilential diseases, as his dying words
does import to the World: Initio vero hoc tenendum, quod supra etiam monui; Io
Crato assert. lib de ^ebr, pestilent. p. 18
pestilentes morbos hoc quidem habere proprium, ut sint plurimis perniciosi,
graves and lethales. Vt autem per contagium communicentur, nisi putredo ad
istam malignitatem in iis divenerit, ut morbidam expirationem transmittant in
alia corpora, non necesse est. Plurimos enim interire nullis prorsus
contagionis indiciis extantibus, apparet. Pestilentes igitur privatos, nisi
putredo in iis orta morbidum expiret, Id. ibid. p. 20.
astantibus innoxios esse affirmamus -- Accedit ad hoc quod nostra quoque
aetate in multis regionibus orientalibus and Meridionalibus, Pestilentias
plurimis exitiosas fuisse constat: in quibus neminem contagione contaminatum,
nec ullos a consuetudine aegrotantium refugisse legimus. i. e. In the first
place it is to be held for a certain truth, that pestilential diseases have
their properties, that they are deadly to most, being very afflicting, and
mortal. But that they should be contagious, it is not necessary, except the
putrefaction be come to that height as to produce such a morbid exhalation as
may infect other bodies. For it is most apparent that many dye, and yet there
is not any sign of contagion to be demonstrated by its proper effect, of having
introduced the like sickness in others. We do therefore avow, that those we
call private Pests do not prejudice or infect those that attend the sick party.
-- Besides, even in our Age several deadly Plagues have destroyed multitudes in
the Eastern and Southern Climates of the World, which yet have not diffused
themselves by contagion unto others, so that none have declined to converse
with the sick.

Whereas it is said in the Definition that it primarily affects the Heart, it
is not to be understood so constantly, though generally a great debility and
disorder of the pulse, and prostration of the strength ensue: for sometimes an
indisposition in the Stomach is the first sensible symptom the Patient feels:
and sometimes the Head is first and primarily affected, as in those that are
Lethargical and Soporous, or Vertiginous. I read that A. Paraeus going to visit
one sick of the Plague, A P^raeus Chirurg. l. 21. c. 12.
and hastily taking up the bed-clothes, that he might see and dress a Bubo
which he had in his groin, and two Carbuncles upon his belly: presently a
sudden thick, noisome vapor issuing from the Carbuncles that were apostimated,
and broak, pierced his nostrils and discomposed his brain, so that he swooned
away, and fell as it were dead and senseless upon the floor: afterward coming
a little to himself, he was giddy, and every thing seemed unto him to turn
round, so that he had fallen to the ground again had he not laid hold of
something whereby to support himself: All the comfort he had was, that he found
no indisposition about his heart, no pain, no palpitation, nor any sign of any
powerful and fixed debility of his strength. Which confirmed him in an opinion
that only the animal spirits were tainted with that pestilent exhalation; in
which he was more satisfied, by reason that he sneesed presently ten times with
so great a violence, that his nose fell to bleeding, and that evacuation (as he
thought) freed him from the vene^at^ impression: for he felt no other ill
effect afterward.

In that I say it is commonly attended with a Fever; it is upon the grounds
already alleged: I add that P. Paaw the great Physician at Leiden (in those
Provinces the Plague is frequent) denies that the vulgar Pest is to be defined
by a Fever. P. P^^w tract. de Pest. c. 2.
For it is not an usual Fever, neither sanguine, or putrid: there happens
oftentimes no signs of either of those in the Plague. It is not a malignant
Fever; for neither is the type and characterisme thereof to be discovered
here, no nor the least sign of heat frequently. You will say that sometimes
it is a common Fever, sometimes malignant: but neither is that true, for albeit
frequently, nay, for the most part it be accompanied with a Fever, sooner or
later, yet is that but a symptom thereof and separable from it: they have
different originals; the Pest a venom; the Fever a putrid heat. All poisons
do not engender a Fever in him that takes them: why should we think otherwise
of Plagues? In short, Experience shows that sometimes there is no sense of any
great or unusual heat in the infected, no thirst, no alteration in the Pulse,
Urine, or Respiration: where that which is essentially consequent to a Fever
is not to be found, it is but reasonable to deny the antecedent to be there. I
refer the unsatisfied for to be further convinced by Sennertus. Sennertus de
febr. l. 4. c. 1.


As to the Botches about the Ears, Armpits, and Groin, and the Spots (or
Tokens) and Carbuncles, those are so no necessary to this Pest (though many die
before any appear) that the populace is rather suspicious, than convinced, till
they be seen.

Having premised this long discourse, which I hope will seem neither useless,
nor tedious to any Reader, the solution of the ensuing Questions will be brief.

Concerning Phlebotomy in the Pest, whether it be useful or legitimate, it is a
question not to be resolved otherwise than by distinguishing upon the Pest: If
it be taken in a general sense, I answer that it has been frequently practiced
with great and visible success in several Epidemical, cont^gi^us and frequently
mortal diseases, as the Coy^tarus de purpurat. febr. c. 12, 13.

P^t^u^ a Castro de ^ebr. puncticular. sect. 6. and in dedicatori^ epist.

Dilect. Lisnan de venae sect c. 9. art. 4. p 1^9

Septal. de Pest. l. 5. c. 17. p. 217.


Spotted Fever, the Bartholin. de Angina puer. exercit. 5.

^everin de abscess p. 449. Men^t^s consult. ^4.


Paedanchone or strangulatory disease of the Children in Spain, Sicily and
Naples: In the Cobelcho^er. cent. 5. cut. x. in Scholio.

R^land de ^ebr. Vngoric. p 270. and alibi.


Hungarian Fever also: and in Epidemical catarrh (when it was in Holland)
Forrestus did with great success bleed, in 1580. Obs. Medicin. l. 6. obs. 3.
But I must also say, that our Experimental Physicians in these cases do
sometimes interfere one with another; and at least it is manifest that most of
those diseases have been cured without bleeding: that it is to be administered
with great caution; yet is it never more true that Medicaments are as it were
the hands of the Almighty, then when in such diseases Phlebotomy is prudently
used: all circumstances must be duly weighed to the administration thereof; and
there are so many fatal instances of the ^vil success, that though they are
balanced by contrary Exp^riments made in all Countries, yet ought the wisest
to be timorous; and the ignorant ought to consider, that since in such diseases
most dye by the violence thereof (and this is their nature) it ought not to
seem strange, if Phlebotomy prove as ineffectual, as other Remedies do. In such
diseases, it is not rashly to be attempted in the beginning of the disease (as
Coyttarus in his excellent discourse observes) but when it is in his progress,
and that the nature and tendency of the poison is manifest, and the strength of
the Patient better judged of, if indications require it, nothing is more
beneficial; not that it is then administered to evacuate the poison (as our
ignorant Helmontian does suppose) but to allay the putrid Fever, and concoct
it; for revulsion in pestilential Pleurisies, and Squinancies, (wherein each
wise man divides his cares betwixt the malignity and the disease it self) to
prevent further putrefaction or those inconveniences which some direful
symptoms men^ce the Patient with. ^


In the more limited sort of Pest, commonly termed the Plague, as the disease
is usually more pernicious than in those others, so do Physicians multiply
their fears, and Patients their suspicions. They are much divided upon the
point; and though the generality of modern Writers oppose Phlebotomy, (or
suspect the good issue) nor can the happy instances for the contrary (though
they may be alleged in all Countries) suffice to imbolden the present Age. The
happy practice of Botallus is not regarded: Botallus de ven^ sectione, c 7.

Massarias de Pest. l. 1.

Roderic^ a Fonseca in append ad Iacchin. de febr. p. 354: Septal. de pest^ l.
5. c. 14.

Forrestus Obs. l. 6. obs. 17.

C. Hofmann. Anti Fernel. lemm. 64.

Prosper Alpin. de medic. Aegyptior. l. 2. c. 7. p. 54.

Prosper. Alpin. medic. meth. l. 5. c. 9.


Massarias (as learned and as well versed as he was in the Plague) is not able
to convince men: Not Rodericus Fonseca at Lisbone, not Septalius at Millain,
not the cautelous Forrestus, who let them blood in the Pest at Delph within
eight hours after infection, though it were occasioned from f^mine and misery,
and that with good success: not the president of Hosman in the Plague at
Norimberg: Not the constant practice of the Egyptians, who in all pestilential
diseases, and plagues do bleed largely the sick parties, as Prosper Alpinus
relates; and whose example and experience did so convince him, that in that
excellent Book of his de Medicina Methodica he thus expresses himself for the
cure of pestilent Fevers, and the Plague. Itaque laxata a^vo lenitorio
Pharmaco, ad vacuationem sanguinis declinandum. Primo secta interna vena cubiti
dextri in ea copia mittatur, quam vires permittent: and in altero die, si
corpus sanguine abundaverit, and vires permiserint, ex altero brachio evacuatio
sanguinis erit repetenda: in pueris, and in viris, and mulieribus albidioribus
sanguis mittendus itidem erit copiosus cruribus scarificatis, ex qua
scarificatione, facta sanguinis evacuatio in febribus pestilentibus est
utilissima, quia cum ipsa quantum sanguinis volumus, evacuamus, sine virium
magna jactura (quod e longinquis partibus educatur) sine violentia, and quod
maxim in hisce febribus videtur desiderandum, quoniam ex ea evacuatione a
supernis partibus adinfernas ^iat revulsio: Vnde mirum non est, si nos saepius
in hisce aegrotis vigilias, vel dolorem capitis, vel delirium, vel surditatem,
vel aliud symptoma simile continuo sublatum viderimus, praesertimque si copiosa
^acta fuerit evacuatio. De hac Oribasius ita scripsit: Et sane dum pestilentia
vehemens Asiam deprehendisset, In lib. 7. c. 20.
multosque perdidisset, meque etiam morbus attigisset, secunda morbi die
remissione febris facta, crus scarificavi, duasque libras sanguinis detraxi,
hacque de causa periculum vitavi. In pueris and infantibus in quibus una cum
pestilenti febre vel exanthemata vel variolae apparuerint, perpetuo summam
utilitatem ab hac evacuatione subsecutam vidimus; qua Aegyptii Arabesque nullum
utilius praesidium in hisce febribus esse long a experientia cognoverunt. Not
all this can either justify or excuse a Galenist unto these Helmontians: I add
the opinion of Erastus who lived in Germany, which Climate and Nation may seem
to correspond better with the English; after he had given his reasons for
Phlebotomy administered in the beginning, in plethorick bodies, and where
nothing does contra-judicate, especially in such as were used to bleed, or had
any sanguinary evacuation at the nose or other parts, stopped on a sudden: and
after he had refuted the Arguments of such as would cure the Pest in his time
with Alexipharma^s and sweating only; he adds, Equidem una consuetudo fere
praestare videtur, Th. Brastus epist. 25.
ut nostris hominibus venae sectio in hoc morbo minus nocere videatur. In hac
peste prorsus multi ex rusticis vicinorum pagorum nullo alio remedio
affugerunt. I might cite the judgment of many more in this case, as
Rondeletius, Mercatus, Trincavellus, Io. Costaeus, Altomanus, Pereda,
Andernacus, Sarracenus, Massa, Mongius, Citantur ab Isbrando a Diemerbrook de
pest l. 3. c. 3.. 1.
Paschalius, Mercurialis, Zacuius Lusitanus, Bayrus, Carolus Valesius du
Bourgdieu, Joel, Thevartius (upon Ballonius's Epidemia p. 50, 51.) Hieronymus
Rubeus upon Celsus: Of the Ancients Aetius, Avicenna, Avenzoar, and that Latin
Hippocrates. C. Celsus who particularly says, C. Cells. Medicin l. 3, c 7.
Si vires sinunt, sanguinem mittere optimum est; praecipueque si cum ardore
febris est. But I conclude with this assertion, that in the Controversy about
Phlebotomy in the Plague, Caeterum in contrariam sententiam abeunt complures
alii, iidemque doctissimi Medici, docentes omnino secand^m esse venam, nec
minores paucioresve adducunt felices successus. Hieron. Rubeu^ in C. Celsum. l.
3. c 7. p. 140.

Massarias de Pest. l. 2. (inter opera) p. 531. F. Platerus de ^ebr. (inter
opera) p. 161.


the number of them that defend it exceeds that of those which oppose it, and
their learning, judgment, practice, the reasons, the Experiments they allege
at least, equals what their Adversaries can pretend unto: Some Arabians have
advised in the beginning of the Plague (before the disease has impaired their
strength) that the infected should bleed even until they swooned: And Platerus
informs me, that some having pursued that counsel avow that they have cured
many, and therefore dislike all minute Phlebotomy in comparison of that which
is so copious: thus Bayrus in his Treatise of the Pest commands, that if the
Patient be robust, plethorick, and the pestilential Fever be accompanied with
a violent putrid Fever, he bleed largely. But to deal heartily in this affair,
I do think that of the Germans the most are averse from Blood-letting in the
Plague, and depend upon Sudorifics.

Because our Helmontian does so opiniater it about the Plague, and would reduce
all Fevers (almost all diseases to be cured like it) and insults over the
Galenists for their ignorance in the cure, and upbraids them with their ill
success in that malady, I shall briefly represent some of the reasons of their
evil success; and the arguments they urge against sweating in all Pests, in the
beginning, and process of the cure; as also sum up their practice about
Phlebotomy.

When I consider the general desolation which the Plague has made in all parts
of Europe, notwithstanding the various ways used for the cure thereof, and
that Ge^many and the Netherlands can no more boast of an infallible cure, no
nor ^f a better success than Florence, Veni^e, Rome, Naples, Paris, or Sevill,
methinks it is apparent that the recommendation of Medicaments or M^thods of
curing in the Plague arises from the observation that some by the happy use of
such a course, or such a Medicament, have (perhaps amidst d^ngerous and
seemingly deadly symptoms) been recovered: And herein Septalius, and
Massarias, and others, say as much for themselves, as Minder^rus, or Sennertus:
And what Celsus says of Hippo^rates, Herophilus and Asclepiad^s; I cannot but
call to mind when I reflect on the several Methods of Physic endeared unto us
by judicious Practitioners: C. Celsus in pre^. Medicinae.
Si rations sequi velinius, omnium posse videri non improbabiles: si
curationes, ab omnibus his aegros perductos esse ad sanitatem. So just I am to
those excellent Practitioners: It is certain that in Physic we do oftentimes
commit the Fallacy of non causa pro causa, and attribute those effects to one
Medicament, or Method, which either did but accidentally ensue th^reon, it
contributes nothing to the effect (but only happening to be insisted on at or
before the time that the Phoenomenon discovered it self) or only removing
something that hindered the natural production of the effect, or only acting as
a partial cause therein, or merely strengthening or making room for nature that
the effect might more easily result. Thus we dir^ctly yield the glory of one or
more successful cures to a wrong original, and delude our selves and others not
only with vain hopes in the remedy or method, but with new Hypoth^sis raised
upon these frail foundations, and with the same levity reject the Medicaments
and Methods of others, with which we celebrate our own; nay oftentimes with
more; for those foundations are most sure which are laid by the most men, if
they be judicious and observing, and have endured the test of more ages and
trials. If presumption and arrogance could have entombed the Pest, the most
insolent but worst of Physicians, that is Van Helmont had secured mankind
against its ill effects: and what man could have dyed, or languished under the
Gout, or other Chronical distempers, if the Rhodomontades of Paracelsus,
Penaltus, Severinus Danus, had contained any solidity? But experience has
showed us that we have only exchanged, not amended our practice, the Tinctures,
the Essences, the Elixirs, however graduated, or how gloriously soever
denominated, do not exempt us from that condition humane nature is subjected
unto; the general intentions of curing cito, tuto, jucunde are old: the
performance now answers not the pretenses: the Athanasia, Iucunda, Mysterium,
Ambrosia (of which you may read in Galen) If I were to choose my Medicaments by
the sound they make, would seem as good as the Anima Auri, Tinctura polyaceia,
or Pulvis pestifugus; and better than the Alexistomachon, for that like (...),
would affrighten me, as if it were a Medicine to drive away a man's stomach. And
if I were to word my discourse I would more willingly use a known tongue, than
an unknown, and write Secretary rather than the Universal Character: If I
cannot acquire knowledge above others, there is more of vanity than glory in
the ostentation of a new-fashioned ignorance. I write this because I am
convinced, because I do not believe that there is any thing more intelligible
in the modish word veno^^, then in the profound, sordid or superlative,
^^^trefaction wherein the Galenists placed the (...) If such a putridity be
unimaginable (which ye^ (...) graduated above what we see, and unto which it is
evident that diseases sometimes gradatim do arrive) it is certain that there is
no such thing as the Arsenical or Napelline poison in the Pest; but somewhat
forsooth Analogous thereunto, Mindererus de pest c. 3.
as Mindererus and Sennertus assure us: and here we are put upon Gradations
again by which Cerusse and Lithargyre, Napellus and Thithymal, Cantharides and
Dipsas are to be transmuted into, or graduated up to Arsenic. Most assuredly in
this Age the Chimaeras have exchanged their pasture, and being clo^ed or
starved with feeding upon the Second intentions, they are now luxuriously
dieted with Metaphors and Similitudes. I would not therefore have this
following discourse to be construed as an Apology for the failures of the
Galenists, but of all judicious Practitioners, even of different principles,
who intermeddle with the Plague.

The first reason of their miscarriage, is the difficulty or rather
impossibility of discovering of the Plague oftentimes in its first approach,
and sometimes the disease continues and makes a progress hopeful and promising
for several days: Sennert. de febr l. 4. c. 1.
and then manifests it self in the sudden death of the Patient: Anton
Benivenius obs. Medicin. c. 54. H. Florentius in notis ad ^. P^^re de pest. p.
154, 155.
of the truth hereof I need no Instances: the only care a Practitioner can show
is (after that frequent Funerals have informed him of an approaching or raging
Pest) to tend his Patients whatever the distemper be ( little or great) as if
it were the Plague: and yet that this supposition is fallacious, I can
demonstrate out of the Histories of several Plagues, particularly that of
Vicenza, and Breda. Here then our Physician is no more to be blamed, than he is
for not being an Angel, or a Deity.

Another reason is, that the sick parties do not come to our Practitioner upon
the first and smallest sense of the disease; for after the Pest has seized
upon them a few hours ( eight or twelve hours) Sennertus himself could not cure
one in an hundred: Sennertus de febr. l. 4. c. 6.
and of this Erastus complains (who was for bleeding) that most that died came
not unto him till that the Plague had too far seized their spirits, and
debilitated them so as to render all means ineffectual, Erastus ep. 25. p. 90.
though he tried Sudorifics, and complied with all Hypothesis in his practice.
I must here note that the diversity of Plagues, as to their nature, and
continuance, makes a greater latitude in the opportunity or timing of
Medicines, than to restrain it to eight or ten hours; but this cannot be known
till the Plague has lasted some while.

A third reason is the great difference betwixt the Nature of one Plague and
another, so that neither one Method nor the same Medicaments will serve in all
Pests, no nor in any two hardly: besides the particular diversification which
the Pest receives according to idiosyncrasy and constitution of each infected
person. And for this reason Nicolaus Ellain in his Treatise of the Plague
(commented upon by the renowned Guido Patin) refused to write down a special
cure of the Pest in that book. N. Ellain de pest. apud Guibert. Med. Offic. p.
533.
Quantum ad curationem spectat, eam attingere nolui, quia periculosissimum est
ex solis universalibus regulis curationem instituere, idemque calopodium
singulis quibusque adaptare. Iuris peritorum effatum est, Theorias generales
non informare animum practicum, qui consistit in singularibus. Si haec
propositio in jure vera existit, potiorem locum in Medicina habere debet, in
affectu presertim adeo anomalo atque insolenti, cujus ut Protei, nunquam fa^ies
eadem est. Nulla enim pestis alteri similis est, nisi in uno, quod scilicet ea
correpti maximam partem i^ereant. Constans opinio est, tot fere species
morborum pestilentium esse, quot annorum, quibus in vulgus grassantur. Varianda
proinde curatio ex affectus, causarum, symptoma, tumque varietate: ratioque
habenda temporis, regionis, sexus, aetatis, temperamenti, peculiarisque
cujusque naturae (quam Graeci idiofyncrasiam vocant) pluriumque aliarum
conditionum a Medico expendendarum. Insignis igitur abusus foret in peste
curanda eadem uti Methodo. i. e. As for the cure of the Plague, I would not
intermeddle with it; because it is a most dangerous thing to form a particular
practice out of general rules alone, and as it were to work all peoples shoes
upon the same last. It is a Maxim amongst the Lawyers, that General Theories
do not accomplish a Practitio^nr, whose business lies in particular and
promiscuous Cases. If this ^e true in Law, I am sure it ought to hold good in
Physic, especially in a disease so anomalous and so seldom happening, as this
is, and whose Type is as changeable as that of Proteus, never exactly the same.
For no Pest ever was like unto the other perfectly, except it were in this one
qualification, that most that are infected dye thereof. With him agrees
Gerardus Columbs de ^ebr. pestil. c. 24. p. 253^
It is a constant opinion in many, that there has been, and always will be
almost as many sorts of Pests, as there have been, or can be Pests: And
therefore the cure thereof must be varied according as the disease, its causes,
and symptoms vary: and particular regard must be had to the season and course
of the year, the country, the sex, the age, the temperament, and the
individual constitutions of persons, and many other circumstances which a
judicious Physician must consider. Wherefore it would seem an abuse and
imposture to prescribe or follow in every Pest the same Method. The truth of
which Assertion is so universally assented unto, Mindererus de pest. c. 3.
that Mindererus does caution us diligently to attend unto the course and
symptoms of the Plague, and to vary our Method and Medicaments accordingly,
and tells us that in individual persons (and not only in the Plague it self) we
shall find reason to guess that the pestilential poison admits of an
unexpressible discrepancy and variety; And partly from its native variety,
partly from concurrent circumstances in the Patient, and Ambient, etc. and
combination with sundry humors and i^tire commixing with them, it grows up and
is improved into new sorts of venom. And from hence, he says, arises a grand
difference in the cure as well as ^ffects of each Pest, so that a multitude of
trials must be circumspectly made, the motion of Nature in the recovery of the
Patient observed, and many die, or involuntarily, yet unavoidably, be
dispatched, before the right Method can be known. Hoc enim in incognitis, usu
persaepe eveni^, ut non nisi aliorum damno sapiamus, and ex complurium strage
quos morbus perdidit caeteros servare discamus; nihil interim l^udis Medica
facultate ab hoc amittente, utpote quae plus studii in incertis observandis,
quam in lucidis jam and p^rspectis malis, commodo consilio amovendis
removendisque sollicita impendit; etenim and Magistratus ad occultum ^urem
deprehendendum debita adhibens media, non minus suo officio fungitur, quam si
hunc ipsum comprehensum, capite plecti aut morte multari praeceperit. Since
then it is manifest that there is so great a variety in general amongst
Plagues, and so great a discrepancy in particular Plagues, arising from
individual constitutions and other circumstances, since the different motions
of Nature are such, that sometimes it is terminated happily by sweat, sometimes
by stool, sometimes by urine, or an haemorhagy. Since it is a disease that so
seldom happens (especially here amongst us) that it is impossible for any man
to acquire a practical dexterity in knowing, or curing it: there is not any
intelligent person will condemn the Galenists, or other prudent Physicians for
ignoran^e; but rather deplore the misfortune of Mankind w^ic^ is subjected to
so monstrous and pernicious a malady as this is; and by a pious and penitent
life rather study to divert the Divine judgment, than to depend upon what is
Humane.

These discourses will satisfy any man of the vanity of those pretenses of an
Universal Medicine for all Plagues; or of acquiring any superlative skill by
the dissecting of one infected Body, or feeling one sort of Plague twice or
thrice; whereas not only each Pest differs in specie, but often in individuo:
and undoubtedly, according as the venom, and venenate symptoms differ, so
would the several bodies if dissected.

As to the reasons why the Galenists do not suspend the cure of the Pest
entirely upon Diaphoreticks, and repeated Sudorifics, I find that they do urge
these.

They do conceive that a Physician is obliged to be the Assistant of Nature in
all diseases, except it manifestly appear that she acts irregularly, or by
way of such an irritation, as to comply therewith were to destroy the Patient:
they know what their Method obliges them unto; and what necessity does often
put them upon: that some diseases are cured with more facility than others;
that it is the nature of some diseases not to be cured at the same time, nor in
the same manner: that as men are oftentimes forced to make the best of a bad
market, so in some indispositions they know what they desire, but know not how
to effect it, but by means extraordinary, and by a greater difference to the
distemper than it is their inclination to submit unto: Scire enim quid fi^ri
Oport^at, magna res non est, sed quibus rationibus illud efficias, id vero
arduum. Galen 6. m. m c. 2.
it is not ignorance and folly, nor the want of generous Medicaments, which
makes them comply, but a tendern^ss of the lives of the sick, and the discharge
of a good conscience; which last obliges him always to the safest way, and
not to follow either doubtful and questionable opinions in Physic (which may
pass for probable, P. Zacchias Qu. Medicolegal. l. 6. ^it. 1. qu. 7.. 2. id
ibid.. 7, 8
if that be such against which it is one thousand to one that it is false) or
to prescribe Medicaments which the rules of Art and Experience do not ^ustifie.
Wherefore they do imagine that a Physician ought to imi^ate Nature when she
does well (and well she does, when she cures the disease) and since Nature does
in several Plagues acquit her self sundry ways, that therefore they ought not
to confine themselves to one: Particularly, since some Plagues have been cured
by spontaneous Erastu^. epist 25 p 97. c. 2. and Th^v^r^. in Schol. ad Ball^n.
Epid^m^ l. 50, 51. ^ch^^kiu^ (ex Paraeo) l. 6. p. 770.
Haemorrhagyes at the nose, others by Stools, it is most irrationable to expect
that any should do otherwise in so dangerous a malady, than to consider the
ul^roneous emotions thereof, and accordingly to demean himself.

Secondly: Seeing that Hippocr. sect. 4. Aphor. 36, 37, and 42. E^ast ^p. 25.
p. 99.
all Sweats in the beginning of a disease are rather bad, than good: since in
the Plague few or none are ever freed Erast. epist. 25. p. 9^ c. 2.
by spontaneous Sweats: since Nature takes ^d. ibid. p. 98.

Erast. ubi supra. p. ^9.


another course by discharging it self into the glandules of the Ears,
Armpits, and Groin: They do not think that they ought to pursue that M^thod.
Ex his arbitror, patet, Sudores statim ab initio febris hujus per vim adeo
calidorum medicamen^orum evocatos, non tam utiles esse quam aliqui putant.
Siquidem spiritus evacuantur, vires dejiciuntur, sanguis agitatur, turbatur,
magisque acuitur febris, quod subtle est in sanguine excernitur, sicque
crassior intus relicta materia citius and facilius interficit. Ideirco magis
videtur factum and consilium eorum approbandum, qui ab his medicinis calidis
abstinent, sive sudent aegri ab initio, sive non sudent. Certum namque est,
Sudorem sponte sub initium morbi prodeuntem, diaphoreticum and symptomaticum,
non laudabilem and criticum esse.

Thirdly they argue; that since there is such danger least the Patient infected
should dye for want of strength before the disease be cured, and that above all
others the vital indication to preserve the strength ought to be most prevalent
with a Physician, and regulate him in the administering of his remedies: since
the regard hereunto makes them to quit their usual course of diet, and even
compel their Patients to eat plentifully, and drink wine ('it is no Helmontian
Proposal, Isbr. a Diem. brook de pest. l. 3 c. 2.. 1.6 and l. 2. c. 6.. 14. C.
Celsu^ l. 3. c. 7.
but transmitted to as from Antiquity) they conceive it not fit in the
beginning of the Plague to debilitate the sick with a violent and tedious Sweat
(perhaps to be reiterated twice or thrice in twenty four hours) whereby the
spirits will be extremely dissipated (much more than in Phlebotomy) the humors
good and bad promiscuously evacuated, and the blood and grosser humors (which
are not exhausted by Sweat, and in which commonly the Pest is seated, as is
manifest from the Botches and Carbuncles) continue infected still. Sane
spiritus per sudores affatim and copiose vacuari satis indicant prostratae
afflictaeque vires post longum sudorem: Erast. ep. 25. p. 97.
Crasse and inquinati sanguinis nihil aut particulam exiguam educi, probant
accidentia, quae fere omnia fiunt post sudorem deteriora.

Fourthly, Though they do very much commend the intentions of such as would
presently and without any delay expel the morbific poison; yet they conceive
that where the Plague arises from previous evil humors congested in the body
by an unseasonable year, evil diet, or the like, that then the case differs
much from what it is when it is contracted by a foreign contagion; and
therefore whatever reasons may be alleged in the last case, they cannot admit
the Method as universal: they do apprehend that in the first case the putridity
is incorporated and become as it were innate to the mass of blood, and is no
more to be eliminated by Sweat, then mustiness in drink is exterminated by its
working out the yeast: Besides, they do not perceive that the sick receive such
benefit when Nature discharges it self into the Skin by the Spots, or Tokens,
that they should imitate that operation by promoting sweat: they are afraid
that potent sweats may divert Nature from her usual and intended course of
discharging it self into the Glandules, and whilst a double evacuation is
purposed by the Physician, the Patient may find the benefit of neither, the
sweat being so powerful as to disturb that other motion; and the humors in
which the venom is incorporated being so gross (why else should Nature never
take the more facile and expedite way of the Skin, but the more difficult of
the Glandules?) as not to be exonerated in that manner.

Lastly, Supposing the Plague to be a venenate disease they do not conceive
that all poisons are to be cured one way, and that by sweat, especially as soon
as ever they are taken: much more if they be of a Septic nature: they do not
believe sweating to be the remedy for Arsenic, or Lapis infernalis, should any
take them. But if it were, yet sometimes there is such a plethoric habit of
body, and the veins are so distended either naturally or through the febrile
agitation of humors, that it is imprudent and dangerous to promote sweat, till
Phlebotomy be premised: for thereby the febrile heat will be mitigated,
obstructions removed, the blood ventilated and capable of a further rarefaction
in order to sweat, and transpiration promoted, and Nature inclined to sweat;
for bleeding does not draw in the humors, or poison, but carries it out to the
circumference, as experience does testify, and consequently is rather
subservient unto, than opposite to the indication that others go upon.

These are the most solid Objections I have met with upon the subject: in which
whatever is suggested is not so to be understood, as if the Galenists did not
know that their Adversaries use or pretend to use Cordial and Alexipharmacal
Diaphoretick^: as on the contrary none but this Baconical -- G. T. would
suppose, that when a Galenist speaks of Phlebotomy, that he intends to use
nothing else. Those judicious persons do consider the variety of Pests, that
some of them are by foreign contagion, and seize upon healthy bodies: in these
they are willing that the venom be eliminated presently by sweat, except the
Plethoric habit make it necessary to bleed first, and then they sweat them
afterward immediately: taking all imaginable care for to preserve their
strength: they also know that in such times as the Patients have been used to
an ill diet, and debilitated through poverty and misery, that in such cases
even Galen would not allow bleeding: for how requisite soever it may be for the
disease, such persons cannot bear it: They know that some Plagues are attended
with little or no Fever, yet attended with symptoms dangerous and mortal; in
these cases they are for Cordial-Alexipharmacal Diaphoreticks, and promote
sweat as earnestly as any Helmontian: in others the Plague is attended with a
Synochus and putrid Fever, in these they divide their cures, and regard both
the Fever and the pestilential venom, etc. according as the strength of the
Patient will bear (they consider not only his present but future strength) they
proceed to Phlebotomy: sometimes they observe the Plague to be so gentle, that
the infected can go up and down and feels little or no indisposition in
himself: in this case they only continue the motion of Nature by mild
Alexipharmac^, that the Botch or Carbuncle do not strike in again, and perform
the rest by a sollicitous Surgery. In fine, as there is nothing more
rational than all their solicitude in cures: so they know that in so desperate
a disease, there is no course to be left unattempted: the way by Alexipharmaca
and Sudorifies come from them, and is properly theirs: but they urge no method
generally in any disease almost; knowing that the same distemper may be cured
several ways by men proceeding upon contrary indications, and yet the Art not
violated: Hippocrat. Epidem. l. 6. sect. 7. cum notis Vallesi^, p. 7^8, 739.
and in the Plague, as they know the great variety thereof in specie and
individuis, so their directions leave us in a great latitude upon emergencies:
They understand that saying of Celsus: Nam quo celerius ejusmodi tempestates
corripiunt, C. Celsus medicin. l. 3. c. 7. de febr. pest.
eo maturius auxilia, etiam cum quadam temeritate, rapienda sunt. As also that,
Cum eadem omnibus convenire non possint, Id, ibid. c. ^.
fere quos ratio non restituit, temeritas adjuvat. To conclude, if there be any
thing that requires a dexterous Physician, it is this disease: And if any thing
can make him such, it is the diligent reading and understanding of the
Galenists; who have in this case transcended themselves, and replenished their
discourses with so prudent cautions, such excellent observations, and
experiments, that may raise admiration in all that are conversant therein, and
satisfy the World, that those notional men, following the ancient Methods of
Science, have outdone all that ever the ignorant rash Experimentators of this
Age could imagine. I have a long time designed a Collection of all the choice
Experimental Writers upon Epidemical diseases, whether pestilential, or not;
together with the Histories of diseases that are otherwise of a facile cure,
and are changed by the mixture of a pestilential venom: for as there is
nothing more dangerous and intricate then such diseases, so there is nothing
wherein the generality of Physicians are less aquainted: it is ar^ effe^^ of the
novelty and curiosity after knick-knacks which infatu^tes this Generation, and
will ruin the next: there is so much of pedantry in reading, it is so much more
pleasant, and divertive to talk of, to make Observations about freezing, then
to read over Galen de typis, that I do not wonder to find D. M. not to
understand what the Type of a disease is: but I do wonder how he durst say I
was intollerably ignorant in the Rudiments of Physic, for speaking as Galen,
and the best Physicians do: I may accommodate to these impudent Scholiasts that
saying of Hippocrates. They that are sick, and do not know themselves to be so,
have an imbecility in their Intellectuals. Such men are p^ss^ssed with a
desire to prepare their own Medicaments, contrary to Law: and neglect the study
of necessary and useful Books in their Profession, which is contrary to all
Reason: It Is easy to foresee that the nex Age will scarce be furnished with a
wise Statesman, Physician, or Civilian; and perhaps scarce yield an
accomplished Divine, or an intelligent Sheriff, or Justice of Peace. And this
evil is become remediless, by reason that the contempt of Vniversity-learning,
and neglect of studying, has so decayed the Trade of Book-selling, that no man
that is desirous can furnish up a Library; which I find too true, being not
able to repair the loss of a choice Collection of Physick-books, which were
consumed by the fire at London.

Having thus explained the nature of the Pest, I return to the Argument of --
G. T. which gave occasion thereunto. That the Pest is neither a Fever (...),
nor indeed a Fever at all, I have demonstrated: That there are some Pests in
which Phlebotomy may be used, I have also made evident: As also that it was not
without Singular prudence that the excellent and learned Physician Doctor
Willis did pronounce that Phlebotomy was seldom, and not without great
caution, De febr. p. 235
to be practiced in the Pest: because the blood being too much exhausted, and
the vessels subsideing, the necessary inclination to transpire and sweat, is
not so easy to be promoted, or continued. I have likewise evinced that the
Pest does not consist properly in a Poison, but in somewhat Analogous
thereunto: and consequently since similitudes are not identified, it is
foolishly argued by -- G. T. that because upon the taking of Po^son Phlebotomy
is useless: therefore it is so in the Pest. But neither is the antecedent true
always; as any man acquainted with the Medicinal History of Poisons does know:
for although upon the first taking, they are to be attempted with peculiar
Antidotes, yet if afterward they produce a Fever in the Patient, or if there
be danger of it, Phlebotomy is both used and allowed, by the Authority of
Paulus, Avicenna, and Haly-Abbas and other eminent Physicians: Joseph. M^ne^sus
de sec. venae cubiti in febr. putr. malig. p. 141, 142^
particularly by I. Caesar Claudinus in his Emperica rationalis l. 6. sect. 1.
c. 1. It is also perspicuous out of what I have said, that it is false to say
that All Fevers, be they ill conditioned, or others, have any resemblance
with, or are to be cured like the Pest: much less is it true of most Maladies
whatever. Whereas this Impertinent goes about to prove it thus: Because there
is quiddam deleterium in them, or a certain venenosity. If he take Quiddam
deleterium and a certain venenosity for one and the same thing: it is most
false: show me the effects thereof such as are visible in the Pest, and I may
grant there is somewhat Analogous: but I cannot see any such thing, nor that
they need any such such cure: It is possible -- G. T. may with his
Pepper-drops, or Essence of Ginger, and such like hot Medicaments drive out
some Pustules in the Skin, in most Maladies (and even where were none) but I
shall not conclude thence that either the indisposition was venenate, or that
he did impoyson him, though that be a facile thing to do where the same person
acts the Doctor and Apothecary; C. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. and l. xii.

W. C. may learn what Medicus circum^oraneus is out of Menagius's Am^^fu^at.
jur. civil. c. 3^.


and usually done heretofore as any Schoolboy may know out of Tacitus: or
Tully, pro Cluentio, where two are mentioned, the one the City- Physician, who
was called Medicus; such were retained by Salary, the other is termed
Pharmacopola circumforaneus, that is a Doctor who kept several Markets, making
and vending his own Medicaments, which gave him the opportunity of grati^ying
Oppianicus his Mother in law: a courtesy the other had oftentimes done for him
before: I believe there were no Apothecaries at that time in that place,
Lindenbrogius Codex legum Antiq. inter constitut. Sicula^.
but in 1220, or 1221. when Physic was first made an Vniversity-Faculty, and
Doctors thereof created in imitation of those in Theology, then were the
Profession of Physic, and that of the Apothecary made distinct, and that with
so mnch caution, that it is a question amongst the Imperial Lawyers, Whether a
Physician may have any manner of Contract with An Apothecary, though to drive
on other Traffic than that of Pharmacy? In the Lombard-Chronicles there are
many cases of Princes (and no doubt than others) by Physicians: there was one
Sedechias in the days of Charles surnamed the Bald, in France: and in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth one Doctor Lopez, and Giulio. If some men's reading
extends not to this knowledge, I would have taught D. M. and W. C. this and
much more, had not the Artifice and interest of some men debarred me from
publishing it. If any man can show me any Dispensatory made by any European
Physicians (since there was so much as a Graduated Doctor) that was previous to
the distinct Profession of Apothecaries, I will own then (though it be a
certain untruth) that the practice (I do not say practicing) of the Apothecary
in the Quartane, was contrary to the rules of Physic, and the case well
proposed by D. M. All men are at the mercy of such as write what they will, and
defame as they please, and permit not others to vindicate themselves, nor
undeceive the World. It Is ungenerous to pinnion a man's hands, and then beat
him. In reference to that Controversy, I add that the Statutes of the College
command the Physicians to send their Bills to an honest Apothecary: St^t.
Colleg. L^^din. Miss. in biblioth. (...).
And our Laws make the College Judges of all Receipts, as well as Methods of
Physic: which Act as it conforms with the general practice of Europe, so it is
very prudential; for hereby provision is ma^e not only against noxious
Medicaments (and the high prizes of Arcana) but illegitimate Methods of
practice, by which last it is as easy to destroy a man, as by poison, and more
privately: How the designs of the Experimentators will consist with our Laws,
and be accommodated to them, I know not: I know a Physician may be tried upon
giving his own Medicaments if the Patient miscarry; how he shall defend
himself, I know not: I have not seen any reason alleged, that is likely to
convert the Magistrates throughout Europe to permit it: or to gain a repeal of
the two last Edicts in Denmark against it: It Is an evil president to dispute
against wise Laws: it is worse to act against them: and what consequences it
will bring upon the Land, to see one Profession retrench upon another, let the
Lawyers judge: The beginner of this Novelty, the Lord Bacon, stopped not at
Natural Philosophy, but carried on his humor to attempt or project a change of
our Laws. I do recommend it to the consideration of our Sages in the Law, that
if Physic, Divinity and other Faculties be overthrown by a company of Wits,
whether it be probable that they shall long continue free from the attempts of
the Omniscient --

But I shall resume the examination of the remaining Arguments of my Adversary.

Because I often observe many squaring their Therapentic intentions according
to the Definition of the Fever, endeavoring to cool those that are in a
scorching heat, by breathing a vein, let them know, Cannot an Accident be the
product of a foregoing cause? Besides, whoever defined a Fever so as to make
its Genus to be An Accident?
that a Fever, whose essential nature is to be inquired into for the use of
man, is very erroneously defined an Accident: for a febrile heat is certainly
the product of a foregoing Cause which is primarily to be searched after, then
whatsoever depends thereon will quickly vanish.

Now this cutting an hole in venal vessels for the removing a bare Quality, is
all one as if one should lave out of the Pot ready to boil over a spiritous, or
some precious Liquor therein contained, to the intent it may thereby be
quailed, neglecting to withdraw the fire, the impulsive occasion of the violent
motion made therein. Do not they take the like absurd course, who do think to
cool the body in a Fever by throwing away whole Porringers of the Nectar of
life, never looking after the ablation of the Causo-poietick cause and focular
matter sited about the Stomach, which makes an estuation and effervescence in
all the other parts. That way of frigidation which pillageth the vitals,
increasing the malady, only obliquely abating a tedious quality, is never to be
approved by a Legitimate Physician. He that will bring to a moderation the
finger excessively heated from a thorn impacted therein, must extract the same,
otherwise he will take a wrong course by the use of mere frigefactives. So he
that will positively refrigerate in any preternatural heat, must eliminate that
spinous, aculeate, acid, acrid matter which goads the Archaeus, incensing it
that it becomes exorbitant, fretting, raging, Heautontimorumenos, gauling it
self at the presence of that which it abominates, never to be pacified till it
be excluded, or some extraordinary Sedative given (I mean not Opium vulgarly
prepared) which may for a time assuage its fury till it have leisure to thrust
out the unwelcome guest.

I could wish my Adversary, instead of consulting the Novum Organum of the Lord
Bacon, had been conversant in that more ancient one of Aristotle: he h^^ not
then committed so many errors in point of Ratiocination, as he now does, which
renders his discourse intricate, confused, and oftentimes impertinent, to the
great distraction of his Reader, and vexation of his Antagonist. He perpetually
mistakes through an Ignorantio Elenchi: he never apprehends what he opposes.
That the Galenists do define a Fever by a preternatural heat diffused through
the whole body, is true: They are contented to call that a Fever, which the
vulgar does so, and accordingly to define it: Not but they distinguish in
Fevers the Material and Formal cause thereof; as also the several Efficients
thereof: and in their Method of curing, except necessity put them upon another
procedure, they do always, and are obliged to do so by the Rules of their Art,
to remove the Cause of the Fever: and this is notorious to all that understand
the first Elements of Physic. They consider the evident, occasional
procatarctick Causes: they consider the Antecedent causes, which though they
are not the immediate and conjunct Causes of the Fever, yet dispose unto it;
and are of such importance as that they may often degenerate into immediate and
conjunct Causes: and, which is more, in the Cure they do not only regard the
Cause which gave birth unto, and produced the Disease, but that which does
foment and continue it, and that which may produce or increase it. Valles.
meth. med. l. 3 (...)
Censeri debet causa non quae facit, aut fecit solum, sed and quae faciet nisi
quis obstet. And although the curing of the Disease, or Fever, be the object
of their designs: yet As all wise men consider by what means the ends they
propose to themselves may be effected, so do they deliberate how they shall
effect their designs: and that is by removing the Cause of the Mal^dy: But as
in other designs it frequently happens, so here they often meet with
impediments, which must be removed, before they can prosecute their intentions
by direct means. Upon this account they are forced upon ma^^ (...) which they
confess are not immediately (...) of a Fever, which yet they pur^^^, because
without doing so, the indisposition either could not be cured, or not with such
safety as becomes prudent persons. Few of them ever bleed that I know of merely
for refrigeration, and the extirpation of the formal he^t, without regard to
the material cause of it, which is to be concocted and ejected by Nature.
Though Phlebotomy be but one operation, yet it produces sundry effects in the
body, and in order to each of them is both indicated, and practiced: For it
evacuateth that redundancy of blood, which frequently occasioneth diseases,
always is apt to degenerate into a vicious morbifick matter during the Fever,
and by an indirect and exorbitant motion to afflict some or other principal
parts to the great danger, if not destruction of the Patient: upon this account
we do use Phlebotomy in Fevers sometimes to diminish the Plethora, and so to
prevent the violence of the succeeding disease, and dangerous symptoms that
may ensue; and then the veins are too much distended, to facilitate and secure
the operation of subsequent Medicines that are used to evacuate the Antecedent
Cause, and to maturate and expedite the continent morbifick cause: Besides, it
promotes transpiration incredibly, gives a new motion to those humors which
together with the blood oppress and endanger the internal and principal parts,
it diverts them from the head, and draws them from the heart, lungs, stomach
and bowels into the habit of the body, whereby Nature being alleviated
prosecutes her recovery by maturation and expulsion of the peccant depraved
matter, deducing to its proper state that which is semi-putrid, and not
irrecoverably vitiated, and separating first, then exterminating what is
incorrigible: So the Patient recovers. Nor is there any thing more true than
this, which every Practitioner may daily observe in his practice, that Of all
the Medicaments which are used by Physicians, there is not any may compare for
its efficacy and utility with Phlebotomy: Valles, M^th. med. l. 4. c. 2.
so expedite, so facile, and so universal is it. The universality of its use
appears herein, that it evacuates the redundant, it alters the exorbitant
Fluxes of the peccant or deviating humors and blood: It retaxeth the vessels
and pores of the body, and refrigerates the habit thereof: And therefore is so
absolutely necessary in putrid Fevers, that though I do not say they are
incurable without it, yet I pity the languishing condition of such as omit it,
the violence of the symptoms being increased thereby, and the cure
procrastinated, to the great trouble and hazard of the sick, and his great
detriment afterward; for you shall ordinarily meet with a slow convalescence,
and the blood be so depraved by so long and violent an effervescence, that it
becomes remediless, and degenerates into an evil habit of body, Scorbute,
Dropsy, etc.

This being premised, (which is more clearly proved by Experience than Reason)
I answer to his Argument, that we do not go about only to refrigerate the
Patient, but to concoct and eject the morbifick matter: that we take the most
befitting course to exterminate that spinous offensive cause: and as upon the
prick of a Thorn, if part stick in the wound, and be buried therein, we proceed
to maturate and bring to a paculency the vitiated blood and humors inherent in
the part affected, and with the supp^^^^^d m^tter dr^^ out the fragment of the
Thorn; so we do in Feav^^s, (where the depraved humors are not so easily
sep^^^ted and extirpated, as in the prick of a Thorn) maturate the eject the
morbifick c^^se, and thereby atchieve the Cure: And I do profess my self to
concur with the Ancients in their Opinion, that there is a great Analogy
betwixt the generation of the Hypostasis in the Urine after a Fever, Id autem
ita esse aperte intelliges, considerans, quae partibus, in quibus suppurationem
molimur, contingunt. Ea enim alteratio similli^ae est concoctioni, quam in
materia putridarum febrium expectamus, nisi omnino est eadem. Valles. Method.
med. l. 4. c. 2.
and the production of purulent matter in an Apostimation; and that Fevers are
but a kind of Abscesse in the mass of blood: for the proof whereof I do remit
my Reader to Ballonius, de Hypostasi Vrinarum. Amongst the Ancients I find two
ways commonly practiced to extinguish this Febrile Heat, by a course
corresponding with the usual ways of extinguishing a fire; which are (...), by
substracting the fuel from it: thus they did Phlebotomise at once till the
Patient did swoone: the other (...), Galen. ^eth. medend. l. 9.
by quenching it: thus they gave them cold Water to drink largely, until the
sick grew pale and fell into a shivering: this last was not practiced till
there were manifest signs of concoction: But it is observable that upon either
of these Medicaments, they did expect that happy issue, that Nature thereupon
should presently discharge it self by sundry evacuations of the morbifick
matter: so that they did not thereby intend bare resignation, but the
extermination of the concocted febrile matter.

And thus much may suffice in answer to this Objection.

The last Objection he makes is this, as I shall form it.

The great Indications of the Galenists for Phlebotomy, are either Evacuation
of the redundant blood in a Plethora: or, the Revulsion and direct pulling back
of what is in flux, or flowed into any part already.

But neither of these Indications are valid, and oblige them to that practice:

Therefore the practice of Phlebotomy is not to be continued.

As to Phlebotomy in a Plethorick body, he thus explodes that:

If by plenitude be meant an excess of pure blood, p. 122.
I absolutely deny there is any such (...), or indication for Phlebotomy: for
during the goodness of this juice there must needs be perfect Sanity arising
from integrity of all the actions of the body, so that it may justly be reputed
madness to go about to broach this Balsome of life, weakening Nature thereby, as
long as there is health with abundance of strength. Imprimis notandum (says
Van Helmont in cap. de febr. p. 8.) ut nunquam vires peccare possint
abundantia, ne quidam in Methusalem: ita nec bonis sanguis peccat minuitate, eo
quod vires vitales and sanguis sint correlativa. i. e. We are to take special
notice that too much strength can never be offensive to any, yea, not to
Methusalem; no more can any one have too much blood, for as much as vital
strength and blood are correlatives. Well then it is plain, that whatsoever
sickness seems to indicate Phlebotomy upon the account of an (...), p. 123.
sanguineous superpletion, must needs come from an apostate juice generated by
vicious digestions, which being hostile to life irritates the Archaeus to frame
the Idaea of a disease, I would willingly know how this Archaus does frame the
Idaea of a disease? and what this Idaea of a Fever is? to return -- G. T. his
own words: Is it a Substance, or an accident? Material or Immaterial? That it
specificateth the disease, must be granted: But the notion is incomprehensible:
and this Scurvy Idea is more ridiculous than the Scurvy Qualities.
not as it is merely provoked by nimiety or plurality, but from the pravity of
the matter: wherefore the case is altered now, and the (...), signification or
demonstration of evacuating, does in a strait line respect the Cruor, or
Cacochymy, directing the Artist to reform, mundifie, and rid those impurities
contained in the seemingly corrupted marred juice, by proper means sequestring
the vile from the precious, not to let out indistinctly what comes next at
random to the furtive castration of the Eutony, lustiness, liveliness, and
strength of the Patient, which is to be preferred before all motives whatsoever.

The Analysis and Synthesis of in^nimate bodies, does not teach the Operatour
convincingly what may be done in those that are Animate.
It Is certainly known to those who are thoroughly versed in the Analysis and
Synthesis of the parts of bodies, that ebullition, aestuation, effervescence of
febrile liquors arising from a pleonasme of degenerate Sal. and Sul. etc. as
they would have it, may be appeased and allayed by Remedies assisting the
vitals to make separation, and afterward an exclusion every way of what is
reprobate, reserving what is acceptable. This being performed, there is no fear
that a plenitude simply of it self can do any harm, for hereby so expedite a
course is taken, that the overplus is in a short time sent packing away by
vomiting, stool, urine, expectoration and sweat: For this reason, considering
what strict abstinence the Patient is put upon in a Fever, it is very unlikely
a plenitude should be of any duration. Is it not then greater prudence in a
Physician to minorate what is superfluous by safe, profitable ways of
secretion, and excretion, still advancing the principal Agent, then for that
end to give vent indiscreetly to what comes next without any election, p. 124.
How much blood does he account to be a great Quantity? I do not know of any
Physician that takes away such great Quantities, as to create these dangers.
incommodating, if not hazarding the loss of the vital principles. For believe
it, whosoever has any great quantity of blood taken from him, either rues it
for the present, or hereafter: Let him that is heterodox prate what he will,
alleging examples of those sturdy, lusty bodies, which have hereby received
immediate succor; I can make good by practice (and challenge any one to come
to that; otherwise let him forbear his Garrulity) whosoever is cured by a
Lancet in this sort, Can you make good by practice, that Phlebotomy is the
cause of these subsequent evils.
is either prone to relapses, or to live more crazy in his younger or elder
years, although for some short time he may not by reason of a robust ingrafted
constitution be sensible of these inconveniences.

As for Phlebotomy in order to Revulsion, p. 126.
he thus explodes it. Another pretended wa^ for sanguimission is Revulsion, by
which they say a violent flux of morbifick liquor into any noble parts, is
intercepted: for this end they use the Lancet in a Pleurisy, Peripneumony, or
any inward inflammation: But how far they err herein, is well known to the
best Practitioners: for although I confess they do sometimes in the beginning
suppress, and as it were crush the aforesaid diseases, yet is it done
accidentally, very uncertainly, rather by way of distraction of the Nature for
the loss of its substantial treasure, than from any true Revulsion or direct
pulling back of what is in flux, or already flowed in. It Is true, where the
vessels are depleted, a repletion is forthwith made ob fugam vacui, to avoid a
vacuity, but the supply is from what comes next: for as intro as well as intro
for as. However there is no straight immediate Revulsion intended from the part
affected to the Orifice.

It seems strange to me that any man should pretend thus long to have
diligently attended on the practice of Physic, and yet never have seen, or
have the impudence to deny that there can be any such thing as a surcharge of
Blood, which is that which Physicians call a Plethora or Plenitude. But the
continuance of these Baconical Philosophers will in time free us from any
admiration of this kind. In Greece, when the Athletae or Wrastlers were
publicly maintained, the observation indeed was more facile than now, but
every Country almost yields frequent cases of such an indisposition:
particularly it is easily to be remarq^ed in strong, healthy and plethorick
Children, whose sudden death, ^s it often arises from no other cause, so it
astonisheth the vulgar, and usually raises in them suspicions of Wit^hcraft.
Hippocrates, and Galen having taken notice of the evil consequences attending
this habit of body, do advise the owner to attempt the change of it, though it
be accompanied with the most perfect health and vigor imaginable. Hippocr.
sect. 1. ephesians. 3.
(...). And this habit of body, and fullness of blood, which he says would do
Methusalem no harm, is observed by those who had daily opportunity to see the
sad experience of it, ^lato de repub. l. 3.
to abbreviate the life, and occasion many diseases, as Apoplexies, Cardiacal
Syncopes, and Ruptures of veins in the Lungs, Galen in exhortat. ad bona^ arts
descend.
Squinancies, Pleurisies, etc. So that Hippocrates condemns that habit of body
again in his book De Alimento: and Celsus concurs with him therein. C. Celsus
Medicin. l. 1. c. 1.
Ea corpora, quae more eorum [Athletarum] repleta sunt, celerrime and senescunt
and aegrotant. i. e. Those bodies which are dieted and brought up to an
Athletick habit, do soonest of all decline into sickness and premature old age.
I never read of any Physician, who in his directions for health recommended
unto his Patient that course of life wherein the Athletae were bred up, thereby
to acquire such a Plethoric habit: and whatever the present sanity were which
they enjoyed as to strength of body, their intellectuals were very dull; and
the most understanding persons would have thought it prudential in such a case
to broach some of the Balsome of life, and weaken Nature thereby, rather than
to live in a perpetual danger of such perilous diseases as that Euexy
subjecteth men unto: But our Helmontian does think otherwise.

If such an habit of body be thus perilous during perfect health, how ought a
Physician to apprehend it upon the first approaches of sickness? Does not then
Nature add to the redundance of blood by a defective transpiration; whereas the
veins are so full as not to be able to contain more? Is not the pulse weak,
slow, and oppr^ssed, and the Heart so debilitated as not to be able to
discharge it self of the Blood which flows into it, and in danger to stagnate
in the Lungs, or coagulate in the Ventricles? Can there seem any thing more
agreeable to common reason in this case, than to practice Phlebotomy, whereby
Nature is at present alleviated, the surcharge of blood abated, and the
imminent dangers prevented? Is it not prudential, were a little blood so
precious a thing, and the loss thereof attended with some small irrepairable
debility? Is it not, I say, a part of prudence, to submit to lesser (though
certain) inconveniences, then to run an almost inevitable hazard of the
greatest imaginable? I read not that the famous Milo arrived to the years of
Methusalem, nor yet to those of Hippocrates: though I am apt to think he was so
solicitous for to preserve his strength in its vigor, as not to have been much
Phlebotomized: Ae^im. var. Histor. l. 9. c. 31.
At the Olympic Games being Victor, and going to receive the Garland from the
judges, he fell down dead suddenly, and was thence carried to his Grave. It is
to be supposed, according to our Helmontian, that in that Euexy of body,
something so virulent or odious put the Archaeus into such a fury that it ran
mad and destroyed him: whereas had it been sublimate or Arsenic, it would not
have been half so exasperated, or hasty. It Is a most humoursome amd senseless
Kitchen boy, that no man knows how to please: Suppose that the Brain might be
in him a little oppressed with a Vertigo, or some petty disorder, must this
capricious Duumvirate immediately produce the Idae^ of no gentler a disease
than an Apoplexy, or Epilepsy? But to pass from these phantastic causes, the
allegation whereof least becomes an Experimental Philosopher, I shall instance
in the effects of Bleeding in a Plethora.

Anton. Benivenius Medicinal. observat. c. 69.
Men commonly attribute much to the Pulse in the discovery of diseases: If that
be weak, low and small, they frequently presage death or mortal dangers: if it
be full and strong, they give hopes or assurance of recovery. Yet we meet with
one Philip, a drunken and corpulent fellow, who lying sick in his bed, I found
his Pulse so weak, that it was scarce perceivable, and I should have t^ought
him near death, had not the high color of his face, the fullness of his veins,
and his eyes ready to start out, together with the setting of his teeth, all
proceeding from redundance of blood, hindered me from passing such a
Prognostic. Upon due examination of circumstances, I concluded the whole
distemper to arise from a Plenitude and that there was no such effectual remedy
for him as speedy Phlebotomy: His friends were much against it, apprehending
that the weakness of his condition was such, that it would rather hasten his
death, than cure him: but at last they did assent thereunto, and I caused him
to be let blood. And immediately he recovered, the decay of his strength and
malady not being more sudden, then was his recovery.

This observation of Boniv^nius is confirmed by the like accidents and
resembling cures, which had fallen under the observation of Dodonaeus, as he
relates there in his Annotations; particularly he says, Adfui and ego olim
homini ebrioso, qui cum ad tantam plenitudinem venisset, ut quodam modo
strangulari videretur, etiam mutus factus suit. Huic vero and sanguis largiter
detractus e communi dextri brachii vena, mox loquelam and sanitatem restituit.

It were endless to transcribe cases of this nature: nor do I believe that
there is any understanding Practitioner who will deny that it is possible for an
excess of blood to become prejudicial to a man. I proceed against our
Helmontian: He says, that nimiety or plurality does not offend in such cases,
but the pravity: and that the pravity is to be cured by proper means
sequestring the vile from the precious, and afterward excluding it by vomit,
stool, urine, sweat, and expectoration. -- I answer, that the case here being
put concerning persons that are Plethorical, and that Quoad vasa, when the
vessels are so full that Nature languisheth under the burden, and is not able
to discharge even the vital operations, by reason of its excess: though the
Blood may have some mixture of depraved humors, and though they may have
occasioned that ebullition or irregular motion of the blood, yet is not the
disease ordinarily to be cured without Phlebotomy: I will not deny but that
such cases may be alleged, as the Patients may have recovered out of those
kinds of distempers, not only without Phlebotomy, but without any help at all.

I am willing to grant that the Diatritarii, or Egyptians (who were prohibited
by Law to administer any manner of Medicament till after three days were
passed) that many did recover under their hands: Aristot. polit. l. 3. c. 2.
though I believe that in Apoplexyes and Squinancies multitudes must have
miscarried: G^len. adv. ^rasis^ratum ^^ 4.
Had not Erasistratus done great Cures, his fame had never equalled that of
Hippocrates: So Petron was a man of renown, yet perhaps what Celsus avoweth of
the last, C. Celsus Medicin. l. 3 c. 9.
may be fixed upon them all. Plures, si protinus a principiis excepit,
interemit. Thus much I am willing to grant, when judicious men are the
Physicians, (...) was (...) first pr^^ess^d to (...) j^c^nd^. C. Cells. l. 3. c.
4.
and instead of one Medicament do substitute another. But what Asclepiades or
Erasistratus might do in their days (when fastings, bathings, oylings, and the
like were the so much the vulgar practice in health, that Patients willingly
submitted thereunto in sickness) I cannot believe that an ignorant Helmontian,
or other cheating Chemist, or illiterate Experimentator of this Age can do.
Physic is a PROFESSION wherein we commonly ice Miracles, the events of
diseases being such, that Nature oftentimes transcends our Art, (...). quos
(...) non resti^ui^, temeritas adjuvat. C. Celsus Med c. l 3. c. 9.
and Imagination: And sundry unexpected Medicaments (undoubtedly rash) do
effe^t Cures that the most rational and Methodical procedures have failed in.
Nothwith^tanding all this, I do ^ot see that we ought to presume upon
monstrosities; or regulate our practice by such contingent Cures: And I scarce
believe that any discreet person would either put his life upon such an
adventure, or take it well from us should we either relinquish or persuade him
thereunto. I say then, that in a Plethorick body, suppose we that it is an
Ephemera, or Synochus imputris, it is well done of the Physician to bleed the
Patient, least those Fevers (which we confess, even without Phlebotomy, to be
safe) least the Diary fever should degenerate through some secret
indisposition of the Patients body, or some error committed by him, into an
Hectic or putrid Fever: Non est tam^n negligenda haec febris Ephemera quamvis
velocis and bonae terminationis sit, Forre^t. obs. l. 1. obs 3. in Scholio.
cum soleat propagines malas gignere, and in alias febres transmutari^ and
licet cito termin^tur, non tamen inter morbos acu^os reponenda: quia^ car^t
malis accidentibus. Si error contingat in curatiene vel per medicum imperitum,
vel aegro^um periculum est ne in H^cticam transeat, si biliosae ^uerit
temperaturae, qui egrotat: In aliis vero in putrid^m. This is confirmed by many
observations, and allowed of as true by Physicians: No less true is it that a
Synochus simplex changes into a putrid Fever, and Squinancies: as Forrestus, ^
and Experience demonstrates. As for diseases accompanie^ by, or occasion^d
from a particular conflux of blood (though some humors also be depraved) unto
any part, as Apoplexies, Squinancies, etc. for any man to think that such
distempers can be cured without Phlebotomy, is direct madness: for all other
evacuations (by emeto-cath^rti^s; which every body cannot endure, Si^ omnia
membra vehementer resoluta sunt ( (...) apoplexia) sanguinis detractio
veloccidit, vel liberat. Aliud curationis genus vix unquam sanitatem restituit;
sepe mortem tantum differt. C. Celsus Medicin. l 3. c. 27.
nor is the Apoplectick in a condition to swallow) or stool, urine^ or sweat,
and expectoration, are either useless, or too tedious to depend upon in such
indispositions. Neither is that to any purpose which this Baconical Impostor
says, that after such a strict abstinence as the Patient is put upon in a
Fever, it is very unlikely a plenitude should be of any duration. Itaque
mittitur, non quia multa subest copia, sed quia ea quae subest, tunc est
inutilis and noxia. Valle^. Method, med^ l. 2 c 3.
For if the Fever be such as is accompanied with a particular defluxion upon
any principal part, the effects of that abstinence will signify nothing: for
the party will dye ( in all probability) before he can reap any benefit by such
abstinence: no benefit accrues by abstinence, but after some time: whereas the
malady permits no delay. It is notorious that suppuration is not the effect of
a few hours: and that pain does attract (explain the notion how you will, the
Phenomenon is manifest) so that it is not to be conceived how so acute a
disease should admit of a ling^ing cure. The residue does not need any answer:
for to say that whosoever loose^h any blood does rue it first or last, is a
matter as easily denied by an intelligent Physician, as it is avowed by one
that it is not so: If a prudent man advise it, there is not any danger
(abstracting from casualties) if the Patient and those about him do their duty.
These last circumstances are such that Hippocrates placed them in the first of
his Aphorisms. (...). It is not impossi^le but that a Patient may be so
debilitated with his malady, and the means used for his recovery, that he
continue afterward infirm: if he refuse thereupon to take that Analeptick
Physic in order to a perfect convalescence, whatever ensues is neither the
default of the Doctor, nor the evil consequence of Phlebotomy: The same I may
say in case either the sick party be not tractable, or those about him malapert
or negligent, or some extraordinary casualty do fall out. Potestautem id, dum
solum est, non movere, qued junctum alii^ maxim movet. C. Celsus l. 1. in
praef.
For where many concurrent causes are requisite to the producing of an effect,
if it succeed not, we are not to blame what did operate, but what failed.

As to Revulsion that which he says is very weak: -- G. T, averrs that the
best Practitioners take it for an Error: It Is no great vanity to pretend to
know more than a Baconical Philosopher: I do say, that no experienced Physician
ever denied the operation though since the tenet of the Circulation of the
Blood the manner how such an effect does succeed admits of some dispute, and is
obscure. We the silly followers of Galen and the Ancients do think it an
imbecility of judgment, for any to desert an experimented practice, because he
does not comprehend in what manner it is effected. In eruptions of blood and
Catarrhs every one sees the thing is done: and that the Fuga vacui is not the
occasion of the subsequent blood flowing to the orifice of the vein, I believe
those to whom he dedicated his Book will assure him. How perfect our Cures are
continual trials demonstrate: How little confidence there is to be placed in
the Brags of -- G. T. after his ten years practice, any man may determine by
taking a due estimate of his Ignorance.

Having thus examined all his Arguments against Phlebotomy, I come now to give
our Reasons for it: But before I proceed to them, it is necessary that I give
my Reader some account of, The quantity of Blood in Humane bodies. The several
Qualities of the aforesaid Blood. The manner of its Generation.


As to the Quantity of Blood that is to be found in Humane bodies, Gassendus
holds that the utmost thereof exceeds not five pounds: but he is justly
reproved for that error (and for intermedling with Medicinal debates) by
Riolanus; I. Riola. opus^. Anat. nova, i^ rot. adv. G^ssend. p. 174.
who avows, that in suffocating diseases he had taken away much more than that
within the space of twelve hours, without indangering the Patients life. To
relinquish therefore these impertinent Naturalists (whose discourses in Physic
have done more hurt than good; being accommodated generally to some prejudicate
Hypothesis they take up, or founded upon a narrow experience) let us see what
Artists teach us, Alex. Massario^ de febr. c. ^9. Io. Riol^h Enchirid. Anatom.
l. 2. c. 27.
Avicenna and several of the Arabians do hold, that there are ordinarily in a
man twenty five pounds of blood, and that a man may bleed at the nose twenty
pounds, and not dye: but if the flux exceed that, after the loss of twenty five
pounds he dies inevitably. M^bius fund^ med. c. 12. sect. 18.
Moebius does allow or twenty four pounds to be the usual quantity: Homo
staturae decentis ad libras xxiv. sanguinis in corpore habet. Riol^nus imagines
there may be in such a person fifteen or sixteen pound, Riolan. de circulat
sang^ (in Antropograph.) c. 15. p. 585.
at most but twenty in a French m^n, though in a German, he says, Plempius
supposed there might be thirty. In an healthy sanguine person, being in the
prime of his years, Marquardus Slegelius does so calculate the matter, M.
^legelius de sangu. motu. c. 13. p. ^04.
that he concludes there cannot be above twenty or eighteen pounds; and that
the generality of men contain but fifteen. Dr. Lower de Cord. c. 3. p. 115,
116.
Doctor Lower in his excellent Treatise Of the Heart, doubts whether any man
has twenty five pounds of blood in his body: and says, that according to
Anatomists, the quantity seldom exceeds twenty four pounds, or is less than
fifteen.

Perhaps the consideration of such fluxes of blood as spontaneously happen may
give some light unto the controversy, and contribute most to the decision of
the grand one, concerning the prejudice that may arise from the loss of Blood
by Phl^botomy. It is recorded by Matthew. de Gradi, that he had under his cure a
lean, slender and seemingly Phlegmatic Nun, ^^^^nck. Obs. med. l. 1 p. 172
which by the Nose, Mouth and Urine did void at least eighteen pound of blood;
and yet there remained so much in her, that upon the application of
Cupping-glasses, they were instantly filled with Blood: and he recovered her
notwithstanding that l^ss of blood. Brassavolus relates how he had in cure one
Diana a Lady of the House of ^ste, Art. Mus^ Brassavolu^ c^mment. ad Aphor. 23.
l. 5.
which bled so much at the Nose, that he saved and weighed eighteen pounds,
besides what was lost in the clothes applied to her: so that the whole quantity
might amount to twenty two pounds. He recovered her by the use of several
Remedies, one whereof was Phlebotomy. Marcellus Donatus does avow, that he
weighed eighteen pounds of blood which issued from the Nose of a certain Cook
of the Cardinal Gonz^ga's; Marcell. Donatus de vario. li^ c 23.
who was recovered to as perfect health and as good an habit of body, Amat.
Lusit. cur^t. 100. c^nt. 2. and cur. 60. cent. 7.
as he ever enjoyed befored. Amatus Lusitanus gives an account of one in a
Quartane, which bled at the Nose within five days twenty pounds: and of
another who bled in like manner, within the space of six days forty pounds:
whom yet he cured by Phlebotomy. Montanus says he cured one of the Emeroids,
which bled every day for forty five days, Sch^n^k. obs. med. l 3. p. 312
two pounds of blood, and more. Arculanus does tell of one Woman that avoided
by the Womb in three days twenty five pounds of blood, Sh^^ck. Obs. Medic l.
4. p. 614.
and yet recovered. Almericus Blondelus cured in a very short space a Soldier
who was wounded under the right Arm-pit unto the Lungs: Alm^r. Blondelus de
venae ^ectione, c. 2. p. 30.
after the man had lain without sense or motion many hours, on a sudden there
issued an incredible quantity of blood out of his mouth. The like incredible
fluxes of blood, in men and women, he professes to have observed many times.
Forest. Obs. Medic. l 1^. Obs. 14. cum Scholio.
Forrestus relates how a Gentleman that was his Patient did bleed at the nose
in three days time, about twelve pounds of blood: and was recovered as well as
ever. And when William Prince of Orange was wounded in the throat by an
Assassine, he bled at the Iugulars before the flux could be stopped (which was
not done in several days) twelve pounds of blood: and was perfectly recovered
to his strength again. Id. ibid. Obs. 12.
He also tells of another Gentleman, that having drunk Wine-must, fell into
such an Haemorrhagy at the nose, that he bled without intermission six pounds;
and was cured by Phlebotomy, and other befitting Medicaments. Alex. Massarias
de febr. c. 29.
Massarias did see a young Lady of twelve year old, which avoided at the nose
about twelve pounds of blood: but fell afterward into a Cachexy. To conclude,
in the words of Io. Riolanus: I. Riolan. inter opusc. nova Anat. adv.
Gassendum. p. 108.
Imo december vel duodecim libras per nares, vel haemorroidas, per uterum in
mulieribus effundi intra sex octove horas sine vitae detrimento quotidie
observamus.

As to the Quality of the Blood, it is observable, that there is a great
variety in the color and consistence thereof, even in men of perfect health:
many upon Phlebotomy convince us that their blood is seemingly bad, whereas
they are not molested with any distemper at all, but enjoy as entire a sanity,
and are as free from diseases as those whose blood is to appearance better. I
have elsewhere given an account of several Phenomenon to be remarked upon the
burning of Blood: which Observations are the more considerable, in that I. I.
Becherus has published a great mistake about it: I. I. Becherus Physic.
^ubterr^n. l. 1. sect 5 c. 1. p. 5^.
viz. Siccum sanguinem in igne ut lardum fl^grare, and absumi, non minori
celeritate quam ipsum olium and vini spiritus; and in hoc quidem balsamino
spiritu and igne, totius sanguinis vis and bonitas consistit, quoque corrupto
aut alterato, totius ejus crasis alteratur. But I say that it is not requisite
the blood of every healthy person should burn so: and it is evident by those
Experiments of mine, that there is a very great diversity betwixt the blood of
several persons, as to inflammability; and I know a most fair Lady, whose blood
will not burn at all, only crackles, that enjoyes a constant health beyond most
of the Sex, excepting a pain at her stomach: and I have observed that to be an
usual consequent to such blood. I shall not illustrate this matter at present
by demonstrating the great discrepancies of the blood in several healthy
persons, by mixing it with sundry liquors, wherein the diversity of Phenomenon
does manifest the great variety thereof. It is observed by many Practitioners,
that in healthy persons such blood does often appear upon Phlebotomy, as to the
Eye seems bad.

Almericus Blondelus de venae sectio^e. c. 1. p. 8.
I have seen many (says Blondelus) who being casually hurt in the Eye by a
tennis-ball, or by some other accident wounded and bruised, have been let
blood; and the blood which issued out seemed corrupt: yet have not these
persons had any thing of a Fever on them, nor been some of them sick of twenty
years before. And Ballonius observed in several Ladies that out of humor
rather than any indisposition were let blood in May, Ballonius Epidem l. 1. p.
101^ 102.
and six or seven poringers taken from them, that their blood was very putrid.
And he avows that in the most fair Ladies there generally is found such blood
as looks impure and evil: Id. ibid. l. 2. p. 192.
yet that such persons enjoy a greater, or at least as perfect an health, and
live as long as any that have a better-coloured blood. It is granted by
Slegelius, that oftentimes upon Phlebotomy the blood which issues forth may
seem impure, and yet the Patient be healthy. M. Sl^gel. de sanguinis motu. c 9.
p. 75.
Nonnunquam satis insignis impuritas inest sanguini, ex cava educto, nullis
gravioribus symptomatis homini molestis, ex quo patet non tantum semper
periculum imminere, si nonnullae sordes sanguini admisceantur. I shall repeat
here again the strange blood which Simon Pauli observed in an healthy person.

In the year 1654. a Citizen of Coppenhagen, Simon Paull^ de febr. malign.
sect. 11.
aged almost sixty years, being accustomed to be let blood every year in May,
for prevention of the diseases incident in Summer, would needs be Phlebotomized
in the presence of Me, and his Wife and Children: the Surgeon having pricked
the Mediane vein, the blood as it issued o^t had a peculiar but most noisome
smell, transcending any rotten Egg, or stinking Ulcer, etc. which was so
offensive to all in the room, that we were forced to remedy it by burning some
perfumes. As soon as the Blood was cold in the porrenger, the stench ceased,
and the blood seemed to be of a very good consistence, and of so radiant a
Scarlet, that it equalled or rather exceeded the best red that is to be seen in
the most beautiful Flowers: it contained but little serum. This passage of his
recalls to my mind the serum of the blood of a Maid, of a sanguine color, and
perfect health, excepting a pain in her stomach: the blood which I caused to be
taken from her seemed laudable, and burned very vividly; but the serum being
set to coagulate, seemed in consistence like to tallow, and smelt like
thereunto. In another Child that died of an Hydrops thoracis, I observed the
serum (as it heated) to sent extremely ill, and with a penetrancy, as if it had
been Vitriol burning: it would not coagulate though I boiled it; but afterward
when it had stood to be cold, it did jelly. I know a Gentlewoman of
extraordinary beauty, troubled with nothing but Morphew or Vitiligo alba on her
Arms in some places: being let blood, it appeared to be all serum almost, and
very little of any crimson m^ss was in it, and that not so tenacious or fibrous
as is usual; though it were as well colored as any is: I boiled away all the
serum (which made up about six ounces, or more) and it would never inspissate
or coagulate. The variety of Blood is further illustrated by the case of Henry
van Bueren a Brewers man, Regnerus de Graes de ge^nitol. p 84, 85.
who in perfect health had his Blood such, that though it came out of the vein
with a ruddy color, yet as it cooled all the serum did turn lacteous, and
resembled Milk: though the sanguineous Mass retained its due color: and this
was constant to him whether he bled by Phlebotomy or any other way. A case like
unto this is related by Bartholin from Ioh. Bapt. Caballaria. Th B^rth^li^.
Spiceleg. de vas. Lym^^. c 6.
Concerning the variety of blood in healthy persons, it is further observable:
that not only in some small wounds admit of no cure, or a diffi^ult one:
whilst others heal with more facility; in the same persons, when they are
young, wounds will be easily cured even by the first intention, and conjoyning
of the lips thereof: And afterward as they grow more in years, every
superficial wound gives them much trouble; Van der Linden Disp. Physiol. 39..
22.
but when they become old every scratch degenerates into a foul Ulcer:
notwithstanding that the Patient all this while commits not any error in his
diet, nor is sensible otherwise or any alteration in his body, or blood. In
fine, diligent observation will assure any man, that not only the Quantity of
blood does vary in sundry persons, but even the Quality, according to the age,
temperament, and diet of the parties; nay even according unto the
seasonablen^ss and season of the years. Nor shall I exclude the pass^onately
angry, or melancholic, or phlegmatic from a latitude, yet does their blood
exceeding^y vary in the porrenger^ and consequently in the veins. Van d^r
Linden Disp. Phy^iol. 41.. 22.
I have oftentimes seen (and so has Van derLinden) that in some healthy
persons the blood has been of a redness equally florid from the top to the
bottom: in some there has appeared only some blackish spots at the bottom,
which no conversion to the open Air would rectify into a florid crimson: and
perhaps some Observations may inform a man that the florid color in the
surface of the blood arises from a thinner sort of blood, of a peculiar kind,
which radiates through a subtle pellicle on the top, and when the blood is
turned topsie-turvey, it is not the impressions of the Air that restores the
decayed color in the more black blood^ but the assent of this Ichorous blood
through the more black and fibrous mass. I have some grounds for this
suggestion; but I never could see any pellicle or thin concretion upon the
turned blood, and to the defect thereof I have been willing to attribute the
Phenomenon, when the turned blood has not equalled in floridness the first
superficies. Some have attributed that florid color to the concretion and
shooting of some volatile Salts in the surface of the Blood: Simon Paulli de
febr. malign.
and think that Ki^cher mistook those saline striae for Worms in his Microscope.

Besides this difference in the Mass of Blood as to several Individuals, it may
not be amiss to consider the difference that is betwixt the Blood in sundry
vessels and parts of the body. It is the most common tenet amongst Anatomists,
that the Blood of the Arteries differs very much from that of the Veins, Harvey
Exercit. Anat. 2. ad Riolan.
Though Harvey seems to deny it with much confidence, and appeals to Experience
for the proof of his Opinion: yet the Generality, as Doctor Ent, Walaeus, and
Lower, grant there is a great difference in the color of them, and that the
Arterious blood is the most florid, the venous is of a darker red: Besides this
difference in color, there is a greater which arises from the quantity of
serum which abounds in the Arterious blood more than in the venous. Aurel.
Severinu^ Epidoch. de aq. peric. sect. 8.
Comprobavimus in accepto per nos ex crebris Arteriotomiis cruorum duplem ferme
compertam ichoris portionem: qua fit fortassis ut crediderit Auctor lib de
util. respir. Sanguinem Arterialem non concrescere velut venalem; quanquam and
nos eum concrescere non semel observavimus. B^rthol Spic. 1 de vasis Lymphat.
c. 7.
So Aurelius Severinus: with whom Bartholin agrees. And Doctor Ent says it is
more dilated than the venovs. Ent de circul. sang. p. 106. and 267^
Besides this, there is a discrepancy in the venous blood it self: for in the
Lungs the Blood acquires by the mixture of the Air a tenuity of parts and
florid color exceeding any other venous Blood: Reald. Columbus Anatom. l xi.
c. 2.
this Columbus first observed, and gave this reason for the color and great
change which is made in the Blood by passing the Lungs; proceeding to an
imagination that the vital spirits in the Arterious blood might be the result
of this intermixture of Air with the Blood in the Lights: Willi^ in Exercitat.
de sang. accensione, Lower de cord. c. 3.
Most of whose opinion is taken up by Doctor Willis of late, and Doctor Lower.
Besides this there is a discrepancy betwixt the Blood of the Vena porta
commonly and that of the Vena Cava: which is not barely supposed by Riolanus;
but yielded by B^rtholin: Sanguinem in cava prope cor puriorem esse illa qui in
vena portae continetur, Bar^holin. Spiceleg. de vas. Lymphat. c. 7.
omnibus in confesso est qui circulum norunt. Upon this account it is, that by
the Emerods there is often discharged a black faeculent blood, to the great
benefit of the Patient: but whenever it is florid, the effusion thereof
brings a great debility (sometimes very lasting) unto many persons. May I be
allowed here to take notice of the Observation of Spigelius concerning the
Saluatella: Spigel. de fab. corp. hum. l. 5. c. 7.
that the Blood which issues thereat is more florid and Arterious than any can
be drawn from the greater veins: this he attributes to the frequent Anastomoses
that are betwixt the Arteries and Veins in the remote parts of the body:
Vesling ep. 30. and Van der Linden Select. ^ed. c. 13. se and. 423.
wherein he was defended by Veslingius, and Van der Linden. Doctor Harvey
observed in the most healthy and robust persons a certain muccaginous humor to
jelly upon the surface of their Blood, which he esteemed to be the most
spiritous part thereof, others take it to be not an excrementitious Phlegm, but
indigested Chyle: Maebius fund^m med. c. 12 p. 258, 259.
concerning this Maebius does profess, he never observed any of it in the blood
drawn, or issuing from the veins in the head: but frequently in that let out of
the arms, and most of all in that which has been taken by Phlebotomy in the
feet. It has been observed, that the Blood which has issued from the head at
the nose has been of a laudable color and consistence, B^lloni^a Epidem. l.
1. p. ^8^
when that which has been let out at the same time by Phlebotomy has seemed
impure: And the like difference has been taken notice of betwixt the
Menstruous evacuations of Women, and the blood taken from their arms.

This variety in the blood of several persons oftentimes is a cause of that
discrepancy which is to be in the blood of Men that are sick, in so much that
when sundry men are afflicted with the same Malady, yet may it happen so, that
there be little or no resemblance found in their blood. Oftentimes it is
observed that in ^utrid fevers the blood that is let out by Phlebotomy is
seemingly good. B^llon. Epid. l. 2. p 192.
Saepe ad speciem and visum purus est, qui aliqui (...) malus est. Vt contra
impurus cernitur ^ specie, qui non ita (...) malus. The blood often seems to be
good, when it is essentially corrupted and noxious: and it seems often to be
bad, when as yet it is incorrupt, and alimental. In malignant and pestilential
Fevers the blood is sometimes good to see to, whilst yet the sick languish
under most violent symptoms, and commonly such blood is of an evil
prognostic. Pessimum signum est, and timoris plenum, cum sanguis vena scissa
extrahitur, Petrus a C^stro de febr. puncticulari. p. 90.
si purus, rubicundus, and inculpatus educatur, venenositatem superare indicum
est, aut putredinem in penitioribus cordis latitare. In me ipso olim
observatum; nam ter per hanc febrem misso per venam sanguine, nulla prorsus
putredinis nota appar^bat, aliis signis immani ferocitate saevientibus. In like
manner does Simon Paulli observe such outward goodness of blood to be a sign of
malignity in a Fever, Simon Paulli de febr. malign.. 11, 14.
and to be of an ill presage: which he illustrates with the case of an ancient
man, fifty six years old, who being sick of a Fever (which the Doctor
concludes to have been pestilential) was let blood: that which issued out was
so florid, that it transcended what any pencil could paint, or pen describe now
out of any Artery, or the Lungs ever surpassed it: after it had stood twenty
four hours, the mass was all coagulated, and no serum to be seen: the Patient
died suddenly and without any pangs of death a little after. With this does
that Observation somewhat correspond Coyttarus does make (though he take it for
no ill presage) that in Epidemical pestilential Fevers, at the beginning if
they be phlebotomised, the blood of the Patient will seem very good and sound,
but in the progress it will come out putrilaginous. Coyttarus de febr. pu pur.
p. 247.
Circa morborum Epidemialium principia -- sanguis si educatur, ruber and sano
similis apparet -- quoties iterum and tertio mit^itur, corruptior, quam prius
elicitur -- This he illustrates with Instances, and makes this Hypothesis (most
judiciously) the foundation of his Method to cure such Fevers by letting the
sick blood in the progress not beginning of the Disease: And undoubtedly if
then the blood do not seem corrupted but florid, it must be from some venenate
or heterogeneous mixture which advances the Native red, as Spirit of Vitriol
does that of Conserv^d Roses.

It has been observed, that the blood in the progress of Fevers has seemed
from time to time upon Phlebotomy to grow worse and worse, even on the day
before a natural Crisis. Almar. Blond^lu^ de ven^t sectione. p 8.
Quoties enim contigit videre in continentibus seu Synochis, and continuis,
sanguinem multoties and die ante Crisin emissum priore misso deteriorem, and
tamen perfectam factam, and ad salutem aegrotantis jndicationem, ac sine
recidiva?

Ballonius observes that many people in the most fatal Sicknesses have bled
pure and to appearance good blood, whose Bowels and Lungs have been found (upon
dissection) vitiated and rotten: Others have had their blood extremely
depraved, in whose vitals no default could be found. Plurimis impurissimus
sanguis detractus est, B^llon. Epid. l. 2. p. 191.
imo nunquam fere purus, quibus tamen mortuis and sectis parts omnes satis
integrae sunt deprehensae. Aliis fere semper purus, quibus tamen viscera and
pulmones maxim putres sunt inventi. In a Pleuritic that dyed I observed once
(besides that his Lungs grew naturally to his sides) that all the lest lobe of
his Lungs were corrupted and all reduced to a most fae^id purulency, that the
which he avoided in great quantities at his mouth, and upon Phlebotomy was very
well colored and seemingly laudable. My Author goes on: Scitu valde dignum
est, qui fiat ut multis quibus putrefacta poene viscera sunt reperta, Id. ibid.
l. 1. p. ^00.
laudabilis sanguis detractus fuerit, item and viris, and mulieribus multis
(...), pallidis ac fere virentibus, cum alioqui judicasses sanguinem non ahsimi
lem colori (cum quale alimentum, id est su^cus in venis, talis color
efflorescat) tamen storentissimus sanguis detractus fuerit non serosus nimium,
non subviridis and virore pallidus, -- Multos videmus scabie infectos, p. 101.
aut simili vitio, quibus certo affirmamus nos impurum sectione venoe sanguinem
detracturos, and tamen in ista defaedatione cutis, illibatus incorruptusque
sanguis est, and opinionem spemque fallit eventus. Nos Elephanticis saepe
l^ud^bilem sanguinem detraximus. Quanquam fieri potest, ut specie laudabilis
sanguis appareat, cum intestinum aliquod vitium in eo delitescat, quod quidam
in habitu corporis, and praesertim in partibus delicatioribus, ut in facie cum
ultimo elaboratur, and in rorem convertitur, tum demum se profert and exhibet.
Praeterea siquis splenicus est, aut Empyicus, manente in venis sanguine puro,
non desinit esse pallidus, emaciatus, subviridis, aut nigricans, quia non in
massa sanguinis vitium and causa labis est, sed in alia part.

In like manner Blondelus observed that after a Dysentery of two months
standing, accompanied with a Singultus, and continued Fever, the Marquess De
Ceuvres did upon Phlebotomy avoid at the Arm very laudable blood, whilst that
of his stools seemed to be extremely corrupted. Almaric. Blondelus de venae
sectione. p. 68, 69.
His superaddo sanguinem detractum omnimodas puritatis notas retinuisse, a sero
been repurgatum.

Dr. Willis de ^ebr. c. 1.
Doctor Willis after he has made excellent use of those two old Galenical
Comparisons betwixt the Blood, Wine and Milk; adds this accurate and true
relation concerning the morbid discrepancy of Blood: Thus the Blood, like Milk,
in its perfection, as it cools separates into the several substances of a
florid red on the surface, a thicker filamentous subsidence, and a serous
liquor: But if it be much depraved, when it separates in the Porringer it
discovers it self in a different aspect, and each part assumes another shape:
for that cremor which coagulates on the top, sometimes is white, sometimes
green, En^mvero superficies candicans gelatinae similis in emisso sangui^e,
plerum^que in morbosis condensata conspicitur, and vi^^ cori ins^ar crassam
lentamque; saepe in sebribus acutis hoc anno observatur. Th. Bartholin. de
la^teis dubia, c. 3.
sometimes of a Citrine and livid color: and is not tender, but viscid and
tenacious, so that it becomes as tough as any Membrane, and is not without
difficulty pulled in pieces. When the Blood has been for some time seized with
a Fever, upon Phlebotomy there appears instead of the beautiful crimson on
the surface a certain white or other-coloured Pellicle oftentimes: the reason
whereof is that the blood being as it were terrified by its effervescence, the
upper part thereof commuteth its redness and tenderness into a white and more
tenacious substance: And if the Mass of blood be not well cleared of its saline
and sulphurous recrements, that superficiary Skin is stained with a Citrine or
livid tincture: and for the same reason the supernatant Serum acquireth the
same Colors: Moreover the purple crassament of the Blood undergoeth several
variations: sometimes it is It was black, in color and consistence like to
liquid Pitch, in the Woman whose menstrua stopped eight months, and was cured
by Galen with reiterated and large Phlebotomies. Galen 6. Epidem. 3. 29. cum
notis Van der Linden. select. med. c. 14.
blackish, when the Blood has been too much terrified with a long
effervescence. Sometimes the fibers thereof are quite vitiated, so that it will
not Aliquando putrescentia non tam se insinuat color, quam substantiae modo,
ut quum crit ruber sed non concrescens. Valles. de victu in ^cut. p. 45.
coagulate, but remains fluid, like thick Milk; which is a bad sign, and occurs
often in putrid Fevers, and Cachexis. The Serum is sometimes deficient, as in
Hicticks, and after too much sweat. Sometimes it superabounds, as in
Hydropicks; and being set upon the fire will not entirely coagulate into a
white mass: In some cachectical persons the blood is so watrish, that it
resembles that sanious blood which stains the water in which flesh is washed. I
knew a man of an evil habit of body, whose blood (upon Phlebotomy) used to seem
white and like to Milk; which, after a course of Steel would be again
indifferently red.

I shall add hereunto, that I have frequently seen the Blood in Hectical
persons, and such as have had a latent Fever to be very serous, and that of a
livid, and citrine color: and in Hydropics that have bled at the nose there
was not any serum in the blood at all. In the Febris alba virginea (which I
here contradistinguish from the Chlorosis) I extracted four hours after dinner
out of the Saphena of such blood, Both the white serum and blood burned vividly
with^out any crackling.
as that the Crassament was laudable for color and consistence, but the serum
was so white, as not to be distinguished from milk: the lacteous serum did
coagulate, but retained no smell, whereas it usually resembles a roasted egg:
it was saltish to taste: At the same time I blooded two more in the foot,
neither of which had any such lacteous serum, but a citrine serum: Hers, which
was a young Lady, and in health, burned very well, and crackled: the other
being aged sixty years, was excellently and equally colored from top to the
bottom, and the serum inclining to citrine: but would not burn at all, only
crackled much, and puffed with wind. She had no indisposition on her, only was
troubled with a flushing in her face, swelling of the nose, and an inward hear,
such as is commonly attributed to an hot liver. I do not attribute that
lactescense in the first Ladies blood to the mixture of new Chyle, Dr. Lower de
cord, c. 4. p. 21^.
which Doctor Lower says he has observed in Men, and other Animals, being
phlebotomised a while after meat, to create a lacteous ferum: for I never in
all my life was so happy as to see that, though I have blooded my self on
purpose two hours after dinner to make the trial: and have an hundred times
examined the blood of others who have been blooded at such times as we might
expect to see that Phenomenon of his. Yet has the reality of his observation
been confirmed unto me by other credible witnesses: so that I question not but
he may have seen it; though I could not in these Ladies, who all dined together
about one of the clock, and had done bleeding by four.

Neither may I pass by this Observation, that of all the S^rum which I have
tasted, I never found any to be bitter, though I extracted some once that
seemed so bilious, that being put into an Vrinal none could know it from urine
highly tinged: as soon as I set it on the fire it coagulated with a less heat
than I imagine it to have had in the veins^ and it exchanged its hue for the
usual white, smelling like a roasted Egg. Yet does Van der Linden say, that
some have tasted the blood of Icterical persons, and found it bitter. Actu
nihil naturaliter in sanguine amarum est: Van der Linden disp. Physiolog. 51.
sect. 19.
Sed nec esse potest; redderet enim sanguinem ineptum suo muneri; ceu observare
est in Ictericis. In his enim sanguinem amaricare accepimus ab iis, qui and
ipsum vena emissum, and urinam ejus gustarunt, Andr. Vesalius de rad. Chinae.
p. ^52,
Asclepiadio more. And Vesalius gives us an account of one Prosper Martellus, a
Florentine Gentleman, much inclined to and troubled with the Iaundise, whose
Liver was scirrhous (but Spleen sound) and his Stomach turgid with choler; and
wheresoever he opened any of his veins they were full of thick choler, and the
fluid liquor which was in the Arteries did tinge his hands as if it were
choler. I find the like Observation in Th. Kerckringius: that an Icterical
Woman brought forth a dead Child in the eighth month, Th. Kerckriegius Obs.
Anatomic. 57.
which was so yellow all over, that it rather seemed a Statue of such wax, than
an humane Abortion: being diffected By him, instead of blood in the veins there
was nothing but choler, and all the bones were tinged with such a yellow, that
one would have thought them painted.

The Scholiast upon Ballonius observed, that however the blood is naturally
sweet, even such as upon obstructions from the Menstrua has regurgitated and
discharged it self at the Gums of women: (as they have told me) yet in one that
was troubled with the Green Sickness the blood, though florid, was salt.

Potest esse storidus color, and in se esse acrior and biliosior: unde quaedam
mulier (...), B^llon. Epidem. l. 1. p. 111. sect. 17.
and ejusmodi praedita temperamento mihi affirmavit, siquando vel ex dentibus
sanguis affluit, vel e capite, eum sibi gustum sentiri salsum and molestum.

When I was at Barbados we carried off several poor English thence to Iamaica,
where many of them falling sick, and some being well, were let blood: I
observed that in those poor people, which live upon nothing almost but Roo^s,
and drink Mobby (a liquor made of Potatoes boiled and steeped in water, and so
fermented) that their blood did stream out yellow, and in the Porringer did
scarce retain any show of red in the coagulated mass: yet are they well and
strong, but look pa^^ and freckled: such persons (which are frequent in
Barbados) are called Mobby-faces.

It were infinite, at least beyond my present leisure, to relate all that
variety of morbid blood, which has been observed in sundry diseases, and in
several persons languishing under the same distemper: as in Pleurisies, the
Scurvey, French Pox, Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and the like: wherein if it be
true, as it is, that oftentimes diseases vary in individuals, it is no less
certain that the blood does also vary in them: so that oftentimes ignorant
Physicians do imagine a greater corruption in the blood, and a greater recess
from what is natural to the person, and a greater danger in the disease, or in
the practice of Phlebotomy, than they need; yet in Epidemical, or some
Sporadical diseases, if the Phenomenon be as general as the disease, it is
certain then that the resemblance of the blood argues a resembling cause, which
prevails over the idiosyncrasy of particulars.

I know it will be expected that I should say something about the Controversy
whether the Blood be one Homogeneous liquor, the recrements whereof make up the
four Galenical Humors, which are no otherwise parts thereof, than the Lees and
Mothers of Wine are constitutive parts thereof? Or whether the four Galenical
Humors, viz. that which is properly Blood, Melancholy, Choler and Phlegm are
the constitutive parts of the Blood, in its natural consistence and Crasis? I
shall say therefore about this point as much as may be requisite to my present
purpose.

First I observe that the Galenists are at a difference whether the Mass of
blood contain those Humors actually, or only potentially? so that one may hold
according to them, that the blood is as homogeneous a liquor, as any Neoteric
does hold it to be, though it arise by the mixture of their five principles.
Amongst others Erastus has a disputation, in which he amply asserts, that all
those Humors when they are actually in the blood they become excrementitious,
and are no longer parts thereof, but such as the ejectment thereof depurates
and perfects the other remaining blood, which he confes^eth to consist of
several parts constituting one body, to which they are as essential as the
serous, caseous and butyrous part are to Milk, which if they be deficient it is
no longer Milk. ^ro^tus disput^ 19.. 62.54,
Nam ut non potest lac bubulum intelligi sanum and perfectum sine tribus suis
partibus, sero, caseo and butyro, ita non potest sanguis probus animo concipi
and definiri absque partium illa varietate. Fernelius does compare the
generation of Blood to that of Wine, Fernel. Physi. oleg. l. 6. c. 3.
wherein the Chyle is supposed to resemble Must, which by fermentation
separates and throws out such parts as are not actually in that liquor, but
arise upon fermentation and are ejected several ways: the more crude parts are
by time digested, and then the noble wine brought to perfection: so he
supposes it to be in the blood: and thus though all the humors be at once as
it were produced in the Chyle, yet are they no more parts of the blood, than
the Tartar and Mothers are parts of Wine. ^alen. l. 2. de elem.
Both these Similitudes of Milk and Wine to Blood were first I think introduced
by Galen, Galen. 4. de usu part. c. 4. and de not. fac. l. 3. c. 13.

Vallerioia loc. commun. l. 1. c. xi.

Mercar. Qu. 65.


I am sure he made mention of them, and so did his Successors; to Mercatus,
Fernelius, Platerus, Palleriaca: then Carolus Piso began to carry the
comparison further in his discourse of Fevers: and after him Quercetan: and
since that our learned and judicious Countryman Doctor Willis. Others held
that the blood as it flows in the veins, and is designed by Nature for the
Aliment and other uses in man, is not to be understood as one liquor consisting
of some variety of parts, yet united into one similar body (the rest whereof
were to be excrements) but a more confused Mass of several distinct Alimentary
Humors, which Nature never intends to unite into one similar body, but to
continue in a certain more loose mixture, each thereof retaining its proper
congruity for the continuance of life and health. They do confess that there is
a pure crimson part, sweet and balsomical, which they call in rigor Blood: but
they say Nature never intended this for the sole vitalliquor; because she never
produces it alone; or if it be ever seen so, it is in a morbid condition; as in
malignant Fevers, where the (...), or Blood free from the proportionate
mixture of other Humors, is reckoned amongst evil signs, B^llon. definit.
Medic. p. 7.
Qualis sanguis in malignis adurentibusque febribus solet excerni, aut e vena
tunsa educi. And therefore as none of the Humors are ever seen alone, any more
than Blood is (for they hold them all to be excrementitious, when separate) so
they conceive they all together in a certain proportion make up that aggregate
called Nutritive Blood: and are all actually there, because they do observe
that all of them at sometimes have their distinct corruptions, though they
continue still in one mass; which they conceive they could not have, except
they were actually there: They do conceive them to be so there, that the
resemblance betwixt Gall, or extravasated Phlegm is but Analogical: so that
they do not pretend to show in the Blood a bitter Gall, or a pontic arminonious
Melancholy: They will not allow these to be other than depravations of the
Alimentarious Humors: and the sincere alimental juyces are no more pretended
to be evinced by them; then the pure Elements, except it be a posteriori, by a
diversity of effects arguing different causes. They saw there was a great
latitude in the blood of healthful men, yet so as that the blood appeared with
different colors, and consonant to the colors there seemed a variety in their
dispositions, and other corporeal qualities: they saw the Mass of blood upon
perfrigeration to go into several substances, and they intellectually disjoined
them more, for doctrine-sake; ob^iging themselves to produce each Humor in its
imaginary purity, when the Chemical fire should exhibit any body not
decompounded, or the Corpuscularians make more manifest their configurations of
Atoms, or Texture of Particles.

Having thus stated the Question with as much perspicuity as I could: I pursue
to enquire which is most conformable to the effects in Physic; for I will not
undertake to determine what God and Nature do in the production or mixture of
bodies: It is easy for a man to loose himself in those inquiries: He that made
us can tell how we were made; our Argumentations are as vain as if one should
assert that a Loaf of bread consisted of Cubes, Lozenges, or Trapeziums,
because we can cut it into parts of such a configuration. Let us but imagine a
subtle Chemist to analyze Chymically our Ale, if ever he thereby discover that
it is the product of a Barley-corn growing into a stem and grain, then turned
into Malt, grinded, boiled with water, and fermented; I will assent unto the
Chemical resolutions of blood: Physicians have been always allowed hitherto to
be a sort of gross Artisans; and I remember Massarias somewhere calls it an
Hippocratical demonstration: De re ipsa ut neque dubites, morbi morborum
qicurationes docent. N^mirum hoc est m^ximum argumentum Hippocratis, ait
Mass^ri^s. Van der Linden disp. Phys. c 2.
Indicium autem Curatio. To know bodies exquisitely mixed, and to mix them
intimately, is a divine attribute: this last is avowed by Galen. Miscere
corpora tota per tota, non Hominis, sed Dei and Naturae est opus. Perhaps it
may be replied that the most ignorant persons may say thus much: Lacuna Epit.
Galeni de temper. l. 1.
It is true, and if he speak it knowingly, I confess I can say no more than he.
Francisc. Sanchez de longit. and brevit. vitae. c. x.
Sed quod dicemus objectioni illi? Ignarus aeque ac Philosophus deum causam
omnium assignabit: Hoc ignarus inscienter, Philosophus scienter assignabi^:
quemadmodum Aristoteles ait de Parmenide and Meliss: quemadmodum caecus
alicujus tunicam albam esse asserit. -- Nil seimus. Dicamus ergo. Primarum
rerum, principiorum, aut elementorum causas reddere, nostri non est captus:
secundarum vero, utcunque. Id in singulis quaestionibus experiri possumus.

I say then that notwithstanding any allegations to the contrary, it is
manifest that a certain proportion of salt, sulphur, and spirit, besides earth
and water, is neither requisite to perfect sanity, nor its defect as to any
particular, the cause of diseases: and this is manifest out of the
constitution, as well as color of the blood, in morbid and healthy bodies, as
appears by the burning and distillation of blood: There is much of truth that
-- T. T. says, or may be so. Now I am ready to discover in reference to
miserable man: I have lately blooded a Woman which after a Quartone was
troubled with obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, effervescences in the
Intestines, Asthmatic p^^roxysmes, acute pains in her head, obtuse pains in her
limbs, visible beginnings of a Dropsy; the blood at its issuing out seemed
very black, but was pretty laudable in the porringer: it burned well, without
any crackling or intumescence almost: so did the Serum: Here the salt seems
rather defective, than to abound, as it ought by those princi^les.
that the pretended sanguine sulphur or Cacochymy of any in an high Fever does
afford more salt, water and earth, each of them, than sulphur. I have taken
that diseased blood termed corrupt, which might seem to some to abound with
sulphur, being clearly conveyed into a Retort with a Receiver joined thereto, I
have by a graduated fire regulated very strictly, brought over what possibly I
could. In the upshot upon the separation of the several parts, I have found
very little sulphur in comparison of each of the rest.

At another time I procured the purest blood I could get from an healthful
person, putting it to the same igneous trial, as the former degenerate of equal
proportion to it: then after sequestration of the parts, I could not perceive
any considerable difference in the quantity or quality of the several parts of
that sound and the seemingly corrupt blood.

I do say that in the Blood of all persons that are in health, there is upon
Phlebotomy somewhat that justifies the supposition of the Galenists; but not
which confirms the Hypothesis of the Chemists. The coagulable serum does
commonly represent their choler in part: the florid fluid red their blood:
which if lightly washed away, their is another more darkly-coloured which is
proportionate to their Melancholy: and if you wash the fibrous mass well, it
will be white, and answerable to their Alimentary Pituita, or Phlegm. In this
last part I have the concurrence of Malpighius, M. Malpighi^ de viscer.
structura. p. 163. edit. Londinens.
who upon washing all the blood from the concrete Mass of blood, found the
remainder to be a fibrous contexture of a whitish color, which he pitcheth
upon as the materials for a Polypus in the Heart: And had he taken more
particular notice of that fluid blood in the cells of those interwoven fibers,
he might have discovered two sorts of blood, one that readily ascends, and is
florid: the other more black and faeculent which moves not: and both these
stain the water they are washed into with different reds, the one much brighter
than the other. That some fibrous concretion in some diseases, In quibus
superficies sanguinis durior est and candicans, subjectus sanguis in pelui sine
fibris plane est putridus; imo vidi in hujusmodi, ne gu^t^lam coloris rubri.
Bartbolin. de lacteis dubia. c. 3.
as Rheumatismes and Plurisie^ covers like a pituitous mass the surface of
the blood, whilst that remains fluid and blockish underneath: nay I have out
of healthful blood in the Spring (I am almost convinced that the blood varieth
with each quarter of the year) cast it up to the surface in just such a mass as
covers the top of the blood in those distempers, by putting some spirit of
Har^shorn into the Porringer before the party bled into it. I place the choler
in the serum, not but that I know that it has not the taste or consistence of
the excrementitious Bile, but because it has frequently the color of it, and
the Urine, and Pancreatick juice (not to mention the Lymphaeducts) are tinged
with it, and oftentimes have the Sapor of it: I am sure that herein I have the
suffrage of Pecquetus thus far, that the choler which is separated in the Liver
(and which ^ingeth the Urine) is extracted out of the serum of the blood, where
it circulates first along with it, and is percolated out of it in the place
aforesaid. Et vero nullibi per universas animalium species absque bilis mixtura
sanguinem reperias: Vide Pecque^i Dissertat. Anatomic. de circulat. sanguin. c.
xii.

Videtur humor felleus sanguini firmiter adhaerescere; q^od in seri illius
part fundatus sit, nec facile ab illo, intra ulteriorem prae parationem
separari possit. Charleton. oeconom. Animal. c. 7. sect 16.


slavescens id serum salsumque testatur; nisi forsitan aliquot in suppositis
quibus dulcem mitior natura sanguinem concoxit, secu^ and in aliis, quibus
acciditatis expertem infudit, aut nullo prorsus liene instruxit, aut sane
perexiguo. I cite him the more willingly, because that If the Galenists seem
in^atuated for saying the Gall is a constitutive part of the mass of blood,
(whereas they cannot demonstrate signs thereof by its bitterness) a great part
of the scorn may fall upon Pecquet, Backius, and Sylvius, de le boe, and other
Neoterics, who hold it is incorporated in the Mass of blood.

But these Controversies can be no better decided than by an Enquiry into the
Generation of Blood, how that it is at first begun, and afterward continued:
the knowledge whereof will conduce much not only to the decis^on of that
Question, Whether there be in Nature any foundation for those Galenical
Humors, that they are constitutive parts of the Mass of Alimental Blood? But
also to the main debate in hand Concerning Phlebotomy:

There is not any thing more mysterious and wonderful in the Universe I think
then the production of Creatures: In so much that Longinus a Paynim does
hereupon take occasion to celebrate the judgment of Moses, in that He
represented the Creation by a Divine FIAT, and God said let there be -- and it
was so. The Mechanical production of Animals from so small and tender
rudiments, out of a resembling substance, in all that variety which we see, by
a necessary result of determinate Matter and Motion, is so incomprehensible and
impossible, that were not this Age full of monstrous Opinions (the consequent
of Ignorance and Inconsiderateness) one would have thought no rational Men,
much less Christians would have indulged themselves in the promoting and
propagating such Tenets. It Is an effect of that Sovereign command that every
thing has its being and faculties; Quin nil aliud est Natura, E^^stus dispu^.
de propriet. Medic. c 15.
quam jussus ille Dei, per quem res omnes hoc sunt quod sunt; and hoc agunt
quod agere jussae sunt. Hic, inquam, non aliud quicquam, cuique rei suam dedit
speciem and formam. Per hunc non agunt modo pro sua natura, hoc est, prout
preceptum est ipsis, res creatae omnes, sed per eundem reguntur, conservantur,
propagantur: Et nunc etiam quasi creantur. This is that which gives a beginning
to the Faetus particularly, and by unknown ways contrives the seminal virtue,
its receptacle or Egg, and that colliquament out of which the Body is formed.
Because the first rudiments of conception are tender and minute, such a
provision is made in order thereunto, that the albuginous substance of ordinary
Eggs is no other than what is derived into the female womb: This is the opinion
of Dr. Highmoro, Velthusius, Courvee, and Ev^ra^^us.
And if we may continue the comparison, it will seem most rational to imagine,
that the parts of the whole are contrived at one time, though they neither
appear all at the same, nor in a proportionate bulk; for in some their
minuteness, in others their whiteness and pellucidity conceals them from the
Observer: But that even then there are exerted the proludes of those vital
operations which are so visible after in Nutrition, I doubt not: and that as in
the Coats of our eyes the minute veins and arteries convey their enclosed
liquors (though undisernable except in Eyes that are blood-shotten) and as in
the brain there has been discovered veins by some drops of blood issuing in
dissection, ^o. Iac. Wepferus de apopl. p. 92. etc. Bustachius de dentil. c.
20. Th. Kerkring. Obs. Anatom. c. 2^.
though no Eye can see most of the capillary vessels; and as even the veins and
arteries themselves are thought to be nourished by other arteries and veins,
rendering them that service which they do to the more visible parts: even so it
is in the first formation, wherein after some progress the vessels begin to
appear, and blood first discovers it self in the Chorion, and thence continues
its progress to the punctum saliens, or heat, and undoubtedly proceeds in its
Circle, though the smalness of the vessels (as in other cases) conceal the
discovery. So that we may imagine that the Plastic form (or whatever else men
please to call it) does produce the blood out of that albuginous liquor (which
seems as dissimilar as the blood out of which it is derived, D Highmore's Hist.
of Genesis c. 5.
though the parts be providentially more subtilised, and refined) by its own
power (as it does the rest) through the assistance of warmth, and concurrence
of the contemporary fabric: for the first blood can neither give a beginning
to its self; nor is it comprehensible, how the weak impulse thereof should
shape out all the veins and Arteries in the body, according as they are
situated. Out of which it is ^vident that the Soul or Plastic form does at
first reside and principally animate in the Spermatic parts (so called not that
they are delineated out of the Sperme, but out of the Colliquament, which is
Analogous to it) and that they are her first work; the blood is but the
secundary, and generated out of the Colliquament (for other Materials there are
none) by the Plastic form which is the proper efficient thereof, and besides
the Auxilary Heat there are no other instrumental aids but the spermatick
vessels wherein the Colliquament at first flows to the punctum album, which
when blood is generated do become the Heart and sanguiferous Channels. This is
avowed by Doctor Glissen himself: Liquor hic vitalis, Gl^ston Anat. Hepatis c.
35.
antequam sanguinis ruborem induit, sese a reliquis ovi partibus (quibus
promiscue commiscetur) segregare incipit, and in rivulos seu ramificationes
quasdum excurrere, quae postea venas evadunt. Rivuli isti in unum punctum
col^untes, in eum locum convenient, qui postea punctum saliens and cor
appel^^tur. Idque fieri videtur, diu antequam sanguinis aliquod vestigium
compareat. Herewith agree the most exquisite Observations of Doctor Highmore.
Dr. Hig^more hist of Genesis c. 8. p 69, 70.
Most certain it is by the History of Generation, that no Parenchymatous part
has any operation in the first production of the blood; all their ^arenchymas
being post-nate thereunto. And if the blood be thus generated at first, it is
but rational for us to imagine that it is always so generated during life: For
as it is true that the same cause acting in the same manner will always
produce the same effect: So in this case to argue from the identity of the
effect to the identity of the cause, Glissen. Anat. Hepatis. c. 35.
is allowable. Est enim causarum identitas quae fa^it ut effectus sit idem:
quippe effectus supponitur non esse, donec a causis existentiam suam indeptus
^uerit; and dum existentiam illam largiuntur, oportet ipsius quoque identitatem
impertiant, qua sine effectus ipsemet nequaquam fuerit, That the Spermatic
vessels in which the blood moves do contribute to ^anguification much, seems
apparent from hence: that the blood is seen in them before it is in the heart:
Greg: Horstius Instit. Medi^. disp. 3. Coron. 1. Append. conclus. 4.
And because it is observed that the fluidity of the blood seems to depend much
on them; and therefore in the dead it does not coagulate (except
praeternaturally) in the veins, though it do commonly in the Heart, or
wheresoever it is extravasated. Berigardus Circul. Pi^an. 1. part. 6. circ. 7.
-- Aperta namque in cadavera vena, sanguis profluit. Ent. de circul. sang^
sect. 137.
"Manat praeterea aliquid a venis nobis incognitum, quod dum earum ambitu
sanguis concipitur, prohibet ^jus concretionem, etiam post mortem in
cadaveribus jam perfrigidis, nequis hoc colori acceptum ferat: quod vero
coralliorum instar aliquando repertus est concretus in venis ipsis, hoc merito
Fernelius ascribit morbo occulto. And not only the ^^uidity but motion of the
blood seems to depend much thereon: for if by a l^gature the impulse and
succession of blood be prevented, yet will the blood in the veins continue its
course, and not stagnate. Exempto e corpore cord, motus tamen sanguinis, isque
satis c^ler in sanis videntur. Et si vena ulla, W^l^us de motu sang. epist. 2.
etiam lactea, duobus locis ligetur, laxata ea sola ligatura quae cordi
propinquior est, dum parts adhuc calent, semper Chylus ad hepar, sanguis ad
cor cum movebitur: qui nec a cord per Arterias, nec ab intestinis per lacteas,
objecto potuit obice propelli: nec stuiditate sua potius sursum quam deorsum
movetur. The truth hereof seeming undeniable to Pecquet, P^cquet dis sertat.
Anat. de circulat. sang. c. x.
he makes use of a new Hypothesis to solve this motion of the blood, as if it
arose from compression of other parts, or contraction in the vein it self: But
the Phenomenon will appear in such cases as admit not this pretense. From
these reasons it is that the blood does not need so much as any pulse in the
veins and arteries (as appears in the first faetus) but as soon as it comes to
the Heart it does (to prevent coagulation) the punctum saliens (being endowed
with no such quality) practices its systole and diastole, when yet no such
motion is observable in the Arteries at that time. Whence the color of the
blood arises, is a secret unto me: I know that digestion reduces some Juyces
to a redness: in some Fruits the ^ire does the like: in some the mixture of
acid Liquors begets a Vermilion: But here I conceive none of these causes
produce the effect^ the generation of the blood is manifestly an Animal Action,
and, as such, unsearchable. Whatever I attribute to the veins, it is not to be
expected that supposing they should instrumentally sanguifie, the blood should
turn blew from them, any more than that water put into new vessels of Oak
should turn white, whereas it becomes reddish. Thus the Plastic form produces
blood at first, and whilst th^re is no first concoction in the stomach,
supplieth that defect by that albuiginous Colliquament which is of the same
nature with the Chyle we digest our meat into, and convey by the Lacteous
Thoraciducts into the Heart. That it is of the same nature appears hence, that
it resembles it, and that it is extracted from the Blood of the Mother; and
produces in the Embryo the like excrements of Choler, and Urine, and
Mucosities; nay it has been observed by Riolanus to have been tinged yellow:
Riolanus Anthopogr. l. 6. c. ult. p. 411.
How much more may be concluded hence in favor of the Galenical aliment^ry
humors supposed to consti^ute the Blood, I leave those to judge who consider
the variety of female constitutions, and their condition during their being
with child: perhaps the Hypothesis of a proportionate mixture of the five
Chemical Principles will not seem more colorable?

Having thus related how Sanguification is performed in the Faetus at first; I
come to give an account how it is performed afterward; and even here it seems
an Action perfectly Animal: Concerning Concoction in the stomach see the
excellent discourse of Maebius de usu ventriculi su^dam^ Medi^. c. x where he
resolves it is done by an Animal heat, or Spiritus vitalis veget^ c^lote
praeditus.
for even Concoction in the Stomach is not the bare ^ffect of Heat elixating
the meat; nor of acid or saline Ferments dissolving it; nor of any other kind
of imaginary Fermentation: But it is the effect of an Animal power operating
upon the Meat in the stomachs of sundry Men and Animals by several ways: This
appears most evidently herein, that the same meat eaten by several Persons, or
different Animals produces different Blood and different Excrements: therefore
Chylification is an Animal operation, and is modulated by the speci^ick and
individual constitutions. Having thus determined of things, that the Soul in
all these actions is the Efficient, we may consider that the meat being
masticated in the mouth, and commixed with the salival juice or spittle, is
prepared in order to Chylification: then it descends into the stomach, and is
there (sometimes in a longer, sometimes in a shorter space) reduced into a
cremor which is so far from being acid (as H^lmont says) that it is generally
rather saline, Vide Maebi^m ubi supra^ and Kerger. de ferment sect. 3. c. 2. p.
20^, 201.
as are also the recrements of it that remain in the empty stomach: It is true
that according to the stomachs of Individuals, and the meat they eat, it
happens so that this Cremor has no certain taste, nor color: Undoubtedly it
must have been bitter in that Mariner (and such as he) of whom Vesalius
writes, V^salius de fabric. hum. corp l. 5 c. 8.
that the Gall did naturally discharge it self into his stomach, yet did he
digest very well, and never was apt to vomit, or to be so much as seasick. From
the stomach the Cremor descends into the Intestines (not all at once, Re^sueru^
de urinis. c. 3. p. 42.
but as it is digested) and there undergoes a second digestion receiving into
its mixture the Gall and Pancreatick juice: I shall not speak of the variety
that has been observed in those two liquors, nor trouble my self about the
manner how they operate on the Chyle: It is manifest that upon that mixture the
Chyle suffers a great alteration (if not some effervescence) and some parts are
coagulated and as it were precipitated, and by a succession of changes the
several particles are so blended, Dr. Needham deformat. faet. p. 101, 102.
and r^fracted in their qualities, that the excrements at last are neither
acid, nor bitter, but (in dogs) both sapors are extinguished. In the mean time,
during this descent of that miscellanes the lacteous vessels do imb^be and
convey the Chyle in the shape of Milk to the Receptacle, where mixing with the
recurring Lympha (which is sometimes yellowish) it passes through the Ductus
Thoracicus unto the Heart; and in the Subclavian vein associating with the
Blood, it passes along with it, supplying the continual decay of the Blood,
and yielding Nutriment to the parts, and new matter for excrementitious
humors: yet so as that it is not all transmuted into blood, or perfected, at
one passage through the Heart, but by repeated Circulations, whereby it comes
to loose its lacteous color, and contract a more saline taste, as well as a
serous limpidity, or some more degenerate color: yet it is still coagulable
(except in a morbid state) like to the white of an Egg, Dr. Lower de cord. c.
5.
as the depurated Chyle is. It were easy to pursue this discourse so as to
demonstrate that neither the separation of the Urine in the Kidneys, nor of the
Gall in the Liver, nor of the Spittle in the Glandules are other than vital
Actions, wherein the same form which at first shaped the Body is principal
Efficient, and that in these Operations there is somewhat more than percolation
of corpuscles differently seized: But I shall conclude this discourse by
accommodating of it to the defense of the Galenical Alimentary Humors supposed
to constitute the Blood: It is manifest in this History of Sanguification that
the Pituitous liquor which is derived into the Mouth by the salival vessels is
most agreeable to that which is by the Galenists called Phlegm: it is not like
the serum in the blood, for it is not coagulable, as the other: it is insipid;
and as it makes so considerable a p^rt of the chyle in the stomach, so it may
well be presumed to continue its intermixture unto perfect Sanguification: As
for the Gall, as its intermixture in great qu^ntities with the Chyle is
undeniable, so it is not improbable that it gives a fluidity to the Chyle beyond
what it acquires in the stomach: Platerus Quaest. Physiolog. 17.
thus Painters to make their colors and oils more fusile, and accommodated to
their use, do mix Gall therewith. That upon the mixture it should loose its
bitterness and become sweet and alimentary is most agreeable to the Galenists,
and no wonder: for the sapors as well as colors of liquors are easily altered:
and it is manifest that this happens in the descent of the Excrements through
the tract of the Intestines: and why not in the venae l^cteae? there are signs
of it in the flavidity usually observed in the Arterious blood: and it is
remarqued by Judicious Maebius concerning the blood, that it is not Homogeneous.

Habet enim sua stamina, Maebius fundam Medic^ c. 14. p 3^9^
and nigricantes fibras: habet serum salino principio imbu^um ad putrodinem
eludendam: habet partem sub^^liorem splendente rubore excellentem, supersiciem
in extravasato cruore ambientem: Et haec in recessu videtur custodire BILEM
ALIMENTAREM, flavidine sub insig^i rubore abscondita. Quae ex rubro nigricant,
s^avedini si misceantur, talem spl^ndentem ruborem exhibere, cuivis clarum est.
The bitterness which it has is produced by the Liver upon its separation
there, Mabius ubi supra. p. 338.
which is not done by mere percolation, but an accessional of transmutation
there. As for Melancholy, how much the Pancreati^k juice resembles that (when
it proves not to be bilious, as Veslingius and Virsungus always observed it to
be) let any man judge by what Regneru^ de Gr^eff has most ingeniously written
thereof: besides tha^ the more black part of the blood seems as essen^ial
thereunto, as the more bright Red. But the Degeneration of the Blood into those
Excrem^ntitious Humors, seems to evince as much as the Galenists pretend unto;
Since every thing is not produced out of every thing, but out of d^terminate
matter: it is not incongruous to imagine that in the due constitution of the
Blood there is an Analogical difference of Alimentary juyces to make up good
Blood, since there is such a discrepancy in those depurated from it; upon which
the Soul, by the innate temperament of the parts separating, does so operate
that its effects are modified by the nature of the subject matter: Hence that
variety in the tastes of Urine, which is sometimes so bitter that Gall does not
exceed it: sometimes sweet; so that Fonseca relates of a Por^uguess Peasant,
Fonseca de Excrement. c. de Vrinis^
who by the sweetness of the Urine would tell who were infected with the Plague.

The Gall appeared in great variety to Vesalius: Longum sane esset, ea que in
quibusdam tertiana and quar^ana laborantibus, Vesalius. Examine. obs. ^ullop. p.
191.
and dein suspendio aut capite plexis, in furiis and mania oppressit obsessis,
in melancholia morbo effectis, ex variis f^brium (quae continuae fuerunt, and
rigorum and sudorum inordinatos circuitus faciebant) generibus extinctis, faedo
ictero, eoque vari^ vexatis, malo habitu diu pressis, and dysenteria cruciatis,
subinde reperi, modo commemorare: Sive scilicet hic insignem bilis nunc
flammae, nunc atramenti quo scribimus in modum atrae, sive albicantis
propemodum colorem (qui fere conterminas parts inficeat) sive ^luidam, aut
luti modo, aut unguent^ cujusdam ex farinis and melle and terebinthina apparati
ritu consistentis substantiam, sive varias calculorum effigies, sive bilis
vesiculae molem instar duorum pugnorum ob contenta tumidam, ^egner. d^ Gr^eff
de succo pan^ creatit.. 65.
sive omnis bilis defectum, recenserem. Quae omnia me de hujus vesiculae natura
adhuc magis quam antea habent solicitum, As to the Pancreatick juice its
variety is no less observable: So for the Phlegm, and blood it self.

Having said thus much in behalf of the Ancients against some Dullmen of this
Age, who laugh at any one that mentions but those Humors, I might proceed to
demonstrate practically their several motions in diseases, and justify the
Medicinal Documents created thereon by such instances as countenance thereunto:
But the digression would be excessive; I return therefore to the principal
Discourse, and shall from what has been said er^ct an Hypothesis concerning
Plebotomy which will authenticate the received practice, which is so
judiciously and happily followed by all prudent men.

1. If it be true, that there is so great a Quantity of Blood in the body, as I
have evinced, then may we very well suppose, that the loss of a few ounces is
no great damage to the Patient. 2. If it be true, that so great effusions of
Blood have happened to several persons without any subsequent prejudice: If it
be true, that large Phlebotomy even usque ad Lipothymiam has been succesfully
practiced; then is it evident that our partite and diminute Phlebotomy may be
safely continued: and that whatsoever ill effects follow thereupon, the default
is not to be ascribed to Blood-letting, but to the indiscretion of him that
ignorantly made use of it, or the unknown idiosyncracy of the Patient, or the
overruling Providence of God which disappoints frequently the most rational
and best Methods of curing. S^n^ca de beni^. l. ^.
Quaedam ejus sunt conditionis, ut effectum praestare debeant: quibusdam pro
effectu est, omnia attentasse, ut proficerent. Si omnia fecit ut sanaret,
peregit Medicus parts suas: etiam damnato reo, Oratori constat eloquentia
officium, si omni art usus sit. 3. If it be true, that there is so great a
variety and discrepancy in the Blood, then is there no secure judgment to be
made of the Blood issuing out of the vein, either to the continuing or stopping
its Flux: But the Physician is to proceed according to the Rules of Art; and
accordingly as they direct him, may he promote, stop, or repeat the evacuation:
A seeming Cacochymy in the Blood does not impede venae-section, nor call for
purging, and rectifying: Nothing is evil that is natural to a man; but real
Cachochymy or redundance of Humors offending Nature, this does call for our
assistance, and requires sometimes Phlebotomy, and sometimes other Medicaments.
4. If it be true, that Sanguisication is an Animal Action, if it be true that
the Plastic form is in being before the Blood, and produces it, and the whole
Fabric, and subsequent operations; and that the motion of the Heart is proved
by Doctor Lower to depend upon the Nerves during life: then in there no such
strict connection betwixt the Soul, Life, and Blood, as -- G. T. does fancy. 5.
If it be true that the Blood does continually waste and spend it self, in
Nutriment and Excrements; then is it manifest not only that the loss of a
little Blood partitely taken away is not the loss of life, or prejudicial
thereunto. Neither does it follow that the loss of Blood in a moderate quantity
is any imminution of the vital Nectar: it is neither the chief residence or
seat of the Soul, nor in a determinate quantity requisite to the continuance of
Life, but comes under a great latitude: It abounds more in some seasons of the
year, and times, than at others: and why may not Artists imitate Nature in
diminishing its redundance upon occasion, as she does? As long as he proceeds
not to exhaust all, or too much: The loss is easily repaired upon
convalescence, and the quantity is more than can be governed by Nature in
sickness; it is but the observation of a Geometrical proportion in such a
Phlebotomist. The same Agent will produce the same effects: if Nature be
corroborated, and the vitiated tonus of the concocting and distributing vessels
be amended, there is no fear of wanting a new supply proportionate to the
exigence of the Patient. The Blood we take away is no other than what would be
expended or exhausted naturally within a few hours, or days, as the Staticks
show: and it must needs be considering the quantity of Chyle which flows into
the veins upon eating and drinking. 6. If it be true, not only that Nature does
thus expend in transpiration and Excrements as well as Nourishment, much of the
Blood, and repairs her defests by a new supply (whereby Life is continued, not
impaired) so as that the melioration of the following Blood is rather evident
in his first years by his growth, Botallus de venae sect. c. 15.
vigor, strength and intellectuals: But also that She does of her self make
men and women apt to bleed at some times, Hippocrat. sent. ^. Aphor. ^7.20.
ages, and seasons (which is known to all) then is not the effusion of this
solar liquor so unnatural a thing, nor so homicidial an Act, as it is
represented. 'Twould seem a strange Law that should punish every Boy that
breaks the Head or Nose of another as a Bronchotomist, or Cutthroat.

If it be true, that Nature does oftentimes alleviate even in the beginning,
and in the end cure Diseases by spontaneous evacuations of Blood, at the Nose,
and Vterus, by vomiting and stool, then a Physician, whose business it is to
imitate Nature in her beneficial Operations, is sufficiently authorized and
empowered to practice due Phlebotomy, by the best of Presidents.


Having premised these Conclusions, which are all either proved in the
foregoing discourse, or evident in themselves to all understanding men: I shall
proceed to give an account of the Reasons why Physicians do so frequently and
in so many Diseases practice Blood-letting; and those deduced from its variety
of effects in Humane bodies: For it is not a single Remedy subservient unto one
Indication, or End, but conducing to many, and therefore made use of upon
several occasions to different intentions. Vtile est id remedium ad
quamplurima, Valles. Meth. med. l. 4. c. 2.
and vix potest in ullo magno morbo non esse aliquid, cujus gratia utile sit.

Before I come to particulars, it is necessary I tell you that in the cure of
all diseases Physicians propose unto themselves sundry considerations: they
regard the disease, the antecedent causes, and the symptoms which attend or
will ensue thereupon either generally, or in such an individual constitution:
they employ their cares to prevent some inconveniences, as well as to redress
others. Some remedies they make use of because they are necessary; of some,
because they are beneficial, yet may the disease ('it is granted) be cured
o^herwise, in case the Patient have a reluctance thereto, or for some private
reasons the Physicians esteem it fitting to alter their course. Upon this
account it is assented unto, that many distempers may be cured without
Phlebotomy, which yet are ordinarily cured with it, or may be so: And herein
the disagreement of Physicians, or different procedures are all according to
their Art, nor is it denied but that All of them may atchieve their ends by
their several Methods. So that it is a gross paralogisme for any one to
conclude this or that Physician is mistaken, or takes a wrong course, because
another takes or prescribes a different one. All the Physicians in Spain,
France and Italy do not bleed with equal profuseness: In Germany and England
some do practice more frequent Phlebotomies, than others do: and neither of the
parties do err, in case the other remaining Method be inviolately observed. It
is in humane bodies as it is in the body Politic, where there is a Method of
ruling, though it be carried on by several ways and means; and whilst each
Statesman does prudentially sway the Government, procuring peace and plenty to
the subject, his conduct, though it vary from that of his Predecessor, is not
to be blamed. It is not to be doubted but that many grievous distempers are
cured by Nature, without the use of any remedies at all: Yet will no wise man
adventure his life on such incertainties: it is not to be denied but some are
cured with fewer Remedies than others are: But yet it is not prudence to put
Nature upon too great a stress, or to account all means unnecessary which are
not absolutely requisite, or without which the effect may (though with more
difficulty, and hazard) be brought to pass. It lies upon the Physician
therefore to pursue all those means which may secure the life of his Patient,
to alleviate the disease in its course by preventing all troublesome and
mitigating all dangerous symptoms, and to facilitate as well as hasten his
recovery. It is not questioned but Patients have been and may be recovered of
Fevers with little or no blood-letting; yet when I consider the great hazard
they run in that course, the vexatious and perilous symptoms which they
languish under longer and with more violence than others, I cannot approve of
the practice, nor think the Physician discharges his duty and a good
conscience in so doing: Extrema necessitas in moralibus, ut certumest, vocatur,
quando est probabile periculum: and the Patient does offend against himself, if
he refuse to take a befitting course against dangers that probably are
impending: and the Physician does trespass against his neighbor, if he do not
propose and practice such a course. Riol^nus de circulat ^ang. c. xx.
Anthopograph. p. 585.
I cannot (to use the words of the incomparable Riolanus) I cannot without pity
to the sick, and some resentment against the Physician, read in Platerus's
Observations, how sundry of his Patients were broyled and torrefied with
burning Fevers, whom he never let blood. Platerus Observat. l. 2.
He does relate of himself, how he was sick of a most burning Fever, yet did
he never so much as let himself blood therein, albeit that it were requisite in
those cases. Such are not obliged to their Doctors, but peculiarly to the
Divine Providence for their recovery.

It was the mature consideration of that tenderness which is requisite in
Physicians toward their Patients which advanced the present course of Physic
to its glory above all other Methods: it being endeared to our esteem by all
those regards that represent it as prudential. It was not introduced by chance,
or the subtlety of some persons. but the choice of all, and so established by
the Magistracy, that to transgress against the traditions of this Art, was
criminal in a Physician, even by our Laws. It may in some cases seem to be
troublesome and unpleasant: yet SAFETY requires it: It may seem tedious
sometimes by multiplication of Medicines; yet Prudence obliges by all those
means to preserve and secure life; and if the omission thereof be criminal in a
Physician (in case of any sinister accident, why is not the practice laudable?
Would Men but seriously consider How much danger they run, and How much more
they suffer upon the negligence or indulgence of a Physician, who leaves all to
Nature, and advises them to wear out a distemper, they would rather hate, than
love such a Man; and the apprehension they should have for the unnecessary
jeopardy he put them on would extenuate his credit very much: The most rash and
brutish counsels may succeed well; but yet the most prudent are to be preferred.

Amonst Physicians (I do not reckon the Helmontians as any) there is no doubt
but a Plethorick indisposition requires Phlebotomy; Nature being surcharged
with blood forces us thereunto, least some vein should break in the Lungs, or
the Patient be strangled with that excess: this is called Plethora quoad vasa:
when the vessels are so full of blood, that there is danger of their breaking,
or that the blood should stagnate in the Heart, Lungs or Head, there wanting
room for its motion: or take some inordinate course, and so strangle the
Patient.

There is another redundancy of Blood which is called Plethora quoad vires, or
such a plenitude of blood as brings along with it no apparent hazard of
breaking the vessels, yet does it oppress Nature so as thereby to become
redundant: It is more than she can bear in the present juncture; it is more than
she can rule, and it will suddenly fall into an exorbitant motion, to the
detriment of some principal part, in case timely prevention be not used. In
both these cases (in which the blood is not supposed to be much depraved from
its natural estate) all do allow of Phlebotomy, and if it be timely put in
execution, it may hinder the progress; however it expedites the cure of the
disease. In these cases we consider not only the present plenitude, but also
the future, what may be in a few days, to the great exasperation of the
disease, and peril of the Patient: For it is possible that in the first
beginnings of a disease there may be neither of these plenitudes, but they may
ensue a little after: For when the insensible transpiration shall have been a
while abated (as inquietude, Sanctor. Med. Static. sect. 1. aphor. 41, 49.
sect. 4. aphor. 7, 8.
pain, and watching will abate it) the Blood degenerates, and no longer
continuing its usual depuration, those excrementitious particles which were
lodged in the habit of the body and pores do remix with the sanguine mass, and
become like so many fermentative corpuscles agitating and attenuating the
blood, so that whereas before there was no plenitude, now there is: that the
excrementitious particles do contract a fermenting heterogeneous quality
different from what they had in the Blood appears hence, that those which sweat
much (as the new-comers in the Indies) their sweat is less noisome and bilious
by far, than it is in those that sweat more seldom: Thus Soot is a different
body from any thing that is burned. Hence it is that those particles being
reimbibed into the blood are so offensive to the nervous parts, and introduce a
lassitude, as if the body were surcharged with a plenitude. Besides these two
cases in which Phlebotomy seems to be directly indicated by a Plethora or
surcharge of blood: Sanctor. Med. Static. sect^ 4. aphor. 10, 11.
It is practiced in other cases by way of revulsion when the blood and
intermixed Humors flow into any determinate part, or are fixed there as in
Apoplexies, Squinancies, and Pleurisies: for as upon dissection it is manifest,
that in such diseases there is a greater efflux of Blood than upon other
occasions, so it is evident by long experience, that Phlebotomy does alter its
course, and draw back the blood so as that sometimes after that the first blood
has run more pure and defaecated^ the subsequent has been purulent, as if the
conjunct cause of the Pleurisy or Squinancy had been evacuated thereby. In
reference to such fluxes of the blood to determinate parts, we usually consider
what in all probability may happen, as well as what is at present urging: and
therefore for prevention thereof we let blood upon great contusions and wounds.
It is also practiced by way of derivation, when we let blood near to the
affected part, thereby to evacuate part of the imparted matter: Thus Van der
Heyden did frequently let his Patients blood in the same foot for the Gout: Van
der Heyden Synopsis discurs. disc. 2 de potu fri^^gida.
Thus in a Squinancy to open the Iugulars, it is a derivative Phlebotomy. In
all these cases all Physicians agree to the received practice: but in case that
the disease be not merely sanguine, but seem to arise rather from a Cachochymy,
or redundance of evil humors, than any plenitude, or exorbitant motion of the
Blood: here many Physicians cry up that Rule: That Plethorick Diseases require
Phlebotomy, but those that arise from a Cachochymy require expurgation. Here
they accumulate a multitude of Arguments; and undoubtedly, since so great men
are of that side, it must needs be that they have cured those diseases without
Phlebotomy. But the contrary practice has so many abettors whose credit
equalleth or exceeds that of the others; and Experience in a multitude of cases
has showed the great efficacy of Blood-letting in a Cachochymy or mere
impurity of the Mass of Blood: and so prodigious is the efficacy thereof in
promoting transpiration, and opening all the emunctory passages of the body, in
preventing of putrefaction, and expediting of the concoction, and in
refrigerating the whole habit, that Hippocrates and Galen did resolve it in
general, That whenever any great Disease did seize upon any Person, if he
were of Strength and Age to bear it, he ought to be let blood. The Arabians
dissented from this practice, but Massarias (after Iacchinus and the Florentine
Academy) did prudently revive it, and solidly defend the Ten^t: and the happy
Cures did so convince the World of the truth of their Assertions, that all
Italy in a manner was presently reduced under them, and France and Spain; so
that though they did, and do still in Spain and Italy retain Avicen to be read
in their Universities as well as Hippocrates, yet herein they have abandoned
the Arabians` and they which do adhear to that old Maxim of purging out the
evil humors, when they abound, do also comply with the Hippocratical practice,
and by new excuses accommodate it to their principles: So that as to most
diseases it is agreed (though upon different grounds) what may or must be done.
Few now are so timorous in bleeding as heretofore; and where that apprehension
is still continued, the Physicians rather comply with the prejudicate conceits
of the people, then act out of Reason. He that can doubt the strange effects of
bleeding, notwithstanding the concurrent judgment of Physicians, let him either
read over Prosper Alpinus concerning the Physic practiced in Egypt amongst
the Turks (where Phlebotomy is the principal and frequently the sole remedy) or
advise with any F^rrier, and he will be satisfied that in a Cachochymy nothing
is more beneficial, though it be particularly said of Beasts, that the Life or
Soul is in their Blood. For my part I am sufficiently convinced of the solidity
of their judgment who do much use Phlebotomy, So Blondelus could not with all
his Skill cure the Marquess of Caeuvere till he did bleed him) in a chronical
terrible d^sentery: which he confesses, though he writes against Phlebotomy in
Epidemical dysenteries. Valles. meth. med. l. 4. c ^.
and I have frequently observed that the best Medicaments have been ineffectual
till after Phlebotomy, and then they have operated to the recovery of those
Patients who found no benefit by them before: so that to begin the cure of most
diseases therewith is the most ready and certain way of curing them: and to
make that previous to purging, is the direct course to purge with utility.
'Twas most Oracularly spoke by Vallesius. Facile concesserim venae-sectionem
esse optimum omnium auxiliorum quibus Medici utuntur. Est enim valentissimum,
and maxim presentaneum, and multiplex. Dico autem multiplex, quia and vacuans,
and revellens, and refrigerans, and venas relaxans, and omnem transpiratum
augens, quam ob causam (and est a Galeno valde celebratum) in nullo magno morbo
non est opportunum, si vires ferunt, and puerilis aetas non obstat.

When I considered the strange efficacy of blood-letting in several diseases,
and that the discovery of the Circulation of Blood had rendered most of the
Reasons which were formerly used to be more insignificant, or false: I was not
a little surprised. I observed that the effects were such as did exactly
correspond with their Hypothesis, and that the practice was not faulty or vain,
though the principles were: neither ought any man to quarrel with or laugh at
such Arguments as ('it is certain) will guide a man rightly to his utmost ends.
It Is a kind of impertinency that swayes this Age; for it is not so much a
Physicians business to talk; but to heal. It was most judiciously said long
ago, C. Celsus Medicin. in pres.
Ac nihil istas cogitationes ad Medicinam pertinere, eo quoque sensudisci,
quod, qui diversa de his senserint, ad eundem tamen sanitatem homines
perduxerint. -- Itaque ingenium and facundiam vincere: morbos autem non
eloquentia sed remediis curari. Quae siquis elinguis usu discreta benenorit,
hunc aliquanto majorem Medium futurum, quam si sine usu linguam suam
excoluerit. Neither did Hippocrates place any great value upon Philosophical
curiosities, and Natural discourses, but esteemed it very well in Physicians if
they could demonstrate by their success the solidity of their judgment, (...)-
Hippocrat. de Art. c. 23.
I resolved with my self, that if the Circulation of blood and other modern
discoveries taught us but the same practice we already followed. it was
useless; If it contradicted it, it must be false: I observed that it was the
great work of the wiser Novellists to accommodate the new Theories to an old
and true way of practice; and perceiving that the effects of Phlebotomy were
such as the Ancients insisted on, I perplexed my self in considering what there
might be therein to produce so different effects: I abstracted from all common
Principles, and called to mind the Opinion of the Methodists, who were a
judicious sort of Physicians, and the most prevalent at Rome in Galen's days.
They held that Diseases did not arise from peccant humors, since many lived,
and lived long with Cachochymical bodies: and in diseases if in the beginning a
multitude of humors (and such as Physicians ascribe the disease unto) be
evacuated by vomit, sweat, or stool, yet the distemper continues, and becomes
worse and more dangerous by reason of such evacuatians: As little did they
regard the first qualities of heat and cold, siccity humidity, concluding them
to have no immediate effect in producing diseases, but as they varied the
symmetry of all or any parts of the body: the grounds they went upou were such
as were deduced from that Philosophy which makes Rarity and Density the
principles of all bodies; and they placed Health in such a conformation of the
body, and such a configuration of particles as did best suit with its nature:
they held that the intertexture of the minute particles of our bodies were such
as admitted of an easy alteration, the fabric being so exquisitely
interwoven, not only in the solid vessels, and parts, but a commensuration of
prorosities every where, the alteration of which texture of the body into a
great laxity, or streightness, and this change of the pores did they make the
great causes of all Maladies, and the restoration of them to be the way to
sanity, (...).

Cassius in problem.71.


and this they called (...) and (...), or the variation of the texture and
combination of Corpuscles, in the symmetry whereof they placed Health, and in
the asymmetry or improportionate and incongruous state whereof they placed all
Sickness. It was their Tenet, that amongst those Remedies which did most alter
the texture of the body from streightness to laxiiy, They seldom used purging,
imagining it not fit till the body was prepared, and humors concocted^ but
they made much use of vomits.
the most powerful were Phlebotomy, and Purging, and that their principal
effects were not merely to evacuate such or such peccant Humors, but in doing
so to create a new Texture and configuration of Corpuscles in the whole Body,
and therefore they held them to be General Medicaments, and of use in most
great diseases, since such distempers were rather occasioned by a streightness
than laxity of the pores, and even such as were laxe one way (as Dysenteries
and Diarrhaeas) might be accompanied with a streightn^ss in the habit of the
body. This Hypothesis (for the furthe^ explication whereof I remit you unto
Prosper ^lpinus) having been of great renown, and most accommodated to the
course of life by which the Romans (and since the Turks and others that follow
not our Physic) did preserve their Health, and recover the^^ Mal^dies, did
merit my regards: and I observed the truth of that part of their Opinion, which
avows that purging and bleeding have further effects than merely the evacuation
of Blood and other Humors: that they had such an influence upon the whole body
as to restore and promote all the natural evacuations of the body by its
several emunctories and pores; and that Phlebotomy did particularly incline to
sweat, promote urine, (and sometimes instantly allay its sharpness) and make
the body soluble, so that upon Phlebotomy there needs no antecedent Glyster:
Neither is it convenient in a great Cacoch^my to purge before bleeding; Valles.
method. medend. l. 4. c. 2.

Gregor. Horstius Instit. Med. disp. 18. Coron. d^ venae sect. qu. xi.


not so much for fear of irritating the Humors, but that the purge operating
so as to attenuate and alter the whole mass of blood, and promote secondarily
all natural evacuations; without preceding Phlebotomy it is scarce safe (not
secure) to purge, Any man that is conversant in Physic knows that such purges
as operate on the blood, promote urine, and sweat, and transpiration, even
during the working^ for those very qu^lmes the Patient^ feel are an effect of
Di^phoresis. Lipothymia juvet: quia sudorem and validam perspirationem ^acit.
Sanctor. Med. Stat. sect. 1. Aph. 98.
except in bodies the laxity of whose texture is easily restored, or with
gentle Medicaments: for the Humors being powerfully wrought upon by the strong
purges, and inclined to be expurged by their sev^ral emunctories, and those
being either defective, or the veins and arteries too full to admit a greater
rarefaction in the mass of blood (which is requisite to their separation and
transpiration) hereupon there happens a dangerour Orgasmus or turgency of
humors in the sick: which Phlebotomy does prevent. And it is I conceive in
reference to this alteration of texture that Hippocrates says, Hippocrat. 2.
aphor. x.
(...). I observed a great congruity betwixt the Static observations and those
of the Methodists; and that Sanctorius has a multitude of Aphorisms which
agree with them: Sanctor sect. 1. aphor. 104. Id ibid. sect. 2. aphor. 28.. 1.
aph. 120.
viz. That such bodies as transpire well in the hottest weather, they are
lighter, and not troubled with any vexatious heat. That nothing prevents
putrefaction like to a large transpiration, In fine, I did observe that it was
the general sense of Physicians, that Phlebotomy did draw the Humors from the
Center to the Circumference, and I had taken notice of it always in my self;
even in the Colic bilious, when I was tired out with pains, vomiting and want
of sleep (when I took no Laudanum) and reduced to extreme debility and
emaciation, I determined in that forlorn case (having used all other means for
several weeks) to bleed so long (yet partitely) as that I might be freed from a
most troublesome pulsation of the descending Artery, I did herein follow Galen,
and those that represent Phlebotomy as a great Anodyne: and particularly
Citesius concerning the Colic in Poictiers.
below the reins: I bled eight ounces at first, and found a vextious heat in
the whole habit of my body: I repeated the Phlebotomy in the afternoon, and was
very hot all night: thus I continued to bleed twice each day for three days,
loosing above sixty ounces, and then fell into sweats, was eased totally in my
back, and afterward recovered with a more facile Paresis in my Arms (and no
contracture) then that disease commonly terminates in there. These
considerations made me think that there was some more important effect in
Phlebotomy than the evacuation, derivation and revulsion of the Blood and other
Humors; and that it must consist in promoting that Statical transpiration: and
I conceived that the Blood was in perpetual motion, and though Motion does
hinder Fermentation, yet I had observed that in Pipes at Owburne Abbey, where
the drink runs from the Brew House to the Cellar (to be tunned up) the
Fermentation continues so (especially in the stronger drink) that the Pipes
frequently break therewith, as rapid as the motion is: I did not imagine that
the nature of the Blood was such as to be exalted into one Uniform liquor
resembling Wine, (for such a liquor would not be liable to such sudden changes
and alterations from one extreme to another) but that it was a miscellary of
heterogeneous liquors in a perpetual digestive fermentation and depuration by
halituous particles arising from it (as in more gross by the emunctories) which
if the conformation of the pores and passages be such as to give it due vent,
all continues well: if they be obstructed or vitiated then several maladies
ensue, except timely prevention be used: I conceived that in Phlebotomy as the
Blood issues from the vein, so (as in the pouring out of other liquors) the
Air comes in by the orifice, and mingling with the Blood produces as great, or
greater effects than in the Lungs when it mixeth there with the Blood,
invigorating it in an unexpressible way, whence we commonly see that the pulse
grows stronger and stronger during the bleeding: and upon this account I think
it may happen that bleeding with Leeches though equal quantity be taken away,
oftentimes does harm, never alleviates so much as Phlebotomy: and such persons
as by reason of their tender habit of body cannot bear a violent transpiration,
swoon not by bleeding in water, (though otherwise they do) by reason that the
great effects of the Air upon the Blood are impeded by the ambient water: the
like happens in Scarification with Cupping-glasses; and in bleeding with
Leeches. I did suppose that oftentimes in a Plethora quoad vires, transpiration
being hindered by the change of the texture of the Body, the not-exhaling
particles remix with the Blood, and there also happens a subsidence of the
vessels, and change of the porosities, so that the Fermentation is is not only
clogged with morbose particles of several sorts, but so hindered by the
subsidence or compression of the vessels and alteration of the pores, Kergerus
de ^erment sect. 1 c. 9. and sect. 2. c 8.

Williss. de ferment. c. 6^


as not to be able to ferment (for freedom of room is necessary to
Fermentation) nor transpire, nor continue its due course, nor by reason of the
charge of porosities confer aliment aright, so that a Plethora arises
hereupon. But as soon as the vein is breathed, and the Blood (as in your common
water-pipes when a Pipe is cut) acquires a more free passage that way, it
presently becomes more rapid, and its motion also is accelerated by the
fuliginous exhalations hastening to the vent, together with the natural
Fermentation resuscitated, and so the whol^ (...) by a natural coherence and
dependence, is not only e^^cuated, but altered in its minute texture, and
conformation.

It is most evident that the Blood in the Veins and Arteries is conveyed as it
were in conduit-pipes, the Heart being the great Elastic Engine which drives
it, being fed by the vena Cava, and disburthening it self by the Aorta: though
even the motion of the Heart depend upon a Superior influence by its Nerves,
which wherein it consists and how derived from the Brain and Soul, is a thing
to us incomprehensible. I do suppose that the Circulation is continued and
carried on principally by Anastomoses betwixt the Capillary veins and Arteries,
many whereof having been discovered by Spigelius, Veslingius and others, the
rest may well be supposed: and perhaps in the coats of the Veins and Ar^eries
there may be a certain texture requisite whereby the transpiration is managed
in order to the safe continuance of the digestive fermentation in the Blood,
This is agreeable to the Hypothesis of the Methodists,
and the nutrition of the body. The impulse of the Heart, together with the
pulsation, is sufficient to convey the blood to the lesser capillary Arteries,
and there though the pulse be lost (which yet a little inflammation in the
extremities of the body will make sensible, and in some Ladies, as also in
Children, the least preternatural heat) yet it is impelled by the subsequent
blood still into the veins, and having acquired by the common miscele in the
Heart and the digestive fermentation (which naturally arises in such
heterogenious liquors) an inclination to expand it self, the compression in the
Capillary vessels adds to its celerity of motion when the larger veins give
liberty for it: the Aerie corpuscles of several kinds (which are easy to be
discovered upon burning) by their expansion, and contraction adding much
thereunto: Thus in Water-engines the narrowness of the Pipes do add to the
impetus with which the Water issues forth: And I do conceive (by the Phenomenon
which daily appears in practice) that the Animal heat in the Blood actuating
that heterogeneous miscele, and according to the diversity of its parts
producing therein (with the help of its fermentation) a rarefaction of what is
aerie, and, according to the room there is, a liberty or inclination to expand
and evaporate themselves, this is the principal cause of the continuance of the
motion of the blood in the veins, and of its saliency upon Phl^botomy. Thus
upon Scari^ication there is no salience or spurting out of the blood, there
being no room for such an expansion, or for the Aerie halituous parts (in which
there is as great a difference as in those exhaling from the terraqueous Globe)
to rush forward out of the continued Arteries and together with themselves to
protrude the blood: Upon this account the Methodists and old Physicians (as
also the Egyptians) where the tender bodies and constitutions of Children and
Women or Men admit not of, or requires that great relaxation of the pores and
texture of the body, which a more robust and firm habit (wherein as the natural
resistance in health is greater, so the recess from it in a bad estate is much
greater) would be cured by, they use these Scarifications, and prefer them
(most judiciously) to Phlebotomy.

This constitution of the Body does evince the great utility of Phlebotomy, and
best (as I suppose) explicates the effects thereof which we daily experiment.
From hence not only is manifest how the Body is evacuated in a Plethora, but in
case of Revulsion, and Derivation. It is manifest in Aqueducts and Siphons,
that the liquors (though much differing in nature from the Blood, nor so
inclined to evaporate) does accelerate their motion, and issue out so rapidly
upon an incision or fracture in one of the Pipes, that a lesser in such a case
will deplete the greater, notwithstanding its free passage in its own entire
Canale. Thus the most learned and considerate Physician, Sir George Ent, having
observed first thus much. Apolog. pro circul. sangu. sect. 23. p 62.
Videmus aquam per siphones delatam, si vel minima rimula hiscat, for as cum
impetu prorumpere. And, Sanguis per aortam ingressus, fluit porro quocunque
permittitur, Id. ibid. p. 107^ 108.
peraeque sursum ac deorsum, quia motus continuus est: quemadmodum in canalibus
aquam deferentibus contingit, in quibus, quocunque feruntur, aqua continuo
pergit moveri. Quare nugantur strenue, qui protrusionem hujusmodinon nisi in
recta linea, fieri posse arbitrantur. After this He explains the doctrine of
Revulsion in this manner. Id. ibid. p. 179, 180.
Quae postea de revulsionibus dicuntur, nullum nobis facessunt negotium.
Tantundem enim sanguinis a pedibus ascendit per venas, quantum ad eosdam
delabitur per Arterias. Facto itaque vulnere in pectore, aut capite, revulsio
instituitur (si modo tam longinqua instituenda sit) in crure. Quia sanguis
alias quoquoversum ruens, facto nunc in pede egressu, copiosius per
descendentem ramum, procul a vulnere, delabitur. Non enim arbitramur, sanguinem
aeque celeriter sua sponte per arteriam aut venam fluere, atque is secta earum
aliquo effluit. Nec sanguis ad laesum pectus aut caput, per venam cavam impetu
affluit, quia fluxus ille aperta inferius vena intercipitur. I do acknowledge
that the reading of these passages did first create in me the thoughts I now
impart unto you: And hereby it is evident how the Ancients (with their large
Phlebotomies) might derive even the morbi^ick matter, or revell it, though
impacted. Our minute Phlebotomies do seldom produce such an effect; for since
it is not otherwise done, but by a successive depletion out of the Arteries, it
would seem necessary to extract three or four pounds of Blood to effect such a
matter: Neither indeed is it necessary: albeit that I believe the most speedy
cures (but great judgment is requisite in such operations) were achieved
thereby: for though we do not retract the Humor, or Blood unto the place where
we Phl^botomise, we do revell it from the place whither it was flowing: and the
course of the Blood and Humors being diverted, the Arteries leading to the
part affected or depleted, and the Flux of Humors (which was by them) is
abated, their tenseness there (which appears by their puls^tion there where
they did not beat before) is relaxed, and so becomes less opportune to
extravasate either the Blood or other Humors: whereupon Nature it self alone,
or with a little help of the Physician, does digest and dissipate the impacted
matter. Whereupon if we add the motion of restitution in the parts affected,
which is hereby facilitated, the great change in the digestive fermentation of
the Blood (which is manifest by the melioration of the Blood which is seen in
repeated Phlebotomies) and the relaxation of the whole body in order to the
transpiration and other depuration of the Blood by its several Glandules, the
Kidneys, Liver, Guts, the reason of those prodigious benefits which Patients
have had of old, and now under our practice, is manifest; nor do we want a
justification for reiterating Phlebotomy, or exercising it in different veins,
and diverse manners.

I designed long ago to set aside some spare hours to a further study of this
Hypoth^sis, and in order thereunto to acquaint my self with the Hydraulic Arts;
The alteration of the te^ture of the body is no less evident, out of Dietetical
observations: of which I have made many, and did intend once to prosecute far
these inquiries; as also the discovery thereof in dead bodies.
as also to examine the truth and solidity of the Static Experiments: (out of
which this texture of the Body, the digestive motion of the Blood, its change,
and restitution, is demonstrable) and to enlarge my prospect by a comparison of
the several Methods and Medicaments used by sundry Physicians (both Methodists
and others) in order to the cure of diseases, and preservation of health: But I
must tell you that the malice of my enemies renders my LIFE and Condition so
ill-assured; And the apprehensions I have least the Projects of Campanella are
powerfully and subtly driven on in this Age (I am the more confirmed in my
suspicions; in that my Adversaries are most intent to ruin me, but not to
remove those Vmbrages) together with the imminent subversion of the Faculty of
Physic by the toleration of Divines to practice (which is contrary to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, I intend some time this Summer to write a discourse
concerning the Unlawfulness of Divines to pr^ctise Physic.
and makes them irregular) the great encouragement of Quack-salvers, and
Baconical Physicians: These reflections have so discouraged me, that I have no
mind to pursue those studies, or to be much concerned for the present on
succeeding generation: But could I see Physic regain its luster, the Faculty
encouraged by such Acts of Parliament, as our Predecessors, and Foreign
Potentates have made, and your College advanced as the Proper and Supreme
judicature in reference to Medicine, I would willingly employ all my leiseure
in the improving of the present state of Medicine, without subverting Learning,
or disparaging the Ancients, without the knowledge of whose writings it is
impossible for any man to be excellent in Physic. Vide Meibomium in sur.
Hippocrat. c. 5. Io: Laurent. dissert. de Aesculapio^
Poets and Comical Wits owe more to their Birth, and need less of industry,
study and judgment, than Physicians: The knotty Staff, the Serpent, the
Pineapple, the Dog, (...). Hippocr. lege. c. 2.
the Dragon, the Cock, with which the pourtraicture of Aesculapius was
beautified, were not Symbols and Hieroglyphi^s of a facile study: The first
Principle that we are taught is, (...). But now the reading of two or three
Books, a Comical Wit, a Bacon-face, a contempt of Antiquity, and a pretense to
novel Experiments (which are mere excuses for Ignorance, and Indiscretion) are
sufficient Qualifications,

Notwithstanding the Melancholy and pensiveness into which the present posture
of Learning here in England always puts me into, when I reflect thereon: I
will constrain my self to proceed further, and examine the cases of Phlebotomy
in a Pleurisy, the Smallpox, and Scurvey: concerning all which diseases as I
shall debate what an Intelligent Practitioner may do, nay is oftentimes obliged
to do in conscience, and out of discharge of duty to his Patient, so I will not
justify any Action of those persons who understand nothing, nor can
distinguish circumstances in particular cases: A thousand things are to be
considered by him that would practice Physic exactly, the present disease, the
past condition of the Patient in reference to himself, his paren^s, his diet,
preceding distempers, the latter, the more remote, the conjunct causes; what
hinders, what promotes, what effects the cure: What will, what may happen in
the disease, what will or may ensue upon recovery: In all these cases, since he
has not a sensible and easy knowledge thereof, but must proceed upon
Conjecture, you understand well How great a comprehension of affairs, and how
much in each case, he must inquire into, who will discharge well the duty of a
Physician. It was prudently said of the incomparable Aristotle (the meanest of
whose Works deserves to be read above all that the Novel Experimentators have
published; if it were but for the wise Apothegmes therein: for Civil Society is
the grand work of this Life; and that is more useful, which qualifieth us
thereunto, then what makes us admirable Mouse-trap-makers!) Physicians, says
he, do not cure man in general, Aristot. Metap, lib. 1. c. 1.
except it be by accident, but Cullias, or Socrates, or some other individual
person. Hence even a man that is a speculative Artist (how much more those that
are neither speculative, nor Empiri^s?) may be deceived in the application of
general rules to singular cases, and so may mistake: He tells us that it is not
for the most dexterous railers, Ethicor. l. x. c. 9.
or witty Sophisters, to judge of State matters, nor yet for any man to direct
therein, who has not served an Apprenticeship in the Ministry of State: for
neither in Physic, does the knowledge of a common Praxis accomplish a man
thereunto: (...). (...).
What is it to the purpose, if they learn a multitude of Knick-knacks, and have
an infinite of Conundrums in their Heads, if they know not what appertains to
Practice? These narrow-sighted Verulamians may recommend themselves by success
in a few; the Grave may conceal, or a strong Nature amend their defaults; but
they are nevertheless ignorant. In a calm many can steer a Ship, whose
imbecility of judgment sinks it in a storm. (...). Hipp^cr. de veter medicin.
c. 17.


I have already spoken concerning Phlebotomy in the Plague: In a Pleurisy it is
no less evident that Physicians are divided in their judgments. To begin with
the true state of the Question: This is more than this Baconical Philosopher
did ever think upon; for he without any distinction derives the usefulness of
Phlebotomy in a Pleurisy. If thou be unsatisfied whether opening a vein as
it is indicated from Evacuation, or Revulsion, be a competent sufficient Remedy
for the cure of a Pleurisy, or any high Fever; thou shall find in this short
Tract a Resolution in a Negative sense, grounded on Reason, Authority, but
especially that which is the sum of all, Matter of Fact delivered according to
what Experiments are past, offered to be made good for the future. -- Thus he
bespeaks his Reader in the Preface: and a little after he assures him, that He
is able to resolve any one that is capable, that the most Plethorick body taken
with a Fever, or any one Cachochymic afflicted with a Pleurisy may be cured
without the Lancet more speedily and safely than by using the same. -- Though I
cannot imagine -- G. T. to be good at resolving Controversies in Physic, yet
such is his impudence, that I will not refuse him the Title of Doctor
Resolutus: I have read over his Book with some attention, but I could not find
any Pretensions in it to Authority, nor any Experimental Histories related: All
amounts to this -- G. Thomson says, It is not good to bleed in a Pleurisy. p.
126.
And -- G. Thomson avows that It Is verified by observation, they who recover by
this Apospastick means do for the most part find a great debility succeeding,
are incident to Empyemas, Consumptions, and prove to relapse into the like
condition again. On the other side, those who rise from their sick Beds,
restored by virtue of adaequate Remedies, are secured from the forementioned
discommodities. Assuredly of all those Pleuriticks, I have handled above these
half-score years, I have not known one after their evasion procured by a
legitimate form of Physic, either live crasie, fall into secondary calamities,
or recidivate into a Languour of the like Idaea. -- This is that irrefragable
Argument drawn from past Experiments, which is the Sum of all Proofs, and must
satisfy all that are capable: which it is possible it may do, if there be
persons in the World that are capable of being resolved hereby: But impossible
Suppositions are equipollent to Negations: Assuredly either this Age affords no
such Men, or they are a Company of Fools: Who else will give credit to the bare
assertions of -- G. T? He should have done like his Brother Odowde, printed an
account of Cures, though they had been all false and fictitious: but as the
case is, he neither cites so much as Van Helmont, and the Peasant that cured
Pleurisies with stoned-horse-dung; but is himself Author and Witness: Thus he
bristles most Porcupine like.

Se jaculo, sese pharetra, sese utitur arcu.
This is all I reply to his Authority, and Experiments: His pretenses to Reason
are no less gain. He says, p. 126.
That when we bleed any Pleuritick, there is no straight immediate Revulsion
intended from the part affected to the orifice -- which is a most TRUE, and
Bacon-like Aphorism! for we never thought that the Revulsion could be
straight, whereas the line in which it is made is crooked. If we Phlebotomise in
the Arm, (whether it be on the same side, or on the contrary) or in the foot,
none was ever so besotted as to avow the Revulsion to be straight, though he
held not the Circulation of the Blood: But such as hold that the Revulsion is
made thus, in that the Veins draw from the Arteries, and so as in Siphons,
divert the stream, they cannot hold any thing like it: nor that the Blood
impacted or flowing was immediately revelled, and drawn back: But I am apt ^o
think that some upon large and repeated Phlebotomies may have drawn some of the
purulent and degenerate blood out of the veins of the Arm; in which there is no
more of impossibility, than that it should be carried by the emulgent Arteries
into the Kidneys, and discharged by urine: which last is avowed to have been
done. I do not know that such large Phlebotomies in a Pleurisy are practiced
by the English Physicians; See Schenckius obs. l. 2. de pleurit.

Prosper Alpin. Medic. meth. l. 7. c. xi.


though I think there is not so much of Reason, as vulgar prejudice to oppose
the thing, when the Doctor is an understanding Man. For why may not we in
England bear that which they do in Holland? I. Heurnius apud Schenckius lib. 2.
de pleurit.
there Heurnius took away above four pounds of blood from one Plethorical
Pleuritic at one time, in a dangerous Pleurisy, and recovered him when all
others gave him up for dead. I believe there may be some amongst us that repeat
Phlebotomy too often; but I am confident the generality err in taking away too
little at one time, in the beginning of Pleurisies and Fevers.

His next Argument is, that the Cure by Phlebotomy is accidental only and
uncertain: p. 126. I would willingly know of this Holmontion, whether it be a
Rhizotomous cure, when Nature does put a period to a disease, by an eruption of
blood at the nose? Here is no dulcification of the acid Latex; no rectification
of the stomach; and no other mortification of the malignity.
sometimes in the beginning they do thereby suppress the disease, and as it
were crush it, but it is a contingent, not at all Rhizotomous Cure, which ought
to be performed by those things which are (...), dulcifying the acid Latex,
carrying it off through all its emunctories, rectifying the stomach, and
mortifying the malignity. -- That all Pleurities shall be cured by Phlebotomy,
is a thing no wise man will undertake for: As little will any man promise to
cure a Pleurisy by sole Phlebotomy, without giving the Patient any
Expectorating, or Sudorifick Medicaments, or other Potions; besides the Powders
of Pikes-jaws, Boares-teeth, Crab's-eyes, etc. which correct the acidity of the
Latex; if there be any such thing.

But to show the folly and impertinence of this -- G. T. There are several
sorts of Pleurisies, in many whereof no Galenical Practitioner is obliged to
Phlebotomy at all; though in some such cases it be left to their discretion
either to use it, or omit it; as in Bastard Pleurisies. Of those which have the
Character of true Pleurisies, Quercetan. Redivivus t 3. p 102. Baptist.
Co^dronch. de morb. vulga^ c. xii. and Bartoletus de diffic. respir. l. 5. c.
4. Bartoletus de difficil. respir. l. 5. c. 4. Wierus obser. l. 1. de Epid.
pleuritide.
some are occasioned by the Worms: in which -- G. T. cannot imagine that any
man would rely on Phlebotomy. There are also Pestilential Pleurisies, wherein
the effects of Phlebotomy are as uncertain as in the Pest it self: Gesner (in
his Epistles somewhere) speaks of such a one, in which all died that were
blooded: So does Bartoletus, and Wierus. There was also an Epidemical Disease
in Friuli, which Vincentius Baronius first named a Pleuripneumony, in which the
Pleura and Lungs were both affected (where the seat of a Pleurisy is, is
doubtful amongst Physicians) but yet so, that though they had all the signs of
a common Pleurisy at the beginning, Vincent. Baronius de pleuripneumon. l. 1.
c. 1.
yet did they never come to suppuration, but were cured by Phlebotomy,
immediately upon the administration whereof they were relieved, and with the
help of accessional Medicaments expectorated bilious and pituitous spittle, and
so recovered. As to those which are confessed to be Pleurisies, Cost^llus de
abusa Phlebotom. p. 87.
it is to be observed, that neither can all persons, nor all places bear
Phlebotomy therein, and in such cases no wise Physician will administer it: the
qualities of the Climate, and individual constitutions or debilities, are
circumstances he will always regard. It is granted that some Pleurisies are so
mild, Gabelchoveru^ centur. 2. cur 92 in Scholio Hollerius apud la^o^ium in
Coac. l. 7. sect. 2. sect. 18. vide etiam I^^ot. in Coac. l. 5. sect. 2.. 26.
and attended with such favorable symptoms, of so good a prognostic, that
they do not need Phlebotomy: In moderata pleuritide, in qua videlicet parum
urgent respiratio, tussis, dolor, febris, Phlebotomia inu^ilis est, aut certe
non necessaria. Aliis enim levioribus auxiliis curari potest, quomodo is a
Galeno p^rcuratus, qui in levi pleuritide sanguinem expuebat; Galenus comment.
3 in l. 6. Epidem. But Riolanus does blame Galen as violating his own Rules
hereby, De circulat. sang. c. xx.
and plurimi visi sunt a nobis and aliis medicis citra ejusmodi auxilium
convaluisse. But although I am ready to grant that in such cases Phlebotomy may
be omitted, and yet the Patient escape: yet I can hardly commend the prudence
of such Physicians as do omit it: For, since a Pleurisy is always an acute
Disease, (in such our Prognostics are not certain) and the parts affected such
as are of greatest importance, Hippocrat. l. 2. Aphor. 19.
and equal tenderness; since the disease is frequently so fallacious, that
amidst the most hopeful signs, and when we may justly expect its happy
termination, even then most direful symptoms break out, and render the case
deplorable. [ Nam aliquando ubi antea signa omnia salutem praenuntiaverint,
Holler. de morb. intern. l. 1. c. 26. De pleuritide.
crisis tempore, quae fere fit ad septimum, aut alium diem criticum, vehementer
Pleuritis exacerbatur, symptomata omnia increscunt, tum nihil movendum est: sed
omnia naturae committenda sunt.] Since the Patients condition is such, I do not
see how any Physician can answer it well to his Conscience, or the Rules of Art
(I am sure it is criminal in Italy) if he forbear to take some Blood (albeit not
so much as otherwise he would) away from him: Zacchias Qu. Medico-legal. l. 9.
consil. 40. sect. 4.
the damage is inconsiderable, but the hazard otherwise so great, that no
prudence can well contemn it.

I do further confess that many have been recovered out of very dangerous
Pleurisies without Phlebotomy: as he in Alexius Pedemontius with the pectoral
drink, Alexius Pedemont. de secr. l. 1. p. 51, 49. River. cent. 4. obs. 88.

Quercetan. Redivivus l. 3. p. 103.


and perhaps that other by the eating of an Apple roasted with Olibanum in it:
whereof Quercetan makes mention; who also speaks of another Powder given in the
water of Corn-poppies, with which he cured many Pleuritics, administering
nothing else inwardly, or outwardly. There is a Case in Valleriola (which yet
he rather accounts miraculous, than to be presumed upon again) of a young Woman
eight months gone with child, that fell into a Pleurisy on the left side, with
a violent Fever, a troublesome Cough, and difficulty of breathing. Vno die
miraculo curata, non misso sanguine, Fr. Valleriol^ obs. Medic. l. 4. obs. 1.
non cucurbitulis adhibitis, ullave purgatione, duobus tantum illi praescriptis
Clysteribus emollientibus, sputo eodem dio cruento plurimo and cum facilitate
emanante: sudore interim copioso sub noctem secuto, postride sana evasit,
absque dolor, absque febre (quae tamen vehementissima in ea erat) and absque
ullis symptomatis relictis, a morbo integre curata remansit.

Neither will I deny that grievous Pleurisies have been cured by Sudorifics:
this Method was practiced by Lazarus Meyssonnierius, and that for this reason:
He says the common People about Lions in France call a Pleurisy Lou-san-prei,
Lazarus Messonnierius doctr. nov. febr. Exerc. 3. p. 41, 42. (...). Hippocrot.
de victu in acut. l. 1. sect. 8.
or congealed Blood: and that Platerus (and others) upon dissection have found
no other default in the Pleura, than that there has been a livid spot thereon,
which he looks upon as a concretion of salino-serous Blood; considering this,
and that the Critical termination of Pleurisies is by Sweat, he perfected his
Cures by discussing the coagulated blood by Sweat, and that sometimes so as not
to use the other subsidiary Remedies of Phlebotomy, or Lenitives.

Imo non adhibitis Medicorum ignorantia, vel adstantium negligentia
convenientibus remediis aliis, in vera Pleuritide sudorem excitavimus diebus
decretoriis 7. and 14. quod nobis feliciter cessit, praesertim in adolescento
praedivite, qui tempesti^a phlebotomia omissa ad mortem properabat, ille
siquidem septima morbi propinato a nobis vocatis potu hedrotico intra biduum
sanus in publicum prodiit: vocatur ille Serre, and Burgundii apud Delphinates
taurice vivit- I must take notice here that our Author dislikes not, but
complains of the omission of mature Phlebotomy; notwithstanding that he
completed his Cures by sweating: Neither is this way of his condemned by
Vallesius, whose words are these. Valles. in Hippocrat. de vict^ in morb. acut.
l. 4. p. 197
Haec [apud Hippocratem ibi] ratio curandi pl^uriticos, potionibus vehementer
discutientibus, non admodum in usu est nostris Medicis, quippe qui post
missionem sanguinis, and inunctiones and moventia sputa, and quae ad has
intentiones pertinent, nisi excreent aegroti, d^sperant servari posse, ad
nullam aliam transeuntes curationem. Scio tamen quendam, cui homo quidam
vulgaris nescio quid hujusmodi in potu dedit, copiosissimo sudore excitato,
servatum esse brevi, and thoracem laxatum, and sputum redditum facile, cum
septima jam dies esset, and nihil caepisset excreare, and pene jam strangulari
prae respirandi difficultate periclitaretur. Idiotae etiam qui Emperice
curationem quorundam aggrediuntur, exudatoriis curant pleuritides, saepe cum
optimo successu: atqui profecto ratione hoc non caret. Of the like Cures,
without Phlebotomy, or other Medicaments besides what expectonate, (and perhaps
a pectoral liniment, or fomentation) you may see in the excellent Rulandus
cent. 1. cur. 59, 75. cent. 6. cur. 76. And Gabelchoverus cent. 3. cur. 49.

Neither is it to be denied, but that Rulandus frequently cured Pleurisies
(even the most desperate) by vomits of Aqua Benedicta, or the Emetic infusion,
and pectoral drinks, without ever proceeding to Pectoral liniments, or
Phlebotomy, except there did appear further occasion thereof after the vomit.
So Cent. 1. cur. 41, 81. Cent. 4. cur. 26. Cent. 6. cur. 13. Cent. 7. cur. 42.
But when there seemed occasion for Phlebotomy, after the aforesaid vomit, then
he uses it. Cent. 1. cur. 35, 36, 57, 62, 65, 68. Hartman. praxis chym. de
pleurit. p^ 1 33. edit. Genevens.
Cent. 4. cur. 16. Cent-5. cur. 53, 56, 57. The like course was practiced by
Hartman, who begins with the same vomit; and if occasion require descends to
Phlebotomy, and Diaphoretics, Liniments, and expectorating Medicaments. In
Plethorick bodies, does Hartman bleed before he vomit his Patients. Sometimes
Rulandas does vomit them with his Aqua benedicta, bleed, and sweat them for
several days till they be well; using other pectoral Medicaments: as Cent. 6.
cur. 18. Sometimes he sweats and vomits them at once with the powder of
Asarabacca-roots, and a Decoction or Water of Carduus benedictus, and does not
Phlebotomise: as Cent. 5. cur. 6. Concerning the use of his Aqua benedicta, or
the Emetick infusion in Pleurisies he avows it to be Experimentum optimum
contra hunc morbum, et omnium aliorum Medicamentorum certissimum. Cent. 1. cur,
66. I must profess I have generally guided my practice in the Country by the
Presidents of Rulandus, proceeding to Phlebotomy after vomiting, if the pain
were not mitigated and expectoration facile; but if it were, I acquiesced in
topics, and expectoration, and sweating. Where the Patient could, or would not
vomit^ I followed the Presidents of the said Rulandus, for to purge with the
decoction of Senna, Agaric and some pectoral additions; and then to
expectorate, and sweat the sick, not bleeding except occasion required it, and
then I either premised, or used it subsequently, as I saw cause: thus Rulandus
Cent. 5. cur. 36, 64. for which procedure you may see his Reasons added Cent.
7. cur. 20. And the practice of Gabelchoverus Cent. 1. cur. 11 Cent. 2. cur.
23. But Gabelchoverus in his Scholium here does not allow of so strong purges
as Rulandus sometimes makes use of, and defends by the Authority of
Hippocrates, who did use Peplium and Hellebore in such Pleurisies, as the pain
descended to the Hypochondria, and did not ascend to the Omoplate: But Rulandus
does not regard that distinction, nor Gabelchover, nor many others. The case of
the Wife of Ludovicus Paniza does deserve to be set down here.

Ludovicus Paniza, Mantuanus, in Apologia Commentarii de parca evacuatione in
gravium morborum principiis a materia multa and mala and non furiosa pedetentim
facienda. cap. 6. fol. 59. col. 1.
Praeterea quid sensui respondebimus? quod anno 1554. mea conjuge pleuritide
correpta, ea suum annum 72. agente, imbecillis naturae, melancholicae
temperaturae, sanguine and carne exuta, dolor ad spatulam ascendente. Eam
secundo mobi die, non cum Phlebotomia, sed cum Pharmaco purgavimus, quod summa
cum tranquillitate subduxit, deinde subtili cum diaeta, and coquentibus, and
sputum facilitantibus (ut par est in hujusmodi morbis) usque ad septimam sic
procedentes, qua tra^sacta, de Phlebotomia memores, sanguinis and carnis
privatione, aetate, and aegra reluctante, eam dimissimus, atque ad id
faelicissimum purgatorium Medicamentum rursus devenimus, a quo post xiv. diem
salvata fuit,

It is further to be taken notice of, that sometimes Pleurisies have been cured
without Phlebotomy, purging, or vomiting, or bleeding; by Liniments and
expectorating Medicoments: as in Gabelchoverus Cent. 1. cur. 3. Cent. 2. cur.
93, 98, 99.

But to oppose -- G. T. directly: sometimes Pleurisies have been cured by
Phlebotomy alone and pectoral Medicaments: as in Rulandus Cent. 7. cur. 13, 14.
Cent. 10. cur. 49. Gabelchoverus Cent. 3. cur. 7. Sometimes by Phlebotomy, and
sweating: as in Rulandus Cent. 6. cur. 60.

I have hitherto made use of these Authors, because they were most eminent
Practitioners, and particularly famed for their Cures in that disease: and it
is manifest hereby, that Physicians are not bound up to one method therein.
Neither indeed can they be in any disease: for in some years, and in some ages,
and persons, and in some circumstances, they are forced to recede from their
usual courses; and sometimes the mildness of a distemper is such, that it
requires not all their address, those Methods which are set down in our praxes.

I now come to give an account of the most common and received Method of curing
Pleurisies amongst Physicians; and to show with how much reason they practice
Phlebotomy therein. There is not any disease whereof Hippocrates did take so
particular care in relating its Diagnostics, Prognostics, and Cure, as a
Pleurisy, as is evident by what he has written in his Books De victu in
morbis acutis; Hippocrat. aphor. 8. 4. cum notis Vollesii.
and De morbis, besides what he has set down occasionally in his other Works:
It is an Acute Fever, finishing its course in seven, Hippocrat. Epidem. 3^ l.
3. p. 309, 310, 311, 312^ cum notis Vollesii.
nine, eleven, or fourteen days; though it has happened (as in the case of
Anaxion) that it extends its period to thirty four days. It is attended
always with troublesome, oftentimes with dangerous symptoms. A violent Cough,
difficulty of breathing, pricking pains and Stitches in the sides: these are
the Pathognomonical signs of this Fever. Though the part affected seem
principally to be the Pleura or costall membrane, yet are the Lungs attacqued
by this disease (and frequently it has been found that the seat of the
Pleurisy is rather in them than in the Pleura; as the followers of Petronius
do demonstrate) and their fabric is so tender, that it is in great danger to
be putrified or corroded in this distemper, by the sharpness or other evil
qualities of the sputaminous matter. Hippocr. Coac. praenot. l. 5. sect. 2.
sect. 27. cum notis Iacotii.

B^llonius Epidem. l. 1. p. 20.


Besides, it is a very fallacious disease, and frequently after hopes of a
recovery by a benign Anacatharsis, after that the stitches have abated,
oftentimes the disease becomes crude and exasperated again, to the detriment or
death of the Patient: as appears by the case of Anaxion in Hippocrates, and
that other related by Franciscus Rubeus: Franc. Rubeus nocturn. exercitat. xii.

Lud. Mercatus consult. xi. Hippocr. Coat. Praenot. lib. 5. sect. 2. sect. 72
cum notis Iacotii.


as also by Mercatus. If it be not happily cured, the danger is no less than
that it should change into a Phrenitis, or Peripneumony, or terminate in an
Apostemation of the Lungs, or an Empyema in the Thorax. Where the disease is so
full of dangerous as well as vexatious symptoms, it is not to be wondered that
Physicians have diligently looked into the disease, and recommended unto our
practice a great many things, which they who either perfunctorily look upon
matters, or superciliously despise dangers, or out of ignorance cannot
apprehend them, may contemn. That the Blood in that disease should acquire a
congealing or coagulating quality seems unimaginable: both because that
oftentimes the procatarctic cause is sudden in its operation: (...). Hippocr.
de victu acut. l. 1. sect. 35. Isbrand. a Diemerbrook de pest. c. 14. sect. 7.
as when a plethoric person any way does over-heat himself, or drink cold
drink, etc. and also that the congelation in the Pleura (when it is there) is
no other than what is seen in the spots of the spotted Fever, or Plague; which
seem not to be congelations of the Blood: Besides, How comes it to pass that
this aptitude to congeal, if it be in the whole mass of blood, does not
discover it self any where else but in the Pleura? And if such a Diathesis ad
acescendum in the blood produce a Pleurisy, How is it true that Hippocrates
says, Hippoc. aphor. 33. sect. 6.
Acidum qui eructant, non sunt pleuritidi obnoxii? Why also are splenetic
persons (in whom we may best suppose such a Diathesis) not inclined to
Pleurisies; except the spurious and statulent ones? Is it not moreover known,
that Vinegar dissolves congealed Blood, and is therefore given in bruises: As
also Oxymel and syrup of Vinegar in Pleurisies? But it is evident that it is a
Fever accompanied with a Catarrh upon the Thorax and Lungs; and that it admits
of a great diversification according as the Galenical humors do operate in it;
and in the Cure a different regard is to be had to a bilious or pituitous
Pleurisy, from what there is in one that is sanguine: as any man knows that
understands Physic, or has so much as read Salius Diversus upon Hippocrates
de Morbis lib. 2. Or Forrestus's Observations, lib. 16. It was the advice of
Hippocrates at first to try to discuss it by fomentations: if they succeeded
not, then in case the stitches seemed to diffuse themselves upwards toward the
shoulders, to phlebotomise the Patient, and let him to bleed largely until the
color changed, Hippocrat. de victu in morb. alcuct. l. 2. cum notis Vallesu.
p. 42.
from corrupt to red, or from pure and red to blackish: But in case the pains
descended below the Diaphragme, then to purge with black Hellebore, or Peplium.
The reason upon which he seemed principally to go was, that a Physician was to
imitate the progress of Nature, and to carry off the peccant humors by such
ways as he inclined them to go: which in one case appeared to have a tendency
to the Arm, (...). Hippoc. aphor. 16. l. 6.
in the other to the Bowels. But Galen considering the uncertainty that is in
the operation of purging Medicaments; as also the hazard of irritating
inflammations thereby, and the diverting that sputation which is so requisite
in that disease: and that since a Looseness was perilous therein, purging
could not be safe: and I suppose that the sad case of Scomphus may have
discouraged him from it: who being purged in a Pleurisy, became frantic, and
died on the seventh day: Valles. in Hippocrat. Epid. l. 6. p. 456. and Van der
Linden select. Medic. c.xii.
the discourses upon which lamentable History, in Vallesius and Van der Linden
do deserve to be pondered: The purge did not work much, yet killed him. Some
other cases as sad as this are recorded: upon the account whereof the
generality of Physicians have prudently been swayed from purging in a Pleurisy
until the latter end: Hippocr. Coac. praenot. l. 5. sect. 2. sect 25.
Because it is very convenient in a Pleurisy that the body be moderately
soluble: they do give their Patients Glysters: and because the disease is a
Catarrh accompanied with a Fever, they conceive their main work to be this, to
prevent the increase of the fluxion, by diverting the course of the Blood
another way: and to evacuate by a concoction and expectoration the matter
inflamed and impacted. To do this, they place the beginning and foundation of
the Cure in Phlebotomy; yet do not we now insist upon their bleeding to a
Lipothymy, or till the color of the blood change, but rather choose to
proportion our Phlebotomies by other considerations; especially since it is
visible in the case of great fluxes of Blood, that revulsion is best performed
by par^ite, and, after some intermission, repeated phlebotomies: and in order
to the Anacatharsis or expurgation by spittle, we do give them all besitting
means to expectorate concocted matter: and use anodyne unguents and
fomentations in order thereunto. There was heretofore a great quarrel about
bleeding in a Pleurisy, which arm it should be administered in, and in what
vein: But those are not the contests of this Age, Vesalius says, that all the
quarrels about the different Phlebotomies in a Pleurisy, were Rixa de lana
caprina. Vesal. exam. obs. Fallopii. p. 129. yet this is evident, that Nature
delights to evacu^t^ diseases of the liver by an Haemorragy of the right
nostril; of the spleen, by the right. And that there is as it were a seam in
the body, is apparent in the Palsy. So that it is wisdom for us to imagine,
that it is not indifferent what side w^ bleed ^n.
wherein it is agreed to bleed on the same side that is affected, and to repeat
the phlebotomy on the contrary foot or arm. Neither ought there to be any
dispute about repeating phlebotomy, since the first occasion thereof
continuing, or upon a recrudescence urging us again thereunto, if the Patients
strength can bear it, we ought to repeat it. In this case the Methodists and
Galen are reconciled; and I suppose it most evident upon those Principles I
have laid down. For if the Habit of the Body in a Pleurisy be become too
adstrict, then is it necessary to relax it and if the disease be great, by as
great remedies; now their grand relaxatory is Phlebotomy: and after a vomit,
Valles Meth. med. l. 4. c. 2. Riolanus de circular. sangu. c.xx. Forest: Obs.
l.xvi. Obs. ^3. in Scholio.
they used it: yet had they this care, not to bleed too much, least the body
being too much relaxed, should not be able to concoct the impacted matter: and
the Galenists do give the like caution, that we have a care of hindering the
suppuration by importune Phlebotomies. I find Hippocrates to have blooded
Anaxion upon the eighth day: Forrestus gives us Instances of the like nature.
That frequent Phlebotomies in the same Pleurisies have been practiced very
beneficially, is evident upon record: and in Holland I find Tulpius to accord
with the French and Spaniards, Tulpius Obs. l. 2. c. 1, 2, 3.
and to allow, if the disease be violent, that the Pleuritic bleed three, nay
five or eight times: and gives such Presidents for it at Amsterdam, as may
justify us at London. I will recite one case of his.

Tulpius Obs. l. 2. c. 2.
Vxori Cusparis Walendalii, insurrexit, octavo a partu die, acerbissimus
lateris dolor: repetens identidem, tot insultibus, ut necesse fuerit, ter
pedis, and quinquies brachii exoluere venas: antequam comprimeretur, sanguis, a
suppressis menstruis sursum raptus. Sedea fuit ipsi virium constantia: ut
praeter sanguinem toties detractum, sustinuerit insuper ingens alvi profluvium,
antequam integre, evicerit hunc morbum.

There is a great variety in the practice of Physicians as to Phlebotomy, some
using it more frequently than others do: whether these be rash, or the others
indiscreetly timorous, I will not determine now: Both may do well as to the
recovery of the Patients; because a judicious person supplies one Medicine by
the use of another: But these Bocanical Ignoramus's cannot do that. I find that
Forrestus seldom, if ever bled his Pleuritics above once: and Blondelus
assures me, that the Peasants of France bleed but once in a Pleurisy at the
beginning, Almaricus Blondelus de venae sectione, p. 50.
and recover. Plebeii fere omnes una vice contenti adire Medicum, una sola
adhibita v^nae sectione curantur, and ex december unus vel duo emoriun^ur, and
aliquando omnes sanantur Without all controversy Phlebotomy is one of the most
generous remedies in the World, if a man understand the Art of using it: But
it is our old Books, and not the Novum Organum of my Lord Bacon, or the insipid
Writings of the modern Experimentators will qualify a man thereunto. I do
believe that B^tallus did the wonders he speaks of, but as there were
left handed Catoes heretofore, so there is many a left handed Botallus, that
would imitate his practice, yet wants his judgment and learning. I would advise
such to be tender how they deal much in this noble remedy, or rather that they
would totally desist from practicing Physic.

I know that in Germany most are scrupulous about reiterated Phlebotomies,
Platerus prax. t. 2. c. x.
yet Platerus commends it in Pleurisies, and advises to bleed frequently, even
twice in a day in the beginning of the Disease. It Is not that the people there
cannot bear it so well as in France, or Spain, I. Riolan. de circulat. sang. c.
20.
but that they will not: There was a time when Galen thought that such as the
French, could not bear will the loss of blood: and Valleriola did imagine that
the Moors and Spaniards could not endure it so well as the Dutch, or French:
there was a time when to let a Woman with child blood in England, was esteemed
impracticable: and the Lady Drury was a bold Lady, that in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, Botallus de venae sect. c. 3.
durst obey Botallus therein, against the opinion of the greatest English
Doctors: But a greater maturity of judgment, and the good success has
undeceived us, and convinced us, that our fears were but panick and vain: and
in opposition to Galen and Hippocrates we accord with Celsus.

Siquidem antiqui, primam ultimamque aetatem sustinere non posse hoc auxilii
genus judicabant; C. Celsus Medic. l, 2. c. 10.
persuaserantque sibi, mulierem gravidam quae it a curata esset, abortum esse
facturam, Postea vero usus ostendit, nihil ex his esse perpetuum, aliasque
potius observationes adhibendas esse, ad quas curantis consilium dirigi debeat.
Interest enim, non quae oetas sit, neque quid in corpore intus geratur, sed
quae vires sint. Ergo si juvenis imbecillus est; aut si mulier, quae gravid^
non est, parum valet, male sanguis mittitur, emoritur enim vis, siqua
supererat, hoc modo erepta. At firmus puer, and robustus senex, and gravida
mulier val^ns, tuto si^ curantur. I have seen some of all Ages phlebotomised,
and have preserved the lives of some small Children by that means; I have seen
L^dies with child to be let bl^^d, when they were continually sw^^ning, and
f^inti^g, and extreme weak: and that judicio^sly: for they havi^g large veins,
and otherwise a firm and imperspirable h^bit of body, we did not regard the
Animal imbecility, n^^ the irregularity of a puls^ altered by vapors, but
proceeded to cure them by Phlebotomy and it prospered.
even Pleurisies. But the effects of Phlebotomy in a pleuritic woman, which was
within a fortnight of her time, are remarkably described by that cautious
Practitioner, Baldassar ^imaeus: He did not scruple to let a gravid wom^n
blood, but she was so far gone, as that he trembled: Tandem non tantum
adstantibus mulierculis, sed and ipsa aegra venaesectionem vehementer u^gente,
exemplo Petri Salii Diversi, qui ultimo mense, and instante partus tempore
feliciter venum aperuit, Baldass. Timaeus respons. Medic. 58.

Petrus Salius Diversus de affect. particular. c.xxii.


j^ci aleam, and secta mediana sanguinem ad uncias circiter sex detraxi, and
sic optato successu and maetrem and faetum a praesentissimo vitae periculo, Dei
gratia, liberavi. There are a multitude of things to be considered by him that
would judiciously practice Phlebotomy in Pleurisies; besides what I have
intimated: as Whether it succeed another disease, as the Measils, or be
primary: Whether it be complicated with other distempers, or solitary: Whether
it be crude, or upon concoction: Whether it be likely to be long, or short:
Whether the Patient do expectorate, or not, If he do; what color, and what
consistence, or taste the evacuated matter has: Whether the disease be upon a
recrudescence, or not: These are circumstances which he ought well to
understand, for as to the time of phlebotomy, it is one in a long disease, when
the beginning is protracted to seven, ten or seventeen days; and another in
that which will terminate in seven days: the urgency is one in an incoct
Pleurisy, when nothing is (in due time) expectorated; and another, when blood,
or purulent but benign matter is avoided: and another when the matter is black,
livid, very yellow, or stinking, or sweet to the taste: the case alters when
Nature does ease her self by a propitious loosen^ss, and when it is an
importune Diarrhaea: when it turns to an Empyema, and when it proceeds to an
amicable Crisis. These things are to be pondered by the Physician, and his
repute is not to be questioned, for his actings, by such as understand not the
case, or apprehend not by what exigences and presidents the intelligent
Practitioner is guided. Men ought not to judge of Diseases by their names only;
and condemn a knowing man for doing that in one disease at one time, which
neither they nor he would adventure in another: and since it is not allowed us
to abandon our Patients in some cases, according to the advice of Hippocrates:
give us leave to make use of that Apology which Celsus does suggest unto us: C.
Celsus Medic. l. 2. c. 10.
Fieri tamen potest, ut morbus quidem id desiderat, corpus tamen vix pati posse
videatur: Sed, si nullum tamen appareat aliud auxilium, periturusque sit, qui
laborat, nisi temeraria quoque via fuerit adjutus, in hoc statu boni Medici est
ostendere, quam nulla spes sine sanguinis detractione sit; faterique quantus in
hac ipsa remetus sit, and tum demum, si exigatur, sanguinem mittere. De quo
dubitare in ejusmodi re non oportet Satius est enim anceps auxilium experiri,
quam nullum. Let the World rest assured, that an understanding Galenist does
nothing rashly: that he considers of all circumstances, and knows their case
better than themselves; that he has as great a regard to the preservation of
their vital strength, as they can wish: and apprehends when to desist, and when
to operate, and in what manner: but these are mysteries to the Baconists: and I
can give no better directions to the sick, than that they would apply
themselves to a prudent Physician, rather than Quacksalvers, and refer
themselves to his judgment, without imposing their own, or that of ignorant
Experimentators, and Arcanists. And so much concerning Phlebotomy in
Pleurisies: the more exact handling whereof, and the accommodating of the
Method of Rulandus to that of the Galenists, must be the subject of another
discourse: I add only, that Nature it self does teach us the use of Phlebotomy
in Pleurisies; for they are often accompanied with a bleeding at the nose, in
the beginning, which is benefici^l to the Patient. Larvi sanguinis fluxus ex
naribus multa solvunt, ut Heragorae. Hippocr. Epid. l. 2. sect. 3. p. 102. cum
notis V^ll^s^i. Prosp. Alpinus de pr^s^g. vita and morte. l 7. c. 2.
Non agnoscebant Medici. Though it happen symptomatically, yet is it frequently
advantageous, even in Pleurisies: nay it is an accident we may commonly expect
in them: Quibus febricitantibus rubores in facie, and capitis vehemens dolor,
venarumque pulsus, Coac. praenot. l. 4. v. ^0^ Prosp. Alpinus de praesag l. 7.
c. 16.
iis ut plurimum fluor fit sanguinis: and in a Pleurisy, it is always the most
mild and safe, if the Patient begin his Anacatharsis by a sub-cruent sputation.
In fine, she usually terminates this Fever by an Haemorraghy at the Nose, P.
Saluis com. in lib. 1. de morb^, p. 170^ Holler. apud Iacot. in Come. l. 5.
sect. 2. sect. 59.
which if it be small does portend evil; but if it be large, is beneficial.
Pleuritis larga haemorrhagia enaribus judicare potest, stillatione non potest.
And this good fortune did recover Demosthenes out of an incurable Pleurisy, as
he relates it himself. Demos^h. adv. C^no^. cit^nte Beve^ovicio de Med. vet^
part. 3. c. 7, p^ 312.
Febres me continuae sequebantur, and cruciatus totius corporis perquam
vehementes and atroces: imprimis vero laterum and imi ventris: neque cibum
capere poteram; and ut Medicus quidam affirmabat, nisi mihi doloribus afflicto,
and jam desperata purgatio sanguinis ultro copiosa supervenisset, me saniosum
((...)) factum fuisse periturum: nunc is sanguis recessu mihi suo saluti fuit.
I have not the original by me, to consult the Text: but whether it were at the
Nose, or by Stool (I believe the former) it is all one to the present purpose;
Hippocr. Epid. l. 6. sect. 3. p. 665. cum notis Vallesii.
but it may seem pertinent to observe, that those which bleed much at the
Emeroids are not incident to Pleurisies.

The subject of my next discourse must be concerning Phlebotomy in the Small
Pox: page 8^.
My Adversary blames Doctor Willis for allowing of Phlebotomy in the Small
Pox, upon the nick of their eruption: but by way or Argument against the
judgment of that eminent Practitioner, he alleges nothing but this: Make this
good by fact, that it is profitable and necessary in any such case to open a
vein (for (...), will never carry with me) then I shall forthwith become a
Proselyte to your Method. Assuredly this, I am certain of it, was neither
profitable nor necessary for the Nation, that we should by this means loose
three persons of the noblest extract. -- I have always looked on the discourse
of that Learned man concerning Fevers, as one of the most judicious Writings
that ever our Faculty produced: it is succinct without obscurity, and without
the omission of any circumstances that frequently or rarely fall under the
consideration of a Physician, and the practice, as well as Medicaments so safe,
so authenticate according to the Rules of Art and practical Observations (which
we preserve) that it is above all the effects of Envy and Malice.

It is a great abuse to the Doctor which this Bacon-faced Helmontian put upon
him, as if he approved generally and indefinitely of bleeding in the Small Pox
upon the nick of their eruption. It appears there not to be his practice, but
upon urgent cases; and he, on purpose relates an History of its evil effects,
thereby to deterr others from using Phlebotomy rashly in that disease. I shall
repeat his words, and method of curing it, as far as relates to the beginning
of the disease.

Quoad primum intentio sit, Williss. de febr. c. 15.
ut naturae impedimenta quaevis anferamus, quo sanguis, variolarum fermento
inquinatus, and coagulari aptus, adhuc motum aequabilem in cord and vasis
stagnatione retineat, ac effervescens portiones cum veneno gelatus for as
expellat: interim cautio sit, ne fermentationis, seu effervescentiae opus
ullatenus cohibeatur, aut nimium proritetur: hoc enim cruoris massa plus debito
in portiones congelatus agitur, isto restringitur nimis in motu, nec particulae
venenatae cum cruore gelato for as emandantur: natura a secretionis and
expulsionis opere impedire solet nimia excrementorum congerie in visceribus,
aut sanguinis exundantia in vasis; quare primo statim morbi insultu deinda erit
opera, ut evacuatio per vomitum, aut sedem, si opus fuerit, tempestive
procuretur, pharmacis tantum mitioribus and blandis utendum est, quae nimirum
non irritent, aut humores perturbent: quare hoc tempore interdum emetica,
purgantia, aut enemata, modo haec, modo ista locum habent: etiam sanguinis
missio si plethora adsit, bono cum successu celebratur. -- Circa missionem
sanguinis instante variolarum eruptione valde ambigitur: olim inter nostrates
haec res sacra audiebat, neque sub ullo necessitatis praetextu Phlebotomia
admitti solebat: nuper autem experientia duce in quibusdam casibus sanguinem
mitti omnino utile and necessarium esse comprobatur: quae tamen evacuatio si in
quavis constitutione indiscriminatur adhibeatur, aut quando isthac opus fuerit,
in quantitate nimis larga peragatur, magna saepe incommoda exinde sequuntur.

These are the words of that intelligent person; whereas -- G. T. seems in the
English Text to affix upon him such a sentiment as if he allowed commonly and
indiscriminately of Phlebotomy in the very nick of the coming out of the Small
Pox: But it may be replied, that he has done the Doctor justice in the Latin
citation: but I think not amongst English Readers, nor in his vulgar
discourses. However I shall endeavor to justify the aforesaid Method of
Doctor Willis as Artificial, and agreeable to the opinion and happy practice of
the best Physicians: and that it may be more manifest, I will enlarge my work,
by examining the contrary opinions of some others: for -- G. T. gives my Pen
here no employment, except it be to tell him, that the three noble Personages
which he speaks of were not the Doctors Patients, as I believe: except he be
accountable for all that act agreeably to that Method which He (and our best
Physicians) lays down: I add, that many Actions are warrantable by Art and
Prudence, which are not successful: and to requite his Catalogue, I would have
him know, that when this young King of Spain had the Small Pox, he was let
blood several times: and so was the present Queen of France upon a feverish
indisposition let blood twice, in 1663. and two days after the M^asils
appeared: And this Lewis xiv. being sick of the malignant and pestilential
Small Pox was thrice blooded by Doctor Vautier: and for it, received this Elogy
from the learned Iacobus Thevart. Jacob. Thevart in dedicatione tomi tertii
Consil. Medicin.
-- Vt boni omnes Galli palam profiteantur ac praedicent suum se tibi debere
Regem charissimum, quem nempe malignis ac pestilentibus variolis
periculosissime laborantem non cordiacis tantum praesidiis (ut Medicastrorum
(...) vulgus solet) sed and ipsa, Ballonii, ad D^ D. Francisc. Vautier Archi
atrorum Comitem.
quam in ejusmodi affectibus aversantur ac damnant, sanguinis missione ter, pro
symptomatum urgentium necessitate, repetita, salvum and incolumen restituiste,
innumeris interim in hac urbe populo sissima pueris hac Epidemica lue e medio
sublatis. Quod ob facinus tam egregium quae non tibi lauds, vir
praestantissime, quae non soteria debentur? Si qui civem Romanum in praelio
servaverat, quercea corona dignus haebitus est, Tu certe qui Regem
Christianissimum ab host tam infenso liberasti, auream, qualis est ab
Atheniensibus Hippocrati concessa, meruisti. Nec dubito quin si vixisses
priscis illis temporibus, quibus inter Hero as referebantur quicunque insigni
aliquo facinore Rempublicam conservassent adjuvissentve; quin, inquam, ipse
Heroum auxisses numerum, honoresque prope divinos accepisses. I repeat this
passage with the more satisfaction, because it may serve as example to the
English, and instruct them with what gratitude and ackn^wledgments they ought
to treat the learned and renowned Physician Sir Alexander Frasier, principal
Physician to his Majesty, for recovering our most gracious Sovereign of the
like distemper, by the judicious administration of Phlebotomy. I could name
many other Persons of Honor, who do confess that they owe their recovery out
of dangerous and malignant Small Pox unto Phlebotomy.

Of those that have written concerning the Small Pox, and are therein professed
enemies to Bleeding, I shall take only two particularly to task; the one is
Doctor Tobias Whitaker, the other Doctor Thomas Sydenham: which I do the more
willingly, because the one writing in English, the other practicing at London,
and endeavoring to insinuate his principles every where, with a derogation
from the authorized practice of Physicians, it must needs seem that all who do
not take his course, have neither regard to the Patients, nor considered
seriously the rise and progress of the dise^se. I did at first doubt, Whether I
ought to reckon them as distinct Authors, because they so far agree in the
Regimen and Cure of the disease; that the one does seem to have stolen it from
the other: As will appear by this Parallel.

Doctor T. Whitaker of the Cure of the Small Pox, p. 22.
In the Regimen of this Disease, the whole work consists in moderation of Air
and Diet, without any other mixtures of violence, or bland impediments, which
may altogether pervert, or in or by a less force retard Nature in its motion,
the motion of Nature in this case being from the beginning of the disease to
the eruption of the pustules Critical, and in Critical motions the least
application of any Medicament is so dangerous, that no expert Physician will
admit of it. -- The Diet is to be Alimentum medicamentosum, such as is Milk
with Saffron and Marigold flowers.

Doctor Sydenham does suppose that it is natural for the Blood of all persons
at least once in their lives to undergo a great change, and as it were a new
form: and that there is no peculiar venom or malignity infecting the Blood,
but all is the result of this inclination in it to exchange its state; and in
order thereunto some parts are to be expelled; and in order thereunto must
first be separated: This is done by a Feverish Ebullition in the mass of
blood, He observes that this Feverish, or great ebullition is not constant to
the Smoll Pox, but that the separation and ^xpulsion is fre^quently performed
without any great sense thereof, the Patient never confining himself to the
chamber.
whereby those parts are separated from the residue, and discharged into fleshy
parts of the Body, which Nature looks as requisite in order to the change she
is going to make: All this is usually done in four days, and the Blood is
recomposed and becomes as calm in its motion, as it was before. The expelled
matter is to be elevated into pustulary abscesses, and there maturated and
dried up. For the carrying on of all this work, it is his judgment that the
Physician ought to do nothing: But the Patient is to be kept in a moderate
heat, and temperate diet, taking nothing that is cold; and not so much as being
confined to his bed beyond his ordinary use, except necessity require it, and
then he is to use no more clothes, nor warmth than he accustomed himself unto
in health, not so much as being obliged to keep his arms in Bed. On the fourth
day he gives them one very gentle Cordial to promote their eruption, and
abandons them to Saffron and Milk, to be given twice a day, and ordains that he
be kept in a constant moderate warmth, such as is natural, and usual to the
Patient.

This is the sum of his Method, except I add, that when they are upon
maturation, he gives a mild Cordial twice each day, morning and evening: And in
case that during the time of the decumbiture of the Patient by any accident a
new Fever arise, then is the Patient to be kept still in such a proportionate
heat as is usual to him in health, if the season be temperate, he is not to
have a fire; to be dieted with small Beer and Water Gruel, stewed Apples, or
the like, but to have no Cordial, not so much as Hartshorn posset drink.

By this Method Doctor Sydenham does not doubt but this disease which so
afrighteth people, and is so frequently mortal, will pass off with much
gentleness, ease and safety.

Betwixt these two there is a little discrepancy in their Method of curing the
disease: though there be some in their expressions, and Doctor Sydenham does
seem the Comment, the other the Text. Both of them oppose Phlebotomy, Vomits,
Purges and Glysters, as well as Sudorifics. Though they differ in the reason
for their rejecting Phlebotomy; For Doctor Whitaker does avow, that it draws
from the Circumference to the Center: But Doctor Sydenham yields, that it
produces a quite contrary motion, and causes the Small Pox to come cut.

p 65.
Doctor Whitaker does avow, that this course of his is the old English Method,
and the ancient, national and successful government of our Nation. But Doctor
Sydenham would seem to erect his practice upon his own Observations; though all
he propose (in a manner) be no more than the common actings of Countrey-people;
(except when by any accident the Fever be exasperated in the beginning, or
progress, that he prohibits Cordials) and what I belive was derived from
Avenzo^r, Fowest. obs. l. 6. obs. 44.
and Fracastorius.

p. 25.
Of these Writers it is remarkable, that Doctor Whitaker does never allow that
there can be any malignity in the Small Pox so great and urgent, as to induce a
Physician to intermeddle beyond a moderate Diet, and temperate Air: because the
Motion being Critical, admits of no violence. But this is a great Error in the
fundamentals of Physic. For, first in Diseases complicated with malignity, not
only the prognostics, but the issues are very uncertain as to life, or death,
and the Critical evacuations deceitful, so as that oftentimes they bring a
momentany alleviation; Prosper. Alpin. de praesag. vit. and morte. lib. 6. c.xi.
oftentimes, notwithstanding those evacuations, the distemper increases, and
the Patients dye: This every man understands who is conversant in our accounts
of Malignant Fevers; so that to grant at any time that there is a malignity,
or venenate indisposition in the sick, and to abandon him to a temperate Air
and Diet, relying upon Saffron and Milk, is a practice never to be justified in
Physic. But alas! we are not to be afrighted with the bug-word, Critical
motion, nor half an Aphorism out of Hippocrates; viz. Quae judicuntur, sinere
oportet. These general sentences neither qualify a Doctor in Law, nor a
Physician: It becomes us to consider in a Critical motion several things:

First, (Supposing it to happen in it^ due time) we must consider whether it be
only a Mo^^^n, or whether it be proportionate to the Disease: for no evacuation
that is diminute, is properly Critical: If therefore the pathognomonies of the
Disease be such as argue a multitude of the Small Pox to be requisite for the
recovery of the sick, and only a few come out, the Physician is obliged to
assist Nature.

Secondly, Supposing that they do come out plentifully, yet if they be not such
as should come out, but black, livid, green, or interspersed with purple spots
(not to mention other circumstances, which every Nurse can tell) it is certain
that the evacuation (how critical soever) does not oblige the Physician to
stand an idle Spectator: No more ought he to be in case that all symptoms
increase upon the critical motion, and his Fever and dangers multiply
thereupon. Hippocr. Aph. 23 sect. 1. and aph. 25. sect. 1.
(...).

Thirdly, It is requisite that the Critical evacuation be per loca conferentia,
by such ways as are necessary to the disease: But if the Small Pox during
their eruption be attended with a dysentery, bloody urine, or other pernicious
excretion; that scrap of Hippocrates will not excuse the Physicians negligence;
for it supposes that all the conditions requisite to a good evacuation be
found in that which the Physician is not to intermeddle with. I need say no
more to intelligent persons: it is not my present work to turn Institutionist.

Whether Doctor Sydenham intend to ascribe sense, appetite and judgment unto
the Blood I cannot well tell; but either He canteth in Metaphors, or explaineth
himself, in his general Hypothesis about Fevers, as if his meaning were such:
p. 4, 5^
Quinimo nec, mea sententia, minis liquet febrilem sanguinis commotionem saepe
(ne dicam saepius) non alio-collineare, quin ut ipse sese in novum quendam
statum, and diathesin immutet, hominemque etiam cui sanguis purus and
intaminatus perflat, febre corripi posse: sicuti in corporibus sanis evenire,
frequenti observatione compertum est, in quibus nullus apparatus morbificus,
vel quoad plethoram, vel quoad cacochymiam fuerit, nulla insalubris aeris
anomalia, quae febri occasionem submi^ nistraret. Nihilominus etiam hujusmodi
homines, praecedente insigni aliqua aeris vel victus; caeterarumque rerum
non-naturalium (ut vocant) mutatione identidem febre corripiuntur; propterea
quod eorum sanguis novum statum, and conditionem adipisci gestit, qualem
ejusmodi aer aut victus postulaverint: minime vero quod particularum vitiosarum
in sanguine stabulantium irritatio, febrim procreet. -- It Is true he did not
pen it in Latin, but another (Mr. G. H.) for him: and perhaps his skill in
that tongue may not be such, as to know when his thoughts are rightly worded:
But it seems strange and irrational to attribute such an understanding to the
Blood; and to transmute a natural Agent into one that is spontaneous: and,
which is more, having represented it as such, to make it so capricious as not
to know when it is well; but to run phantastically upon such dangerous changes
as occur in putrid Fevers, and the Small Pox; for even in this last arises
from a desire the Blood has to change its state. p. 127.
Since natural Agents demean themselves uniformly, and of them it is most true,
Idem, quatenus idem, semper facit idem: I was surprised to see these new
principles, and to see effects of this nature arise without any cause. It does
not seem possible for him ever to demonstrate that there is no Plethora, or
Cacochymy, or obstipation of the pores of the body antecedent to a Fever: nay
the contrary seems evident to all Physicians; nor ever was there any whereunto
they did not attribute some procatarctick cause. Besides, he does not allege
any Reasons, or Experiments, to show that there is any alteration in the blood
before and after the Small Pox, or a Fever, or any difference betwixt the
Blood of such as have had those diseases, and of those which have not had them.
So great a supposition ought not to be made without ground. And since it is
natural (and Nature is constant) why is not the Disease more ancient and
universal than it appears to be? For, if there be any grounds to think the
Small Pox to be of long continuance, it is certain it is but seldom spoken of by
any old Writer: perhaps once by Hippocrates (yet so as never to be understood
by any that has not seen the indisposition) and never by Galen. Salmas. de
annis Climacter. p 726, ^27. It Is Epidemic^l to Aegipt at this day.
It may be imagined to have come from Egypt by contagion, and might have been
called (...), Quia urbi Bubasti Aegyptiae familiaris hic morbus. It infesteth
some places more than others. Prosp. Alpin. de med. Aegipt. l. 1. c. 14.
In Graecia non adeo frequens. Ideo antiquiores Medici vix ejus meminerunt. In
the West Indies it was not heard of till the Spaniards came thither: Roderic. a
Fonseca Consult. Medic. t. 1. consult. 48.
and they (as also the English there) seldom have it. I believe the Disease to
be novel, and of no longer date than the Sarracenical revolution: I could
instance in the nature of such great alt^rations, that they have ever been
preceded and accompanied with many pe^ty changes in other things: and if ever I
have so much vacant time a^ to make political reflections upon the rise of
Mahom^^, I may declare much to this purpose. This is that invidi^us subject
about which E^^bolius Glanvili mak^^ so ^uch noise: as if, to avow that Mahomet
^ere a Gentleman of noble extraction, marrie^ to one who ^^r birth, riches and
be^uty might h^ve been a Princ^ss; and accomplished with that sober Virtue, Wit
^l^quence, and Education, by much trav^l (^or he traveled all over Egypt,
Africa, and ^pain) a^ to ^^nder himself one of the most considerable of his
Age: or to say that the Christians were so ignorant, and debauched, and
perfidious, and addicted to Legends more than to the sound Doctrine of the
Gospel, at that time, that most of the Fables in the Alcoran were accommodated
to the honor of the times, more than to truth (and so Mahamet told them) or to
say He pretended to revive Ancient Christianity; were to be an Apologist for
the Mahometans, and an abettor of the Alcoran: Whereas none but the Illiterate
can deny these things: and the Age our Virtuoso speaks of is the Age of
Apostasy, according to the Doctrine of our Church. Oh Heavens! to what an
height is Impudence and Ignorance arrived! Or what can be safe, if so
prudential and generous a design as I had must be calumniated by such a R -- in
this manner! Bnt to resume my discourse, in the behalf of my opinion concerning
the novelty of this disease, (besides what the learned Mercurialis has said) I
shall conclude with the words of Rodericus a Fonseca, Roderic a Fonseca in
append. ad Iac. chin. de febr. c. 54. vide and Ranehin. de morb. puer. sect. 2.
c. 1. p. 258.

Hofman. Animadu. in Monton. c 7. sect. 15. and Instit. l. 3. ^. 109. ^ect 1.
and N^rdicis noct. genial. 7 p. 456^ 457.


which are these. Si ex nativitate esset, ab initio mundi fuisset, aut saltem
ita frequenter tunc, ut nunc solet esse: et licet antiqui aliquam de his
pustulis mentionem fecisse visi sint, ea certe exigua est, and dubia, ut c^rtum
sit, vix illis temporibus fuisse talem morbum: negligentissimi certe habendi
essent, si tam ingens, commune, and frequens malum; illotis manibus, silentio
involuissent: and cum morbus sit puerilis, Hippocrates eas numerasset inter
aetates, 3. Aphor. ubi diligentissime puerorum morbos connumerat; and tamen
nullam hujus mali fecitmentionem: sed illud satis demonstrat, hunc morbum novum
esse; quod in multis mundi partibus nunquam visus fuit, ubi nunquam apparavit,
nisi postquam Hispani eo pervenere: siquidem per contagium Aethiopis cujusdam
illuc delati, magnam Indorum partem sustulit.

I might here insist upon the Hypothesis of Doctor Sydenham, concerning the
Inclination of the Blood to change its state: I cannot believe but that the
Physicians understood themselves as well before he writ; when it was said, that
there was in every one that was born, something of impurity in the body, which
was naturally to be purged out by an ebullition in the blood, and such an
effervescence as terminated in those Abscessus called the Small Pox. Avicenna
de febribus, c. 6. de variolis.
, Quandoque accidit in sanguine ebullitio secundum semitam putredinis cujusdam
de genere ebullitionum quae accidunt succis: and talia quidem accidentia fiunt
per eam, ita ut parts eorum ab invicem discernantur. Et de hoc est cujus causa
est, res quasi naturalis faciens ebullitionem sanguines, ut expellatur ab eo
illud, quod ad miscetur ei de reliquis nutrimenti sui menstrualis, quod erat in
hora impraegnationis, aut generatur in eo post illud ex cibis faeculentis, and
malis, de illis quae rarificant substantiam ejus, and faciant eam ebullire,
donec fiat and substantia recta fortior prima and magis apparens: sicut illud,
quod natura efficit in succo uvae, ita quod rectificat ipsum, faciendo vinum
similis substantiae: and jam expulsa est ab eo spuma aerea, and faex terrena.
He that can English this passage will find in it the ebullition, separation,
expulsion and despumation of our Doctor. In truth those terms, nor that which
he imports by them are no novelty amongst Physicians: and Rhases (as Sennertus
says) does not make any mention of those uterine impurities as the cause of
the Small Pox, Rhases de pestilent. c. 1. Sennert. de febr. l. 4. c. xii.
but compares the Blood to Must, in in which some impurities are to be
separated by Ebullition. Wherein the whole Hypothesis of this semi-Virtuoso is
contained: However, I cannot allow any more to his Observations, than if a man
should go without his doublet, and pretend to a new Mode of wearing Breeches.
But that which is most intolerable in Doctor Sydenham is, that He seems to
attribute all the evil consequences of the Small Pox to the indiscretion of
those that attend them; be they Nurses, or Physicians. Thus (p. 150. Edit. 2.)
he makes as if Nature did discharge it self in that disease into the fleshy
parts only: ^or Augen. de febr. l. 9. ^ xx. Steph. C^^^en. Qu^^ ex qui^^s. l. 3
c. 16 T^. B^r^ho^in. Ci^^a Medica, p. 594.
so that if the Eyes, Lungs, Stomach, Guts, Pancreas, or Membranous parts be
affected, it is not the violence of the Disease, but the ignorance of the
Attendants which occasioned that: which is intolerable for any man to say, and
refuted by Experience.

F^^n^l p^tho. l. 4 c. 18. and de abdit. rerum (...), lib. 2. c xii.

Coll^do obs. in (...) c 92.

Io. Dan. Horstius obs. Anatom. 9.


I might proceed to demonstrate that there is not any thing n^w in the whole
Cure which Doctor Sydenham uses: that in the beginning of the Small Pox,
before the eruption, being as ancient as Bayrus, if not derived from the
Arabians: And the rest has been inculcated by an hundred Writers: provided the
Small Pox were gentle: yet, as much as they have been for the keeping of them
moderately cool as to Air, or Diet, before the eru^tion of them; yet I dare say
our Doctor is the first whoever did imagine that the longer they were in coming
forth the better it was. Dr. Sydenh^m, p. 138
Mihi quidem rationi consent aneum videtur, ut quo diutius Natura separationem
moli^ur, ac perficit, dum modo ebullitio non omnino torpeat, co certius at que
universalius eadem separatio absolvitur. In genere melius est variolos and mor
billos icto^ quam ta^de erumpere. Sennert. de febr. l. 4. c. xii.
For our best Writers, as Mercatus, Augenius, Forrestus, Sennertus, Riverius,
Ronchinus, and others, do avow, that the sooner they appear, the better is the
presage. But all this while his discourse extends no ^urtherr, than to that
sort of Small Pox which is mild and favorable, not accompanied with any
perilous or mortal Prognostics. but should any such case happen, these two
Doctors leave us in obscurity, and we must help our selves, for they give us
little of assistance.

I shall therefore proceed to enquire what directions the most judicious
Writers, and Rules of our Art prescribe unto us in this Disease.

It is confessed that the Small Pox are sometimes so mild as not to be
accompanied with any Fever, or evil symptom at all, so that the Patient need
not be confined (at least is not) to his Chamber, and any strictness of Rules:
Coyttarus de purpur ^ebr. p. 245.
This is granted by Avicenna, Rhases, Schenckius, Hollerius, Epiphanius
Ferdinandus, Coyttarus; and Franciscus Rubeus, whose words are these: Variolae
aliquando sine febre, Rubeus Nocturn exer. 7. in Scholiis. p. 104.
and aliquando cum febre mihi and placidissima, nonnunquam cum febre acuta, and
quondoque cum febre maligna crumpunt. In this case there is no doubt but the
Physician may do nothing, and ought to do little, there being no need of his
assistance.

It is confessed that sometimes the Small Pox are attended with so gentle a
Fever, of the nature of a Synochus simplex, that the Patient may do very well,
by the directions of Doctor Whitaker, and Doctor Sydenh^m. Yet must I add,
that, supposing the truth of these two Cases, I cannot conceive it proper to
imagine that the Small Pox are then a Critical motion of Nature: there being in
the one juncture no Disease whereof they should be a Crisis; in the other no
such Disease as to discharge it self in so copious an evacuation. The Notion of
a Crisis in the production of the Small Pox will seem more absurd, when we
consider how frequently it happens, that notwithstanding their coming out
plentifully, the Fever does still continue, and increases the dangers of the
Patient. Besides, How is it a Crisis, when there seldom proceeds any Coction,
and when the preceding Disease observes no times?

Of those Diseases which terminate by a Crisis there is a great variety in the
evacuation ensuing thereupon, as an Haemorraghia, looseness, sweat, pro^usion
of urine: but here, whatsoever the nature of the Disease be, a Synochus
simplex, putrid, malignant, or tertian Fever, the Crisis by the Small Pox is
constantly the same: and the expulsion not only toward the skin and habit of
the body, but every way, as on the Stomach, Throat, Lungs, Guts, etc. and after
this kind of Crisis it frequently happens that the Patient dies, no error
intervening: whereupon Joseph de Medicis exclaims after forty years of
practice. Joseph de Medicis apud Greg Horst. t. 2. p. 56.
Hei mihi, quoties malitiosae variolae me fefellerunt! And Augenius, though he
be inclined to the Opinion of Doctor Whitaker, to explain this Crisis, is
forced to desert the vulgar notion of a salubrious Crisis, and include in its
definition, even those that are noxious, saying out of Galen: Crisis esi
mutatio quaedam subita ad salutem, Hor. Augen^ de ^ebr. l. 9. c. 5.
aut mortem: and after all concludes thus: Haec si vera sunt, ostendunt
rectissime dixisse Arabes, variolas contingere per modum cujusdam Crisis:
siquidem modus quidam est particularis, quo febris magna saneri crisi
consuevit, long distans ab aliis. Omnes enim aut per vomi^um, aut per alvum,
aut per urinas, aut persudores sanantur; ut hujusmodi febris nullo ex illis
sanatur modis, sed persolam superficiem, non extimam solum, ut ardentes febres,
quae sudore copioso superveniente liberantur, sed ex^imam and intimam simul,
utque sic per abscessus parvos, quos pustulas nuncupavimus, ubique procreatos.
Nunquam alvi fluore, nunquam vomitu sanantur; imo si forte adveniant, pessimum
signum est. But if we take Crisis and Critical evacuations in this sense, it is
certain then that a Physician may and ought frequently to intermeddle,
notwithstanding that Nature is already engaged critically, and the foundations
of this Doctor are threby overthrown.

I add, that if the motion of the Small Pox be critical, then is not the Small
Pox properly a Disease of it self, Avicenna de febr. c. 6. with whom agrees
Fracastorius, and, I think, the generality of Physicians, who make it to bear
some resemblance of a Crisis, but not a Crisis.
but the termination of one. And therefore the Arabians did prudently say, that
the Small Pox do happen, per viam cujusdam criseos, in the way of a Crisis, not
that they are properly the Crisis of another disease. They are generated by an
effort of Nature, which discharges it self of certain humors which are
offensive unto her by their quantity, or quality; and this is done not by their
eruption in the exterior parts, but even in all the entrails, and other
internal parts: and sometimes this evacuation is a discharge of so crude,
malignant matter, that it is destructive to the sick: which is not usual in a
Crisis: and this is that which the Arabians call Ebullitio secundum semitam
putredinis; which made Fernelius and others ascribe thereunto a venenate
quality. Fernel. de abdit. rer. causi^ lib. 2. c.xii.
Hoc and morborum foeditas testatur, tam deformis aliquando visa, ut occaecutis
oculis, universa cutis in squammas faetidas and in crustas ingentes solveretur:
corpus omne non aliter contabesceret and macie nigroreque torreretur, quam si
menses quatuore furca pependisset.

It is avowed that there is more than one sort of Fever which is antecedent to
the eruption of the Small Pox: and common Reason will tell us, that in such
cases the Physician must vary his Method: if the Fever be a Synochus simplex,
without any putrefaction, it is not to be doubted but that the Small Pox may be
cured by the course prescribed by Doctor Whitaker, and Doctor Sydenham: but
what if it be a Synochus joined with putrefaction, or malignity? Must we then
abandon Nature to her self, and stand Idle Spectators amidst so great and
visible dangers? If the Small Pox be a Crisis of the Fever, what influence
has that consideration upon us, before the time of the Crisis? Are we not
obliged to facilitate and secure the Crisis by convenient means before it
approach? May it not otherwise happen that there will be too great a redundancy
of humors, so that Nature will not be able to guide them orderly, and for the
benefit of the Patient? Do not we see this frequently to happen, where no
irritation has been through Sudorifics, or other Medicaments? Does not it
often happen, that Nature not being able to command the turgent humors, they
have so fixed themselves in several principal parts, occasioning Swoonings or
Syncopes, Dysenteries, as to destroy the Patient in the beginning? or so to
imbecillitate him, that he has afterward languished in a Consumption, been
deprived of his eyes, or limbs, and subjected to incurable Ulcers? Ioh. Michael
Febr. de Scorzonera. p. 81, 82, 83.
It was observed in Germany, in 1644. that the Small Pox reduced some to an
Atrophy, Asthma, and Consumptive coughs: some have had not only the habit of
their body strangely vitiated and altered; but even their bones corrupted and
corr^ded into a Paedorthrocace, or Spina ventositatis: some have had the
Articulation of their Joints so depraved, that they have become immovable, or
crooked. Oftentimes we see that after the first Fever is abated, and the Small
Pox come out in great plenty, a looseness follows, or a new Fever prevents
their maturation and destroys the Patient.

From these Considerations I dare confidently deduce this Conclusion, That it
becomes a Physician in the Small Pox, to examine well in the beginning, the
constitution of the Patients body, if it redound with peccant Humors, or no:
it being easy to apprehend, that what is a Cacochymy before this Disease, will
degenerate into a virulency and malignity in the course of the Disease: If it
redound with too much Blood, as h^ving more than is requisite for the
commodious discharge of that Disease: for if the body be either way Plet^ori^,
there is apparent danger least the Patient be strangled, or that the ^urgent
Humors, being either straightened for want of room, or too luxuriant to be
guided, will fall upon some important part, and so create inseparable evils in
the progress of the distemper. He ought also to inquire diligently into the
preceding season of the year; Forest. obs. lib. ^. cbs. 44.
since that adds much to the mildness or perillousness of distempers: As also
into the present sickness, whether it be in others attended with any thing of
unusual malignity, or pestilence: for in such a case, he must increase his
care, as dangers multiply. He ought also to weigh well the first Symptoms,
Hor. Augen. de febr. l. x. c. 1.
whether they be so violent as that the Patient is not likely to have strength
to support the continuance of the Disease: If the Fever be great, and
accompanied with swoonings; if the Patient being thirsty, restless, molested
with a vomiting, difficulty of breathing, a dangerous Cough, violent and
ill-coloured Diarrhaea, or Dysentery, bloody or black Vrines: It is not to be
doubted in these cases, but the Physician is to make such provision, that so
ominous a beginning may conclude well, if it be possible. And since so great a
distemper requires great and generous remedies: two things will at first (if he
come timely enough) fall under his debate; viz. Phlebotomy, and Purging.

Concerning Purging many are very timorous, because that a Looseness is
dangerous in the Small Pox: as also because that they fear least it should
divert the Humors from their natural tendency, and draw them into the Bowels.
But neither of these Reasons are of any great validity. For neither is a moment
any Looseness (and it is that which is equipollent to a Minorative purge)
dangerous in the first beginning of the Small Pox, before they come forth: Nor
is there any danger that a gentle Purge should create a Flux; but rather
prevent any such subsequent evil, by carrying off the peccant Humors, which by
continuing in the stomach and intestines would contract a malignity. And indeed
this consideration is of such importance, that it ought to sway a Physician to
give some Lenitive in the beginning, when he sees occasion. Neither will he
thereby divert Nature from the expulsion, but rather facilitate it, and by
diminishing part of the redundant Humors, enable her to overcome the rest with
more ease: whereupon Augenius, Ranchinous, Franciscus Rubeus, Riverius,
Gregorious Horstius, and other excellent Practitioners do take this course. And
Ballonius observes: Ballon. Epid. l. 1. p 37. vide Forest. obs. l. 6. obs. 49.
An commode praescribi possunt medicamenta antiquam morbilli se produnt? An illa
impediunt motum naturae? Imo inopinato venam secuimus, and medicamentum purgans
dedimus, quibus die sequenti, aut postridie apparerent variolae, and melius
multo habuerunt, quam quibus non ausi fuerimus idem exhibere: sic parum
probabile, quod dicitur, minus affatim erumpere populas si corpus ante
purgaveris.

As for Phlebotomy, were it not for capricious humors, or indiscreet fears of
some persons, there could be no question about the legitimate use thereof in
this Disease. For there is not any Indication for Blood-letting which may not
occur in the Small Pox: And it is as vain a surmise to think that an
intelligent Practitioner will do any thing rashly; as it is an irrational course
(though too common) to censure Men for the ill success, when they act according
to the best of their judgment, and the most solid Rules of their Art.

The present Controversy includes two Debates: The one Concerning Phlebotomy
in the beginning of the Small Pox, before their eruption: The other Concerning
Phlebotomy after their eruption. In both which cases I do avow, that Phlebotomy
may be oftentimes prudently, and sometimes is necessarily administered. I use
this manner of speech, because that Physicians do make a twofold use of
Blood-letting: Ferdinand. Mena comment. in lib. de sang. emiss. c. 22.
One, when the nature of the Disease and its greatness do absolutely require
Phlebotomy, as the most proper Medicine, and without which in all probability
the Patient will run an apparent hazard of his life: A second, when it does not
seem so absolutely necessary to Phlebotomise the Patient, but he may recover by
other means, without it: yet because this is the most rational and safe way,
Physicians do insist thereon, that so Nature being disburthened and alleviated
in part thereby, may with more ease overcome the rest. 4. de saint. tuend.
Thus in some Diseases Galen professes he omitted to bleed some Patients,
because they would not endure it: whereas had he esteemed it extremely
necessary, he would not have declined that Remedy, and used a Purge instead
thereof: But he looked on it then only as a most convenient Remedy. From whence
I deduce, that whenever any man reads any Author that does not practice
Phlebotomy in the Small Pox (as I. Michael Fehr, and one Langiu^, now Professor
of Physic at Leipsich, or Angelus Sala) the uselessness or danger of the
Remedy is not to be concluded thereupon: since it is evident that Physicians
are enforced often to comply with the Humors and prejudicate Opinions of their
Patients, and the Countries where they live; and do not always act according
to their best judgment: Nor does it follow, that because the imprudence of some
has been, or is successful; that therefore we ought to relinquish the more
wise courses, or condemn as needless those cares which Discretion it self does
put us upon. Neither ought we to be swayed by the Negative testimonies of
Writers, or Practitioners: For it does not follow that what one (or more) has
not tried, or seen, is impossible, or impracticable: The happy Experience of
the Affirming party is the most convincing: as our common Logic informs us.
They who condemn Phlebotomy in the Small Pox, either condemn it because they
have experienced its evil effects therein; or because they have only a sinister
opinion of it, and some specious reasons against it: If the last; they say
nothing of moment: it being the dictate of Hippocrates, De diaet^. l. ^. c. 5.
(...). And Aristotle long ago censured those who out of a preconceived opinion
of the event of a thing did form their judgment; Frederic. Bonav^ntura de partu
octomestri. l. 5. c. 64.
and imagine it must happen so, or so, because they think it will do so. If
they have so often tried the evil success thereof, it is necessary that they
confess they have killed a great many thereby: or at least that they profess
they have seen the sad Experiments thereof made by others: and to make this any
way convincing, they must first assure us that such Experimentators were
Artists, and understood their Faculty so well as to weigh all circumstances
requisite to the due administering of Phlebotomy; otherwise the Actions of the
most judicious shall be condemned through the ignorance and folly of others:
and it must be demonstrated, that the death or other evils which befell the
sick, were the direct consequences of the Phlebotomy; and not by accident, and
from some particular juncture, or (...): least we commit the Fallacy of A dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.

Doctor Whitaker is pleased to call the practice of Phlebotomy in the Small
Pox, p. 27.
the Mode of France; and makes as if that were the principal Argument produced
for it. viz. The greatest Argument to confirm this practice, is, the Mode of
France: by the same argument they would prove stinking and putrid flesh, both
of fish and fowl to be most comfortable to the sense, and corroborative to the
Animal spirits: and if their Rhetoric be no better than their Logic to
persuade persons of reason and sense to accept their Mode, it is most probable
it will prove the Numismata of Galen, which is a quaere that will pass no
further than their own Country. -- He afterward call it the rash practice of
Modish persons: adding, I call it a rash and inconsiderate practice in this
Disease, p 28.
because it is a doubt indetermined amongst the most learned Professors of all
Nations, both Greeks, Arabians and Latins, and all others principled from
them; being all of them unresolved of Phlebotomy in the Small Pox, upon any
Indication to be a safe Remedy: And if the disease be conjunct with an
undeniable plethory of blood (which is the proper Indication of Phlebotomy) yet
such bleeding ought to be by Scarification and Cupping-glasses without the
cutting any Major vessel. -- Assertions so general and peremptory as these are
ought to be very well grounded, or else they subject the Author to the
imputation of Opiniatrity, and Ignorance. I will not deny but some may have
justified their practice by the customary presidents of the French Physicians;
who neither want sufficient knowledge in their Faculty, nor prosperous success
to urge against all Cavillers: And this they may have done, not that ever they
could judge it a Mode peculiar to the French, but because that Nation is our
next Neighbor, and so well known unto us, that they needed not extend their
discourse further: nor do there want reasons to show that If it be requisite
for the French, and they can bear it: It is more requisite for us, and we can
better tolerate it. For our diet is more plentiful, our habit of body more
firm; our innate heat, by the coldness of our Climate, more concentrated and
vigorous; our redundance of blood is greater: and our pores more dense and apt
to be obstipated, than theirs; and if we may aggravate the malady from the
dismal effects and impressions it produces in the faces of the sick, I think I
may say it (I never was in France) that the Small Pox are worse in England
(which indicates greater Remedies, for the most part than in France, since the
disasters which befall good faces are more frequent and notorious here than
amongst them.

But, I do affirm that this practice is not only the Mode of France, but of
Spain and Italy as well as Egypt and Africa; and that it is authentic in high
and low Germany, and Denmark: And whereas he says that the usefulness of this
Remedy, is a doubt indetermined amongst the most learned Professors of all
Nations, both Greeks, Arabians, and Latines^ and all others principled from
them: It is a gross mistake: and there is more of truth in that opposite saying
of Augenius: Hor. Augen. de febr. lx.c.iv.
Omnes, qui de variolis scripserunt, unanimi consensu, principium curationis,
illarum fieri debere a vacuatione sanguinis contendunt, ideoque venam
incidendam esse, aut scarificationes administrandas, aut hirudinibus applicitis
sanguinis vacuatione procurandam.

Concerning the Greeks, I have considered the passage in Hippocrates concerning
the Son of Tmionax, Hippocr. Epid. l 7. p. 894. cum notis Vallesii.
and whatever else is alleged out of him, or Aetius, yet cannot be satisfied
that ever they knew any thing of this disease. They that do believe it (as a
strong imagination may transport a man far) may reply, that since the Malady
was rare then, and different much from ours it is not to be wondered that they
speak so little of the Cure; and never determine a doubt which they never
thought of. As for the Arabians nothing is more certain than that they
considered the disease, and all circumstances, and did determine in the behalf
of Phlebotomy; and whosoever is principled from them (as all in a manner of the
subsequent Physicians have been) must allow thereof. I do not remember to have
read that any of them did ever prohibit Phlebotomy in this case, except it be
Avenzoar, who is said to have given the like directions that Doctor Sydenham
does, viz. To do nothing in a manner: but relinquish the work to Nature
entirely. How Avicenna determines the doubt, Avicenna de febr. c. 10.
his words will best show. Oportet in variolis ut incipiatur, and extrahatur
sanguis sufficienter, cum conditiones fuerint. Et similiter si morbillus fuerit
cum repletione sanguinis. Et spatium illius est usque ad quartum. Sed quando
egrediuntur variolae, non oportet tunc ut administretur phlebotomia, nisi
inveniatur vehementia repletionis, and dominium materiei: tunc enim
phlebotometur quantitate quae alleviet, seu minoret. Et convenientius quidem,
quod in hac administratur aegritudine est phlebotomia. Et si phlebotometur vena
nasi, confert juvamentum fluxus sanguinis narium, and tuetur parts superiores
a malitia variolarum. Et est magis facilis super infantes. Et quando necessaria
est phlebotomia, and non phlebotomatur iterum complete, timetur super ipsum
corruption extremitatis. Whence it is apparent, that amidst such circumstances
as amongst Physicians usually seem to require Phlebotomy, he does allow the
practice thereof in the Small Pox, Joseph de Medicis apud Greg. Horst, t. 2. p.
46.
before they come out, be it on, the fourth day, or later that they discover
themselves. After they do appear, he allows not, except there be a manifest
plenitude, and surcharge of morbi^ic humors, then he allows only a minute
letting of blood, and not what is too copious: and adds, that in this disease
it is most convenient to let blood; and if the Patient be not blooded in a
Plethoric constitution, and that by a repeated phlebotomy, according to the
exigency of the case, that is, completely, there is danger least the party
suffer the corruption or loss of some of his limbs by a Gangrene, or other evil
accident: for when the redundance of the expelled matter is such, that it
cannot duly maturate and tr^nspire in the pustules, it frequently corrodes the
ligaments, and tendons, and otherwise vitiates the remoter parts of the body;
even Worms have been bred in a pestilential Small Pox, all under the pustules:
Fr. Joel. prax. l. 9. sect. 5. sect. 2.
as at Stralesund, in 1574. sometimes the matter not finding room to disburthen
it self in the circum^erence, turns its course into the bowels, and begets
mortal Diarrhaeas and Dysenteries. Of the same opinion is Rhases, as appears by
what is extant amongst the Scriptores de febribus: Rh^ses (inter Scriptores de
febribus) c. 18.
viz. Si antequam apparere incipiant, medicus aegrum inveniat, minuere eum
faciat, aut cum ventosis sanguis extrahatur. Minuatur equidem sanguinis
multitudo. It is true, that there he prohibites Phlebotomy after the Pox come
forth: but I find him cited by others as concurring with Avicenna as to
bleeding even at the nose, as extremely beneficial; and to approve of
phlebotomy after they come forth, in case the Patient find no alleviation
thereupon, Rh^ses 18. Cont. 8. citan^te Diomed. Amico in tract. de variolis.
c.x.
but there continue signs of a plenitude, or redundancy of ill humors, a great
Fever and difficulty of breathing. But there is another piece entitled unto
Rhases, wherein how indulgent he is to Phlebotomy you may learn from Augenius.
Rhases libro suo de peste, Horat Augen. de febr. l.x. c. 3.
capite sexto: mittendum esse sanguin^m vult pro quantitate plenitudinis; si
enim maxima suerit, non veritur vacuare usque ad animi deliquium: si medi^cris,
mediocriter educit: si parva fuerit, paulum singuinem educit: verba ejus sic
habent. Tu venam incidito, and quam multum sanguinis effundito: scil. ad
sanguinis defectionem usque. Supra vero syndromen attulit maximae plenitudinis,
and paucis interpositis inquit. Cum vero haec signa admodum evidentia non
erunt, veruntamen vehementia quidem, parum sanguinis fundito: Sin minime,
minimum: haec ille. How successful so large bleeding may be (though Augenius,
and Ran^hinus and others condemn it, ^otallu de venae sectione, c. 5.
we may judge by the practice of Botallus. To these I add the authority of
Serapion, which runs thus. Si haec febris fuerit propter causam variolarum,
Serapion (inter script. de sebr. c. 12.
and virtus and aetas consentit, tunc non aliquid magis juvativum quam
phlebotomia venae. Et si aliquid prohibet phlebotomiam, tunc oportet ut
administrentur ventosae. Out of which it is evident, that the generality of the
Arabians, were of a different sentiment from what Doctor Whitaker ascribes unto
them: and Claudinus is less mistaken when he (as do many others) avoweth, that
The Arabians universally agree to let Blood in the Small Pox, I. C. Cl^udinus
Empir. rational l. 5. sect 1. c. 1. p. 286.
upon occasion. Nor is there more of truth in that which follows in our Doctor,
viz. that Their followers have not determined this doubt. For though two or
three may seem refractory still in the World, yet it is not amongst Physicians,
but amongst them that are not Physicians that the doubt is indetermined. I
shall take some pains to undeceive this Age as to the present point.

Gordonius's words are these; Inprimis si corpus est Plethoricum, Gordoniu^;
lilium Medicinae. part. 1. c. 12. de variolis.
aut si sanguis dominatur, aut virtus est fortis, fiat Phlebotomia de mediana,
and postea de summitate nasi: i. e. In the first place, if the body be
plethoric, or if the Disease be such as is attended with abundance of blood, or
if the Patient be strong, let him bleed first in the middle vein, and
afterward at the Nose.

Petrus Bayrus having repeated the signs of the Small Pox, Petrus Bayrus de
pest. in capite de variolis and morbillis.
when they are violent, adds: His apparentibus statim fac Phlebotomiam
copiosam, prius scilicet quam variolae ad extra appareant: licet possit fieri
etiam ipsis incipientibus apparere, stante multa repletione; non tamen tunc
fiat ita copiosa, sicut ipsis non apparentibus: dicente Avicenna, in casu,
Extrahatur sanguis quantitate quae exiret, hoc est minoret: i. e. when the
Small Pox begin with such a vehemence of symptoms, presently take from the
Patient a large quantity of Blood, before the Small Pox begin to come forth:
yet may he also be let blood after they begin to appear, if there be a great
repletion, but yet not in so large a manner as otherwise: for so Avicenna
directs in the case: and let the Patient bleed in such a quantity as may dry
the habit of his body: that is, you may lessen the quantity of the morbifick
matter, so to bring them forth to a kind maturation, but not so as to divert
Nature from her work.

I shall not trouble my self to repeat the words of others at large; but refer
my Reader to the places cited. Horatius Augenius, Hor. Augen. de febr. l.x, c.
9.
one of our best Writers upon the Small Pox, (and who protests he writes
nothing in order to its Cure, but what six and forty years ^d. ibid. c. 3.
Experience had convinced him of to be good) does allow, in difficult cases, and
when the Disease is somewhat pestilential, that the Patient bleed first at the
Arm, and then at the Nose, by irritating it with Yarrow, or Horse tail.

I. C. Claudinus Empir. ration. l. 5. sect. 1. c. 1.
With him agrees the cautilous and learned Practitioner Iuleus Caesar Claudinus:
who does debate, and determine this doubt: as also does Dilectus Lusitanus,
Dilectus Lusi^anus de venae sectione. c. xi. Artic. 1. p. 145.

Epiphanius Ferdinandus cas. Medic. 78. Aemil. Campol. de variolis. c 413.


in his Treatise of Venae-sectione: and Epiphanius Ferdinandus, and Aemilius
Campolongus. Neither is it to be questioned, but that this is the common
practice of all Italy; so that I shall cite no more of that Nation.

In Spain it is approved of by Christophorus a Vega, whose words are these. Si
vero lactae fuerint variolae, and ab humore fiant crassiore, Christo a Vega de
art med. l. 2. sect. 7. c. 1.
ab initio sanguinem mittere, si febris adfuerit; sine ipsa vero minime. And
the best of Writers, Lud. Mercatus de puer. morb l. 2. c. 22 Vide etiam Ludo.
Market. de ^ebr. l. 7. c 3 and de recto Medicinal. praesid. usu. l. 1. c. 4.
and Anton. Ponce Sanctacruz de impediment^ magn. auxil. l. 3. c, 18.
Ludovicus Mercatus is thus peremptory in his Resolution. De sanguinis
deiractione nullus usquam dubitavit, aut id sine ratione fecit, nisi aut vires
sint adeo dejectae, quod neque minimam, citra majus damnum far possint, aut
affectus adeo levis, aut benignus existat, quod satius sit naturae committere,
quam ipsam infirmare sanguine misso, vel s^nguinis copia adeo parva, quod
exquisitiori victus institutione securius rem possis agere quam aliis
praesidiis, quae licet aliquo modo possint convenire, non subinde sunt ita
secura and certa, quod eis prorsus fidendum sit. i. e. Concerning Blood-letting
no man ever did doubt thereof, or if he did, he did it without any reason,
except the Patient were so weak that he could not endure it without greater
hazards, or that the disease were so mild and benign, that it seemed better to
leave all to the strength of Nature, without debilitating any way the sick
person, or the redundance of blood and peccant humors so inconsiderable, that
the Cure might be wrought by a diligent attendance and well-ordered diet,
without employing any of those Remedies which how convenient or safe soever,
yet (according to that fate which disposes of all humane affairs) may
sometimes have an evil issue, and are not therefore needlessly to be presumed
upon.

In Portugal I find Rodericus a Fonseca to approve of Phlebotomy in this
disease: Roderic. a Fonseca in appen. ad J^cchin, de febr. c. 54. and Cons.
Medic. l. 1. cons. 48. Steph. Roderic. Castrens. Quae ex quibus. l 3. c. 16.
As also Stephanus Rodericus Castrensis avoweth its utility upon his own
Experience.

I might add others, but that this is the general practice of Spain, is so
indisputable, that I should but abuse the patience of my Reader.

I now come to Germany, and Denmark, where the most learned, and the most
eminent Physicians that we hear of, have admitted of this Remedy. The
beneficialness thereof was experimented by that famed Practitioner, Forrestus.
Forrestus obs. lib. 6. obs. 47. in Scholio: and ibid. obs. 46, 49.
Solet enim mirifice prodesse in hoc affectu hoc auxilii genus, modo tamen fiat
in principio, antequam morbilli aut variolae egrediantur. i. e. It is usually
of mavelous benefit to the Patient, if he bleed before the Small Pox or
Measils do come forth: Whereupon he did ordinarily begin his Cures therewith,
and says, that undeniably it ought to be so, if all requisite circumstances
concur. Felix Platerus (a man of principal esteem in Switzerland, and
Germany) recommends it to our practice, F^lix Platerus l. 2. de cur. variolar.
inter opera, p. 200.
Sanguinis detractio per venae sectionem in brachio facta ab initio, si Synochi
hae sunt febres, ^u juscunque generis, ad sanguinis accensi, vel simul puiridi,
vel maligni etiam portionem educendam, causamque sic minuendam, in adul^is
plurimnm competet. Quae and infantibus majoribus, cum in minoribus na^u non
liceat, non inutiliter administraretur. Quae tamen, si jam maculae and pustulae
eruperint, ne naturae motus impediatur, omittenda erit. i. e. Bleeding in the
Arm, when it is practiced in the beginning, if the Fever be any kind of
Synochus, arising from the inflammation of the mass of blood, or its being
putrefied, or vitiated by any malignity, will be of great benefit to those that
are of Age, to lessen the morbific matter, and abate the violence of the cause
of the distemper. It might also be done to Children of some bigness (not to
little ones) may be profitably. But if the Pox be coming forth it is to be
forborne, least it cause them to retire in, Neither is it a common Elogy for
this practice, that Gregorius Horstius commends, Greg. Horstius oper. medic. t^
2. l 6 in append. de variola: and ibid. de sebr. l. 1. Q^e ult. 1. Dan Horstius
epist. x. Sennert. de febr. l. 4, c. xii.
and justi^ies it.

And his learned Son, Io. Daniel Horstius asserts the the judgment of his
Father. As cautelous as Sennertus would seem, he only doubts concerning
Phlebotomy in Children, not in others. Si tamen in aetate, quae venae sectionem
perferre possit, sanguinis abundantia venae sectionem postulet, mox in
principio ante quartum diem, aut sane prius quam variolae erumpant; dum vires
adhuc constant, and sanguinis tanta copia ad ambitum corporis confluxit, vena
aperienda, ut natura oneris part levata, quod reliquuum est facilius vincere
possit. Post quartum autem di^m, and ubi meculae erumpere incipiunt,
abstinendum a venae sectione; inprimis si jam aeger melius habere incipiat, ne
materia ad ambitum corporis tendens ad interiora revocetur. i. e. But if the
Age of the Patient be such as to be able to endure Phlebotomy, and the
redundance of blood be such as to make that Remedy necessary, a Uein must be
opened before the fourth day, and whilst yet the Small Pox are not come forth,
the strength not being yet impaired, and the blood so immoderately discharging
it self upon the exterior parts of the body: that hereby Nature being
disburthened of a part of what molested her, may the more easily concoct and
subdue the rest. But after the fourth day, and when they begin to come forth,
Phlebotomy is not to be used, especially if the Patient seem alleviated, least
thereupon the matter be drawn back which was hastening unto and fixed in the
habit of the body. To these may be added Baldasser Timaeus, Baldassar Timaeus
cos. medicin. l. 8. c. 29.
Physician to the Elector of Brandenburgh, who after thirty six years of
practice approved this course: and I. Petrus Lotichus: I. Petr. Lotichius lib.
1. obs. medic. c. 7 obs. 13.

D Sebizius disp. de variolis ult. qu. 4. I. Christ. Framman. discurs. medic.
sect. 97 103.

Fr. Joel pract. l. 9. sect. 5. 2 Th. Bartholin. Cissa Medica, p. 60. Also
Hoeserus Hercul. medic l. 7. c. 6. and S. He^enreffer de morb. cut. l. 2. c. 4.


as also the younger Sebizius^ now Professor at Iena; and I. Christianus
Frommanus, a Physician in Saxony: and Franciscus Joel: In Denmark I find
Bartholinus to be resolute for it, before the Small Pox do come out: and if
they do not come forth kindly, but that symptoms of an evil presage multiply
upon the Patient, he allows a minute bleeding then, and says many have been
happily recovered by these means. And so much for Germany.

In England the paucity of our W^iters upon this subject gives me no
opportunity to defend Doctor Willis by the citation of any Book: it is enough,
that since the original and first records of the Disease no other Method than
what he pursues, has been commonly proposed: that the generality of the world,
the wisest of Physicians, the most able and judicious of our Professors
principled by Avicenna) do approve thereof: it is not bare compliance with the
Mode of France, but the Dictates of Reason, confirmed by a prosperous success
in several to my knowledge: I would fain see any man justify the Rhodomontade
of Doctor Whitaker, by producing ten Physicians that reject Phlebotomy: I
remember none but Fracastorius, Langius, Rolfinckius, and Densingius, and one
or two more, and a company of old Wives and Nurses. I never yet Phlebotomised
any; yet 'twas because I either had no exigency for it, or the Patients were
too timorous to admit of it. But were my own life concerned, I would undergo
it: and I hope the Baconical Philosophers have not so irrecoverably infatuated
this Nation, but that we may come to be undeceived in this point, as well as we
have been in others.

Although it be not my intention to write an entire Tract about the Small Pox,
yet that I may demonstrate the Rationableness of their procedure who do let
blood in the Small Pox, it is necessary that I acquaint my Reader with those
cases wherein they do apprehend themselves obliged to act as they do.

In the cure of the Small Pox, whenever a Physician employes his thoughts
about Phlebotomy, he considers the Fever which attends it; and the dangers
into which the Patient is likely to fall: and the strength he has to bear
them: not to mention those considerations which arise from the general season
of the year, or the particular malignity of the Disease at that time, or the
idiosyncrasy or peculiar temperament of the sick, or what is singular to some
families. In the Small Pox there happen frequently three sorts of Fevers: one
in the beginning, which usually terminates on the fourth day, or when they come
forth: Another which begins when the Small Pox begin to come to suppurate:
according to that old saying, Febris fecit variolas, and variolae febrem. And a
third, which either arises afresh upon their coming forth, or is the
continuance of the primary Fever, which if it abate not upon their eruption,
creates new cares and troubles in the Physician.

As to the Fever which is antecedent to the Small Pox: though sometimes there
be none at all: and sometimes it be so gentle as not to create any
mis-apprehensions in the Doctor, or Sick; yet frequently it happens to be
joined with putridity, or malignity, or to have something of the Pest it self:
From all these circumstances the cure must be varied; nor is it any
disparagement for a Physician to act one thing at one time which he does not at
another; and to recede from vulgar Methods in extraordinary cases. In some
cases he need not phlebotomise, if he see no violent Fever, no pernicious or
dangerous symptoms: if it be either a Tertian, or double Tertian, or Synochos
simplex: the danger seems less: yet is it a certain observation, that
oftentimes in the Small Pox, the most hopeful beginnings are defeated by sudden
and subsequent acdidents: so that very many of those whose recovery has been
undoubted at first, have in the progress and conclusion of the Disease died.
Lud. Mercatu^ de puer morbis, l. 2. c. 22.
Hoc primum sciat and consideret, prae oculis semper habeat prudens and
diligens Medicus, nimium fidendum non esse plurimum in variolis and morbillis,
quantumvis salutaria signa primo accessu appareant: nam in recessu and
inclinatione facillime in mortem commutantur: tali^ est horum morborum
fraudulentia and conditio. Besides this, it often happens that a salubrious and
simple Synochus turns to one that is putrid: and then the danger is, least what
is intended by Nature for a depuration of the Blood, become corruptive, and
ends in the death of the Patient. Also it is frequently seen that the
exorbitant matter is so much, or Nature so weak as not to discharge it into the
habit of the body, or there is some particular imbecility in the principal
parts, that the Disease seizes on the Lungs so violently as to exulcerate them
in the progress of the Disease, or so debilitates them that the Patient
languisheth in a Consumption; or else it settles in the Glandules of the
Throat, and the Patient dies of a kind of Squinancy, according to Avicenna. Nam
qui ex variolis moriuntur, Diom. Amic^^ tr. de variolis, c. 8.
inquit Avicenna, plerumque ex angina suffocati pereunt, orta minium
inflammatione in gutture. Sometimes the matter takes a wrong course, so as
that a Flux ensues, which sometimes becomes bloody: and this be^als the
Patient either before they come out, or a little after they have appeared: or
in the declination: in all which cases, it is a bad sign: but in the last,
commonly mortal. Si debet hujusmodi res experientiae judicio terminari, ^or.
Augen. de febr l. x. c. ^.
haec fidem faciet, fluore in declinatione adveniente, etiam si non sit
exulceratio^s, majorem aegrotorum partem mori. Sometimes the matter is so
acrimonious, that it corrodes the bones, as Paraeus testifies upon his
knowledge. Quinetiam animadvertere licet in plerisque hujus morbi malignitate
mortuis and dissectis, Ambr. Paraeus Chirurg. l. 9. c. 1.
eum in principibus partibus invehi corruptionis impressionem, quae hydropis,
ph^hiseos, rauvicitatis, asthmatis, dysenteriae ulceratis intestinis, ac tandem
mortis consecutionem attulerit: prout pustulae pari rabie debacchatae sunt, qua
per corporis superficiem furere ce^nun^ur: non enim externas modo parts
deturpant, pustularum and ulcerum altius sese in carnem defigent^um
impressionibus and cicatricibus relictis, sed and saepe movendi facultatem
adimunt, arrosis and labefactatis cubiti, carpi, genu and pedum
dearticulationibus. Quinetiam multi inde videndi sensum amiserunt, ut nobilis
Do. Guymeneus; alii audiendi, alii olfaciendi, oborta hypersarcosi in meatu tum
narium, tum aurium. There being so great danger in this Malady, I wonder that
Doctor Whitaker should ever look upon it as contemptible: saying, This disease
of the Small Pox was anciently and generally in the common place of Petit and
Puerile diseases; and the Cure of no moment. It is true that Physicians do
usually reckon it amongst the Diseases incident to Children: and they do
believe that Children pass it over with less danger than more adult persons:
because in them the Humors are not so accrimonious as in others: their habit of
body is more lax, and gives the humors a freer course through the flesh, their
skin is more perspirable, and their innate heat more ^igourous than in others:
It is also true, that they do hold that sometimes the Small Pox are so mild,
that there is little or nothing to be done by the Physician: But it is no less
true, that from the days of Avicenna and Rhases unto ours, none ever thought
or writ, that the Cure was absolutely of no moment. Avicenna de febr. c. 6.
For Avicenna in his Treatise of the Small Pox represents unto us a great deal
of danger in the Disease; and though he grant it is sometimes facile; yet he
cautions the Reader sufficiently how malignant, perilous and mortal it is at
other times. Horatius Augenius and others aver, Hor. Augenius de febr. l. 9. c^
4, 6,
that this Ebullition is sometimes such as tends to the depuration and
perfecting of the blood; and sometimes to its depravation and putrefaction: And
as they compare the one to the ebullition os Must, by which it is improved unto
good Wine, so they compare the other to those effervescencies in Wine when it
frets, and degenerates. Neither is Doctor Syden^am less mistaken, when he
forbids the Physician to make use of any generous Medicaments, but to leave the
whole work to Nature, and to proceed according to that Regimen which he
suggests; he representing the disease as facile in it self, and only mortal or
dangerous by the errors of the Nurse, or Physician: Whereas it is evident that
the Small Pox are at some times accompanied with greater danger and worse
Fevers than at other times: and all that difference which is to be seen in the
Pox, that they are green, or livid; flat, or high; horny, or more soft; ^ew, or
so numerous as to overrun the whole entrails, as well as skin, and there to
run one into another, and flux; this does not arise always from the
miscarriage of the Attendants, but from the malignity and quantity of the
morbifick matter; as observation and common reason will inform any man.

Let us therefore judge better of those sage Practitioners, who proposed unto
themselves sundry scopes in the cure of this disease: and thought it their
prudence to prevent all the dangers imminent or present, by a cure like unto
this.

First, They examine the habit of the Patients body, if it abound with blood,
or evil humors: the redundancy of the former they conceive may be such, that
upon a violent ebullition Nature may not be able to rule it, but either some
vessels may break, or the Patient be strangled by a decumbiture of the blood
upon the Lungs, or Brain, or a bloody flux ensue, if it take its course that
way; or a bloody urine, if it incline to the Kidneys. The renundancy of evil
humors they do apprehend to carry this hazard in it, that it may pervert the
whole mass of blood upon the febrile effervessence, and add such a malignity to
the morbifick matter in its expulsion, that the evacuation thereof by pustules
may not put a period unto that Fever, but continue or exas^perate it, to the
mortal danger of the Patient: such evils they think may easily be prevented by
a due method in the beginning; but in the progress of the Disease, they are
either remediless, or not to be cured but with much difficulty. Therefore their
first intention is to lessen that plenitude of Blood, and other Humors, which
they find in the Patient. Secondly, They examine the Nature of the distemper,
what the Fever is, whether a simple Synochus, or one that is putrid; a causos,
or continued tertian: They consider the violent symptoms what faculties they
effect, or what parts: and according as they see occasion they apply themselves
to correct its malignity, or to moderate its fervor; without endeavoring to
extinguish the Fever. Thirdly, They consider the danger that the Eyes, Fuerint
ulcera maligna in faucibus, in asperaarteria, in aesophago, in intestinis
saepen^mero, quae hominem non multo negotio de medio to^^^nt. Hor. Augen. de
febr. l. x. c. 2.
Throat, Lungs, Stomach, and Intestines are in, should the Small Pox affect
them: they know that if they be driven forth into the habit of the body, and
those other parts kept inviolate, there is little of danger: but on the
contrary, if the humors discharge themselves on them, now all other fears
vanished; yet upon the suppuration (which brings a new Fever) horrible
symytomes must ensue in the Stomach, Bowels and Lungs. And therefore they think
it ought to be their care to mitifie the humors, and fortify those parts.
Fourthly, They consider the manner of their eruption; and if they come out
kindly, they intermeddle not: If they either come out slowly, and in the mean
time create Epileptick and convulsive fits, or other dangerous symptoms, they
promote their coming out: and according as they perceive by their color, and
other signs, that they are malignant, they apply themselves to amend those
defaults: If they find Nature to exorbitate in their expulsion, and that they
come out so thick that there is not sufficient room for them, but that they run
one into another: If the Fever continue, or increase, because that destroys
the due suppuration of the pustules, they apply themselves to moderate the
excessiveness of that evacuation, and to correct that Fever, which is not to
be terminated by any new excretion of that kind, but to be cured in a manner as
other putrid Fevers are: and in this case all judicious men must allow no
greater regard to the Small Pox, than a symptomatical evacuation deserves.
Fifthly, They employ their care in securing such parts as are particularly
endangered by their eruption; expedite the maturation of them, if it be to
slow, and difficult; hinder their regress, and suffer not any recrementitious
particles again to reincorporate with the blood, and beget a new Fever, or
other dangerous symptom: and in case any new distemper happen (as sometimes a
Pleurisy, or the like may do) they provide for the due cure thereof.
These are the common intendments of all rational Physicians: these things
Doctor Willis (whose short discourse of this disease contains in a manner all
that our best Writers do suggest) does propose to himself: and whosoever does
ponder well the course of the disease must assent thereunto. Let the Motion be
critical; all intelligent men know, that before the Crisis, if we perceive any
threatening danger, that Nature cannot command the exorbitating humors, but that
the present symptoms are perilous, and the future issue uncertain: If the
Crisis be immoderate, and not agreeable to our desires; If it bring no
alleviation to the Patient, our hands are not bound up, nor are we prohibited
to intermeddle even by generous Remedies. As little are we confined by the
Hypothesis of Doctor Sydenham: for, if Nature be inclined to change the state
of the blood, yet are we obliged to assist her, if she be too weak, and
deficient, or exorbitant: and our providence has the same liberty to exert it
self, that any other principles indulge it in.

I come now to those Means by which Physicians principally are said to act: and
those are the great Remedies, of vomiting, gentle purges, and bleeding; and to
declare the usefulness thereof; it is necessary that we consider that Small Pox
under a twofold notion. As the Fever precedes; and as those Pustules do
accompany it: I think those Physicians to have written most discreetly, who
divide Fevers into two sorts: viz, Febres solitariae, and Febres comitatae:
these last they distinguish from symptomatical Fevers, in that those do
succeed others and depend upon them as their Causes: but these others do
precede some other distemper, or arise with it, and are either a cause or
occasion thereof: and upon the appearance of their companion-disease they cease
or abate: such are Squinancies, Peripnenmonies, Pleurisies, the Small Pox, etc.
Comitatae febres continuae sunt, F. Platerus prax. t. 2. p. 13 de febr.
generib^^.
quae aliquem morbum qui ipsas vel exitavit, vel qui ab illis prodiit, comitem
habent, aliaque praeter ea quae febris solitaria affert symptomata, a morbo
comite prodeuntia, and cum febrium accidentibus complicata, febriumque naturam
aliquando permutantia. In this distinction we are freed from those
impertinencies which others molest us with, as if the concomitant disease were
a crisis of the other: whereas indeed this concomitancy makes us look on them
rather as a complication of maladies, than any such succession as is feigned;
and we are thence obliged to consider what indications arise from this
conjunction: for it is confessed that in these cases the primary disease is not
terminated, nor altogether to be cured in the usual manner, but with a regard
to its associate: but our care ought to spend it self so as that the primary
Fever may innocently and without prejudice to the sick introduce its
Associate, and that conclude with an happy recovery. To do this we consider the
nature of the primary Fever: which is in the Small Pox a simple Synochus, or a
Synochus putride; and sometimes a Tertian, or double Tertian, or some malignant
Fever. These we are so to manage that they neither become exorbitant, so as to
destroy the Patient before the Associate discovers it self, nor then become so
depraved, violent, or malignant, as to disturb the subsequent cure: No man can
in reason doubt but the best and most direct means to moderate the primary
Fever is to begin betimes; Hippocr. l. 2. Aphor. 20.
for then the distemper is less violent, and Nature least debilitated: What we
are to do then the course of the Disease best teaches us; in which the most
enormous vomitings are so far from doing hurt, that they are beneficial to the
sick: It is therefore manifest that a Physician, who is to imitate Nature, may
in the beginning (as he sees occasion, and upon due pondering of all
circumstances) administer a vomit: for, it is neither repugnant but congruous
to any of those primary Fevers; nor contra-indicated by the Associate: For
hereby those excrementitious humors are evacuated, which would otherwise in
the progress of the disease add to the distemper, producing Phrensies, Sopors,
or other malignant symptoms; also part of the super-abundant turgent matter is
exhausted, and the Lungs (who are frequently endangered by a Catarrh in the
beginning) are disburthened: as also the eruption of the Small Pox is
facilitated: T. Bartholinus de augin. Epidem. excicit. 4. p. 56.
Vomits being always held by the Methodists amongst those Medicaments which
principally relax the habit of the body. In case that there appear urgent
Reasons against a Vomit: the next thing under consideration, is a Minorative
purge, whereby the Stomach and Intestines being cleansed, and part of the
Morbifick matter discharged from the Head, Lungs, and mass of Blood, Nature
will be better able to overcome and regulate what remains. And herein the
Physician is guided by Nature, which oftentimes alleviates the Patient by a
slight Diarrhaea before the Small Pox do come forth: Epiphan. Ferdinandus cas.
medic. 7^.
Nor is there any danger in such fluxes, as our Practitioners observe: Si
Diarrhaea fuerit in principio non nocebit. And most of them allow a gentle
befitting purge in the beginning of this Disease, not doubting thereby but to
make the subsequent course of it to be more benign, and safe; for the most
turgent urgent bilious and accrimonious humors being carried off together with
the promiscuous faeculencies of the Intestines; it is not easy to be imagined
that any dangerous malignity can reside in the pustules, or any dysentery or
flux ensue in the state or declination of the Disease; at what time it is
extremely perilous. I shall not enlarge upon this subject further (it not
being my present intention) but refer my Reader, for his more particular
instruction, to Horatius Augenius, Ranchinus, Gregorius Horstius, Sennertus and
Riverius: and if he desire Experiments for the happy use of Vomits, and Purges,
and evidence that they do not retract the humors from the circumference to the
center (Alas! Angel. Sala ternar. Bezoart. c. viii. Forrestus ^ib. 6 obs. 49.
cum Scholio.
y'tis not the time of their separation or motion that way!) or impede their
eruption, let him consult Angelus Sala, and Forrestus.

I come now to the practice of Phlebotomy, about which sundry Questions arise:
As, Whether it may be `administred in the beginng of the Disease? and After the
Pox come forth? In the State? and Declination? In all which times I do assert
that there may happen such circumstances as may make it necessary: But in the
beginning I think it may frequently be done with great convenience.

1. In the beginning of this Disease: that which urges is the Fever and its
symptoms, which if it be so violent that the Patient may be endangered before
the Small Pox do come forth, or so debilitated that Nature may not be able to
command them and concoct them by reason of their multitude or virulency (which
the extremity of the Fever, as well as habitual cacochymy, or the adventitious
malignity may create) it is prudence in the beginning to prevent those perils,
which in a stort space will become remediless. If the body be Plethorical with
either sort of plenitude, it is indubitably requisite to bleed: and our case
here is like to those cases which possess the Brewers, Greg. Horstisu de
variolis and morb.
or Vintners, who whilst they attend diligently to the depuration and
fermentation of their liquors: employ a part of their thoughts upon the
preservation of the Cask, least it break,

Nor is the present plenitude only to be considered, but the future, which will
happen upon the increase of the ebullition and attenuation of the blood,
together with the defective transpiration, which always abates proportionably
to the greatness of the Fever: and in case any peril threaten from the
violence of the Fever, there does not appear any more ready course (in such as
are (...), or in the beginning are at their height, perhaps there is no other)
then to let blood; whereby the redundancy is diminished, the course of the
blood diverted from circulating or stagnating in the inward vessels, the habit
and texture of the body changed in order to the more ^acile expulsion of the
Small Pox, and transpiration promoted, then which nothing contributes more to
the alleviation of the first, and precaution of any subsequent Fever, and
malignant putrefaction of the Humors in the Pustules. Quoties cunque enim
corpus ventilatur and nullo modo transpiratio prohibetur, Joseph de Medicu apud
Gr. Horst. ^. 5. p. 50.
facile putridae fuligines per poros exhalantur, nec cordi communicantur, neque
proin sequitur ulla febris: unica enim causa legitima and immediata febris est,
prohibita transpiratio; uti etiam illis qui a limine salutarunt Medicinam,
notum est. i. e. Whenever the blood is well ventilated, and insensible
transpiration free, whatever noxious and venenate vapors are contained in the
body, which might otherwise fly up to the head, and cause incurable Phrensies,
deadly Sopors, and Epileptick fits; or create Lipothymies in the Heart, or
difficulty of breathing (which is a mortal sign in this Disease) in the Lungs,
or a Diarrhaea and Dysentery in the Intestines, or a virulency in the
suppurating Pustules, and corrode even the bones and ligaments; these vapors
exhale by the opened doors, and the Fever abates: for any one that knows never
so little in Physic, understands that the sole legitimate and immediate cause
of Fevers is prohibited transpiration: From what has been said it is evident,
that of all Remedies Phlebotomy is the most important in the Small Pox, in the
first beginning, whether the Fever be a simple Synochus, or one that is putrid
and malignant: and it is more a wonder that any man should oppose the due
administration of it, then that all Europe in a manner should agree to the
practice thereof.

Neither is it only to be administered to allay the plenitude (which general
occurs in this Malady) or to prevent the evils forementioned; but frequently
for revulsion, when the malignant matter begins to affect the Brain, Stomach,
Lungs, Intestines: For if during the Fever the Humors seize upon those parts
with any violence, the Patient is in apparent danger of death, there being no
way to prevent the suppuration there; and little hopes that the Patient will
survive the distemper, or (if he do) escape a Consumption or Dropsy
afterward. Epiphan. Ferdinand. cas. medic. 78.
Sunt aliae ita malignae, ut non solum carnosum genus adoriantur, sed ossa
quoque dilanient, and corrumpant, and quandoque interna membra principalia, ut
hydropem generent, and nuper observavimus puellulum quendam D. Donati Profili
nepotem mortuum ex hydrope ob variolas, and morbillos: quandoque vidimus alios
consumptos ex asthmate, ob easdem variolas: quandoque vidimus alios diarrhaea
and dysenteria confectos ex morbillis and variolis, and alios gangrenatos and
esthiomenatos. It is true that Physicians do not always regard the distempers
of the brain in this disease, because albeit they may be very violent in the
beginning, yet they afterward cease of themselves: nor do they appear so
highly concerned for the animal, as vital functions: and in such cases great
judgment is required in a Practitioner rightly to distinguish betwixt what may
affright others, and what ought to terrify him: Si est bona vox, and bona
respiratio, spes est in tuto. ex Avicenna. Epith. Ferdinand. cas, medic. 78.
But in case the first approach be accompanied with a violent Cough,
hoarseness, difficulty of breathing, the beginnings of Squinancy from a
pustulary defluxion into the Glandules of the Throat, or with swoonings, and
perfrigerations of the hand. and feet; He that thinks Phlebotomy ought not to
be administered (if other conditions permit) understands not himself, or
complies too much with the prejudicate opinions of the Patient and Relations.
The Authority of all Physicians almost justifies him: the Rules of Art direct
him to it: the prosperous success which frequently follows thereon imbolden him
to it: and Nature her self authenticates the practice by her sovereign example:
for it is usual for Patients in the beginning of the Small Pox to bleed at the
nose: I have known five or six in one ^amily (adult persons) that bled of
themselves eighteen or twenty ounces, with greater benefit: whilst I durst not
be allowed to take away eight. Epiph^r. Ferdinand. cas. med. c. 78.
Novimus plures infantes in principio quibus sanguis in copia exnaribus exivit,
and been habuerunt, neque tot tantisque variolis and morbillis fuerunt afflicti
unde multi autumarunt, si puero multa sanguinis copia sponte vel art exieret,
usque ad animi deliquium, qoad vel non variolabitur, vel non in tanta copia:
nam variolae and morbilli vere sunt morbi a sanguine. With this Author agrees
the most experient Augenius, Hor. Augenius de febr. l. x. c. 3.
Saluberrimum esse provocare sanguinem exnaribus docuit experientia: nam quibus
sponte effluxit, variolae pauciores and salubriores evenerunt. Vidi hactenus
pueros duos, qui ex sluore sanguinis e nare dextra tertio die immunes a febre
evaserunt, and quarto die supervenerunt variolae paucae and benignissimae. I
add the words of Diomedes Amicus, who having recommended the applying of
Leeches, Yarrow, or Horse-tail to the Nose, thereby to cause a flux of blood,
Diom Amicus de variolis, c x.
prooceeds: Haec enim sanguinis evacuatio a naribus, vel sponte, vel art
factae adeo confert, maxim cum adsint signa fluxum sanguinis portendentia,
(cum tamen non fluat) ut solo fluxu isto aegrotantes istos sanatos vidisse
Rhases dicat; Rhases 18. ^^nt. 8.
and eum solum praeservare a nocumento oculos and alias faciei parts dixerit
Avicenna: quae sanguinis evacuatio ex naribus semper medicum excusat ab omni
alia evacuatione: sicuti facit etiam qui per uterum, vel haemorrhoidas fit,
modo fiat cum alleviatione. The consideration of this so beneficial an effort
of Nature made Augenius and others to direct that after Phlebotomy in the Arm;
the Patient should be forced to bleed at the right Nostril (in relation to the
Liver) or at both: and in the cure of Antonio Borghese, a Nephew of Pope Paulus
V. a College of Physicians at Rome did prescribe Leeches to be applied to his
Nostrils, Philander Colutius in dedic. Marsil. Cagnati super aph. 22. sect. 1.
and his recovery was principally ascribed thereunto.

I shall not undertake to prescribe how much blood may be taken away at once:
nor how often Phlebotomy is to be repeated in the beginning of the disease: I
should expatiate too much by such a discourse; the general Rules are to be
found in Augenius, Mercatus, Horstius, Ranchinus, Epiphanius Ferdinandus, etc.
and the accommodation thereof to particular cases does depend wholly upon the
judgment of the Physician employed; How Children (in whom the Disease, if they
can be ordered) is less dangerous commonly: and how Men according to their
different habits of body, and other circumstances (it being more perilous in
them, their flesh being more solid and tenacious, their bodies less
perspirable, and their blood and humors more acrimonious) are to be ordered:
When the Lancet, when Leeches, when Cupping glasses and Scarifications are to
be made use of; the wise do know, and the ignorant may learn, if they will
study to improve by study that time which they mis-spend in censuring the
prudent actions of their betters.

Before I proceed to the second Question, it will be convenient to decide that
Controversy about Phlebotomy, Whether it draw from the Circumference to the
Center, and may hinder the eruption, or cause the Pustules to return in, or
subside? That there are some eminent Physicians who do hold, that Phlebotomy
does draw the Humors from the Circumference to the Center, I do grant: and in
the case of the Small Pox, that it may chance to do so, is the suspicion and
fear of Avicenna and Hollerius, as well as Doctor Whitaker. But why the Doctor
should be scrupulous here, who has so great a regard for the Ancients, (though
he cite no good Authors) is to me a Miracle: For besides the Methodists, who
are more ancient than his Citations; the repute of Galen and Aetius (whom
Septalius entitles to the Opinion) ought not to have been supinely contemned:
and the Authority of many of the Moderns (which a man that cites Fernelius
ought not to slight) does prove unto us that Phlebotomy does promote
transpiration, eject the peccant humors to the Circumference, and not revel
them back: and this is the Opinion of the learned Septalius, Lud. Septal. de
pest. l. 5: c. 17. Greg. Horstius Instit. Medic. disp. 18. co^ron. de venae
sect. qu. 7.

Joseph de Medicis apud Gr. Horst. t. 2. p. 52.53.

Collado obs. in Hollerii meth. c 93.

Botallus de venae sect. c. 5. sect. 6.


Gregorius Horstius, Joseph de Medicis, Collado, Botallus, and several others.
I have said enough to decide this point in the preceding discourse about the
natue and effects of Phlebotomy: Yet since it seems in this place peculiarly
necessary to be again spoken unto, I thus argue thereunto. If it be true that
Blood-letting does draw the humors from the Circumference to the Center; how is
it that Hippocrates, Galen and all the Dogmatists do prescribe Phlebotomy in
Pleurisies, and Inflammations of the Liver, and Lungs? Is this the effect of
that Revulsion, that the Humors should ^low more inward? and from the surface
to the center? Is it upon this sentiment that Physicians reiterate their
Phlebotomies? or practice them at all in the Itch, Leprosy, Hippocr. sect. 6
aphor. 25.
or Erysipelas? Does not Hippocrates caution us against the returning in of an
Erysipelas? Yet is there no man that can rationally condemn bleeding in that
Disease? How often do we read the happy effects of this usage in pestilential
Diseases after the eruption of the Spots (which Septalius tried upon himself;
Septal. de pest. l, 5. c 17.
and Minadous upon an infinity of Patients) and of the Parotudes (of which
Riverius boasts) of the Carbuncles and Botches (the successfulness whereof
converted the other Physicians to adhere unto Septalius, Io. Baptist. Minadous
de abusu non mittendi sang. c. 14. Riverius prax. medic. l. 17. c. 1.
in opposition to the timorous Francastorius) and even of the Small Pox, in
which Avicenna allows of it before their eruption, and sometimes after it?
Consider the Authors, and the Cases related concerning the prosperous issue of
Phlebotomy in the Small Pox, and how speedily they have come forth thereupon;
and see if it be possible to frame a ground for such sentiments, as Doctor
Whitaker^ suggests: I will not here repeat the multitude of cases recorded by
the French, Italian and Spanish Physicians; nor allege the cases out of
Forrestus: but content my self with the single instance of Heurnius. Heurnius
in lib. 2. aphor. 15.
Quin si dyspnaea adfuerit cum exanthematibus, interdum ad Phlebotomian
venimus. Ita nobilissimae comitissae hymondanae Franciscoe, Admiralii filiae,
venam pertundi jussi, cum exanthematu non satis prodirent, idque felici
successu. Can we imagine that if the proper effect of Phlebotomy to draw in the
humors, that it should so frequently, nay universally, produce so different an
operation? Or, is it not more rational to think that the proper effect thereof
is to draw from the Center; and that whensover it happens otherwise, it is by
accident only? Does not Collado argue judiciously against the generality of
that Assertion? Collado obs. in Holler. method. c. 93.
viz. All Phlebotomy draws from the Circumference to the Center: when he
reasons thus?

Whatsoever does draw back the humors from the Circumference toward the
Center, is noxious in the Small Pox. But some Phlebotomies are not hurtful in
the Small Pox. Therefore some Phlebotomies do not retract the Humors from the
Surface to the Center of the Body. Which Conclusion is contradictory to the
universality of the Proposition aforesaid.
I hope I need not inculcate to those of the contrary ten^t that old Rule in
Logic: Syllogizari non est ex particulari.

Page 14^. edit. 2.
As for Doctor Sydenham, he grants that it is most false for any to say that
Phlebotomy (and other evacuations) hinders the eruption of the Small Pox, by
introducing a contrary motion to what Nature intends by the Circumference:
Since that it is commonly seen to happen quite otherwise, they suddenly coming
out thereupon: and therefore he suggests other Reasons, but of little validity.
Per hasce evacuationes non tantum ebullitio nimis imminuitur, Ibid. p. 141.
cujus interim open parts despumandae accurate secerni debuerunt: verum etiam
illud ipsum subducitur, quod caeptae secretioni quasi pabulum continenter
suppeditaret; unde saepenumero contingit, ut variolae primum laudabili impetu
erumpentes (coque fortasse melius, quod evacuationes jam dictae praecesserant)
paulo post ex improviso quasi repercussae detum^scunt, idque ob eam potissimum
causam, quod materia desit, quae quasi a tergo praeeuntem insequeretur, atque
agmen clauderet. These are his most important and persuasive Reasons! so
conformable to his Observations, that he makes them the Basis in a manner of
his practice! so powerful, that all that the Physicians have observed, said,
and writ for above seven hundred years is not worth a straw in comparison
thereof! Ep. dedic. ad cl. R. B.
Such is the Treatise of his, Quae etiamsi neque mole ampla, neque spoliis
Authorum (quorum cineres per me molliter cubent) sit sufferta, tamen non e^it,
uti spero, eo nomine tibi minus grata, quippe qui inter magna quid intersit and
tumida non ignoras! I have wondered often that his Books should meet with any
applauds: and with what confidence he could obtrude upon the World so
irrational and absurd a piece; except it were to show how judicious in framing
of Hypothesis, and exact in their observations these Baconical Philosophers
are. I would not be understood to say the Doctor is a Conjurer.
But, not to disturb the repose of Fr. Bacon, or Bungey ( quorum cineres per me
molliter cubent) all that he proceeds on in that Book about Fevers, amounts to
this, that Nature affects a new state and disposition of the Blood; and so
produces a Fever. Febrilem sanguinis commotionem saepe (ne dicam saepius) non
alio colliceare, De feb. continuis. p. 5.
quam ut ipse sese in novum quendam statum, and diathesin immutet. Well, for
discourse sake, I will now allow him this: but I must remind him that he says
the same of the Small Pox: How then comes it to pass that the Indications are
not the same, where the supposition is the same, and the procedure of Nature
the same, by Ebullition and Despumation? Before, he expressed himself thus;
page 6.
Ita mecum reputo, Indicationes veras, and gemines quoe in hoc morbo
consurgunt, in eo versari, ut sanguinis commotio intra modum naturae proposito
congruentem sistatur; ea nimium ratione, ut nec hinc plus aequo gliscat, unde
periculosa symptomata insequi solent, nec illinc nimium torpeat, quo pacto vel
materae morbificae protrusio impediretur, vel sanguinis novum statum
effectantis labefacturentur conatus. We were then allowed to intermeddle, as we
saw occasion, and to assist Nature by Vomits, Purges, and repeated
Phlebotomies, in case the Ebullition were so violent, as that it was
incongruous for the affecting that change in the mass of blood; or on the
contrary so defective, as not to be able to bring it about: But now, when the
same things fall under our debate; the same Ebullition, attended with no less
violence and danger (rather much more) and the like despumation is to be
effected, how come the Indications to vary, and that our hands are tied up from
prescribing those Remedies, which a parity of Reason does ligitimate? If it
were not necessary, we were then obliged by our Observator not to busy our
selves: but amidst the aforesaid circumstances we might interpose our aid: and
why not now? No Reply can be made but this extravigant and intolerable
Assertion; that, In the Small Pox there never can happen any immoderate, or
defective Ebullition naturally; but it must arise from the error of the
Physician, Patient, or Attendants. And all the proof of this that I can find
amounts to no more, than that some, or many have been recovered by doing
nothing in the Small Pox; when Salubrious that oftentimes upon Phlebotomy, and
other evacuations practiced in the beginning of the Small Pox, though they have
come forth well (nay the better for the use thereof) yet in the progress of the
disease, they have subsided, and returned in: those antecedent Remedies having
either rendered the Ebullition too minute to finish the despumation, or having
carried off part of that matter which should have brought up the rear, whereby
the forlorn-hope, or vant-guard are disappointed behind. Most excellent! But
may not I say on the other side, that since we oftentimes see that the Small
Pox are preceded by a malignant, pestilential, or putrid Fever (no defaults in
any person being to be alleged in the case) and that many (sometimes most) do
not recover: that in those difficulties we are exempted from his general Rule,
and cannot without betraying our Patients and our own repute, omit those
Remedies, and moderate the Ebullition, or correct it? Is it not so apparent
that none, but such as prejudice has rendered blind, and deaf, can deny it,
that Nature frequently produces an effusion of blood at the Nose (or
menstrous) in this disease, to the benefit, at least not to the detriment of
the infirm? Nuper, cum 1665 variolis decumberent filii filiae^ que, uri prae
caeteris sanguine florido rubenti, libenter nonnihil sanguini^ subtraxissem
prius quam eruptio fieret: sed incerti eventus metu retractus optimum consilium
intermisi, quod proficuum videbam: In mittendo enim sanguine non tam annos
Medicus numerat, quam vires aegrotantis aestimat, Celso prae^unte. Negligentiam
tamen meam vel metum supplevit Natura optato successu and felici variolarum
eruptione. Quippe quotquot ex meis decubuerunt, plerisque delirantibus,
eruptionem variolarum, haemorrhagia narium praecessit, qua sublevata Natura
promptius expulit variola^ numero plures, sed nulla alia malignitate infestas.
Bartholin. medic. Dan. dissert. 9. p. 428, 429.
Is it not most notorious in England, that oftentimes people are vomited,
purged, and blooded, in the beginning, they not suspecting the malady, and yet
none of these inconveniences do ensue? Cannot the avowed practice of Italy,
France, Spain, Africa, Egypt, High and Low Germany, and of many in our Nation,
convince a man that these ill consequences do neither generally nor necessarily
follow upon the due administration of Phlebotomy? So that neither is the
Ebullition rendered too minute (which may sometimes be almost insensible) nor
does the Van run away for want of a Rear-guard. If it be so, as it is
undeniable, and our Book-cases make it good, I conceive the Doctors Reasons to
be as weak as any were ever alleged, and that whatsoever is the cause of those
subsequent evils, the artificial use of Phlebotomy cannot be the proper cause
thereof: since nothing is more true, than that old Axiom, Idem, quatenus idem,
semper facit idem. But here those effects are frequently visible, where
Phlebotomy is not used; and do not ensue, as frequently, where it is
judiciously used: therefore those effects are not to be ascribed simply to the
bleeding of the Patient. It Is an imbecility of ratiocination to erect
universal theorems upon a Saepenumero, or what oftentimes happens; especially
if that oftentimes be counterpoised by almost as many, or more Experiments of a
contrary event. Besides, who in Physic ever found out such a Rule, Vide
Valles. meth. med. l. 4. c. 2.
as Vrgency, or a Cura coacta did not absolve the Practitioner from its
obligation at some times? And that is the present case. We do universally
grant, and Spain it self will join with Doctor Sydenham, Sed maxim notandum
est, exire aliquand^ variolas, aut morbillos, ita placide cum febre, vel sine
febre, ut error sit venam secare. Commoda regio est, nullum acciden^ urget,
neque ex pulsu, aut alio signo cognosci potest latitans malum. Quorsum sine
ulla indicatione audet Medicus turbare crisin? Auton. Ponce Santacruz. de
imped. magn. auxil. l. 3. c. 18.
that in the Small Pox, when either there is no Fever, or a mild and
salubrious one, and that Nature without any dangerous symptoms does expeditely
and congruously carry on the work; we ought not, or need not to Phlebotomise:
But we do say, some exigencies may happen (without any intervening error) in
which that practice is legitimate, because then necessary. I know not how
diligent our Observatour was, when he took notice of such as miscarried upon
Phlebotomy: were the Physicians besitting Artists? did the Patient, and all
Attendants faithfully discharge their duty? was there no Malignity superior
oftentimes to all Medicines; no individual circumstances, such as commonly
frustrate a Cure under the most judicious Methods? I must be informed of this,
before I can determine, as our Author intends. Oh! what a misery is much study!
and how many scruples is this Doctor Sydenham freed from, by suffering our best
Writers to remain untouched, unconsulted!

But I need say no more: and therefore proceed to the second Question.

The second Question is; Whether in the AUGMENT or increase of the Small Pox,
it be lawful to let the Patient bleed? For the better understanding hereof, I
think it requisite I explain what I mean by the Beginning, Augment, State, and
Declination of the Small Pox. I intend by the Beginning all that time which
intervenes from the first illness, decumbiture, or Fever, until the Small Pox
do begin to appear: this space is uncertain; for commonly it exceeds not three,
or four days: though I have known it to be much longer before they have
appeared. Zacut. Lusitan. Medic. princip. hist. l. 2. qu. 2.
And Zacutus Lusitanus shall confirm it to any one that doubts the truth of my
Observations. Variolae in die septimo, octavo, undecimo, and duodecimo; and,
quod plus est, vigesimo saepe apparere solent, quando natura prae humorum onere
pressa causam morbificum citius expellere non potuit. Diomedes Amicus de
variolis, c. 6.
Diomedes Amicus says he had a Soldier at Millaine under cure, who having had
seven fits of an exquisite Tertian, in the end of the last paroxysme, the Small
Pox came forth, and he remained perfectly freed from any Fever, till their
suppuration occasioned one, which ended in an happy recovery. It Is true the
Fever preceding the Small Pox may have its distinct times (which fall also
under the consideration of a Physician) and sometimes the Small Pox are so
gentle, Horat. Augen. de febr. l. 9. c. 18.
that this distinction cannot take place: But it is not to my present purpose to
entreat hereof: I have sufficiently proved that Phlebotomy may be administered
in the beginning: and the number of those that deny that, is very
inconsiderable: but in the Augment many are more timorous. By the Augment I
mean all the time from their first sensible appearance until they swell up,
imbody, and exchange their red color for one more white: during which time
commonly the Fever cease, or gives little of trouble to the Patient: and
this extends usually to the seventh, ninth, and sometimes the eleventh day:
sometimes it happens that the Pox arise one under another, and then the Augment
of the former becomes coincident with the state of the latter.

It is not here to be debated, whether we may let blood in the Augment when it
is gentle, and our prognostics happy: but in difficult cases: as if the Fever
be so far from any alleviation upon their appearance, that it increases, and
the symptoms become more terrible: If the difficulty of breathing become
greater, or continue violent: If the throat become very sore, and be
accompanied with a difficulty of swallowing: If the first deliriums persist,
and there be danger of a Frenzy, or Convulsions: If the Cough be vehement: If
swoonings or vomitings begin, or continue: If a looseness, or bloody flux, or
bloody urine ensue: If they come out interruptedly, and disappear after they
have come forth: If they come forth of a dangerous color, or be very hard and
horny (as they call it) or interspersed with purple spots: If they come out in
such multitudes, that Nature seems oppressed, and incapable of disburthening
her self, or ruling them in order to due maturation: If appar^nt danger
threaten the Eyes: In these (and other cases that are perilous) it is
controverted, Whether we may let blood? And I am for the Affirmative; supposing
that either Phlebotomy has not been administered; or so diminutely, C. Cells.
Medic. l. 3. c 18.

Vallesius in Hippocr. sect. 2. aph 3,

Ludovic. Market. de morb. pueror. l. 2. c. 22.

M. I. Paschal. meth. me^. l. 2. c. x.

H. Augen. de febr. l x. c. 3.

I. C. Claudin. Empir. rational l. 5. sect. 1. c. 1. p. 286.

Epiphan. Ferdinand. hist. 78. Dilect. Lusitan. de venae sect. c. xi. Art 1 p.
145.

Iose^h de Medicis apud Greg. Horst. t. 2

Hoeferus l. 7. p. 366.

Bar^holin cist. medic. p. 101.


that there is still occasion for it. Multa in praecipiti periculo recte fiunt,
alias omittenda: I have already alleged the Authority of Avicenna and Rhases,
and Bayrus, and the practice of Heurnius upon the Countess of Egmond: I add
here, that it is approved of by Vall^sius, Mercatus, Paschalius, Fonseca, and
the Physicians of Spain: by Horatius H^genius, Caesar Claudinus, Epiphanus
Ferdinandus, Dilectus Lusitanus, and the vulgar practice of Italy: By Joseph de
Medi^is, Hoeferus, Bartholinus, and many other Physicians in high and low
Germany: and the happy practice thereof frequently in this N^tion, has given
some credit thereunto. I mention not the French Physicians, because their
Authority is excepted against in this disease: though no Nation (excepting
Spain) has ever produced better Practitioners, or more judicious men than they
are. It being manifest then that the number of Physicians which approve the due
administration of Phlebotomy in the Augment of the Disease, and after that they
begin to appear, is such as may justi^ie any prudent Man in the doing thereof;
Let us now examine with what success it has been done. The Countess of Egmonds
case I have already recited: Bartholinus avows the beneficialness thereof. Sunt
tamen qui erumpentibus variolis venam secent, Th. Bartholin. cist. med. page
601.
quando febris intenditur, anxietas, spirandi difficultas, angina, pleuritis,
lotium crassum, and rubrum, aliaque symptomata apparent, ut detracta humorum
portione, reliqua facilius superentur. Certe si imperfecto prodeant
exanthemata, naturae laboranti succurrendum, partim parca venae apertione, si
copia sanguinis oneret, quod multorum felix eventus comprobavit, partim
sudoriferis, quae, ubi malignitatis suspicio, tutius ad extrema corporis
clinimant ichores. And Dilectus Lusitanus professes the neglect of it to be an
error: Qua in part aliquorum Italorum Doctorum error and timor calumniandus
venit, Dilect. Lusitan. de venae sectione cap xi Art. 1. p. 146.
qui dum apparere vident variolus inviolabile servant praeceptum nullo modo
sanguinem evacuare; and in praesenti casu exceptio facienda erit, cum multa
experientia viderimus in his quibus talis evacuatio fuit repugnata, and ante
suppurationem pueros suffocari, and in multa illarum quantitate etiam
suppurata. Non enim potest natura tanta regere and vincere ulcuscula, and ideo
suffocatur, indeque multotie^ pulmonia and alia superveniunt accidentia. It Is
needless to recite other cases: I proceed to the Reasons of the practice; which
though they are easily deduced out of the foregoing Treatise, concerning the
general effects and utility of Phlebotomy, yet may it not seem amiss to debate
the controversy particularly in this place.

It is an Aphorism of Hippocrates, that in the beginning of Diseases a
Physician is to administer his principal Remedies: but in the state to
supersede: Cum morbi incipiunt, Hi^p^cr. sect. ^ aph. 29.
siquid videbitur movendum, move: cum vero vigent, quietem agere melius est.
And the reason of that injunction is, because that in the beginning Nature is
rather oppressed by the tu^gent and crude humors, then as yet debilitated; the
temperament of the body is not much vitiated, nor the mass of blood much
depraved; nor the Disease highly prevalent. It being most certain, Id. ibid.
aphor. 30.
Circa initia and fines omnia sunt levissima: circa vigores autem
vehementissima. In which Aphorisms the word beginning is so used as to include
the Augment of the Disease: for he passes immediately from the Beginning to
the State of Diseases. Hier. Thriver. in Hipp. l. 2. aphor. 29.
Id nunc manifest ex verbis Hippocratis constat, qui principio nominato ad
statum transilivit, tanquam Augmentum sub principio continuerit. Clarius id
cognosces, quia morbum in tria duntaxat tempora partitur. And from hence we
learn, that the most seasonable time for Phlebotomy is within the time of the
Beginning of the Small Pox, yet so as it includes the Augment, and may then
judiciously be practiced, in case it have been omitted before, or that new
emergencies urge us thereunto: for if we delay then to use it, 'twill be too
late to administer it, when Nature is more spent, the Blood and Humors more
corrupted and perhaps degenerated into a malignity; the disease with all its
symptoms more violent. If then after the eruption of the Pustules the Fever
continue, or increase, with evil symptoms; it is most evident that we ought to
proceed to Phlebotomy, not only to diminish the present plenitude of blood, and
surcharge of peccant humors, to allay the vehemence of the present Fever (by
ventilating the blood) open obstructions, relax the texture of the body; but
also to prevent future evils, which will after prove remediless. For in case
the Fever continually increase, it is indisputable that no proper maturation of
the Pox can ensue: the violence thereof interturbing that work, and depraving
the expulsed humors so as to destroy the habit of the body, instead of
suppurating in the skin: and their eruption is in this case perfectly
symptomatical, because they bring no alleviation with them, but add to the
danger so much as their maturation interferes with the proper cure of the
putrid or malignant Fever: If ever it be true that the expulsion of the Small
Pox is a Critical motion, it is manifest that now they are to be looked on as
judicatoria non judicantia, as efforts of Nature intending, but not being able
to effect her easement; and consequently they portend either a tedious and
perilous sickness, Prosper Alpin. de praesag. vita and morte^ l. 1. c. ult.
or death. Omnes excretiones male sunt, quae non sedant dolorem -- and quae non
judicant, difficile judicium reddunt, atque quae laedunt in acutis morbis
exitium praenunciant. And were there any danger of retracting the expulsed
matter, as there is not (because neither does Phlebotomy draw from the
Circumference to the Center: nor is it an easy thing to draw back extravasated
matter) yet would not the regard thereunto deter us from this practice;
because in reference to the maturation of the Pustules, the Fever here assumes
the nature of a Causa prohibens, or an obstacle and impediment thereunto, which
must first be removed. The case in hazardous; but it is now we must act with
that prudence which obliges us to attend unto what is most urgent; though we
neglect not other considerations: Nor can any man in his wits doubt but that we
ought to recurre unto Phlebotomy (even more than once) Cupping-glasses, and
Scarifications, except by declining an uncertain peril we will subject the
Patient to one that is certain. Other remedy there is none: and what imports
it, if the attempt be hazardous, since the omission is likely to be more fatal?
we know not, nay scarce fear that we shall indammage the sick by the remedy; we
are assured to do it, if we forbear: seeing that each moment adds to his
jeopardy, and so far incapacitates us to serve him, as it accelerates the state
of the Disease; in which when the distemper is most violent, we are generally
obliged to supersede: or if we were not, yet would our care spend it self to no
purpose; for in such Small Pox there is not any declination, nor does the
Patient survive the State thereof. Hor. Augen. de febr. l. 9. c. 18.
Status autem [variolarum lethalium] cum omnia in deteriorem labuntur
dispositionem: exulcerantur subdita parts, pus educitur maxim faetidum,
nigricans, viride; subjectum corpus plurimum contraxit ingredinis, ita ut totum
videatur igne ustulatum, virtus imbecilla, febris interdum magna: atque tunc
aegrotus moritur.

Neither is this the only case in which a Physician ought to practice
Phlebotomy; but it may be done safely and warrantably, if that the Small Pox do
not come out kindly; but appear, and then retire in again, or come out so
slowly, or evil colored, as that the Patient may be in danger to perish during
the progress of the malady. For in the first case, is a certain sign that
Nature is not able to govern those humors in the first eruption, either because
of their malignity, or surcharge: and if it be not to be done by her, when the
Disease is not arrived to its height, nor she as yet much debilitated: how can
we imagine, but she must fail in the vigor of it? It is therefore requisite
that a Physician (duly considering all circumstances) do proceed to secure the
infirm by a minute, and perhaps iterated blood-letting. For it is not here as
in other putrid or malignant Fevers, in which we have a greater latitude of
practice; and what Nature cannot effect by one way of termination, may be
accomplished by another. The concomitant Pox alter the course of the Fever,
and suffer it to admit of no other issue, but by a due maturation of the
Pustules: since therefore that Phlebotomy promotes the eruption, and by
altering the texture of the whole body and facilitating transpiration does
diminish the morbifick matter, hinder putrefaction, extinguish the Fever, and
so alleviate Nature, that she is enabled to prosecute happily her work; I see
no reason, but that it ought to be administered: and the same considerations do
sway me to approve of it in the latter case: for if the Pox appear malignant in
their first coming forth, their continuance will prove fatal, if this Remedy be
not applied: for we have none so effectual. No Minoratives can be used to
disburthen part of the humor; no powerful Cordials: for those, however they
seem to yield a present benefit, do in the issue debilitate Nature, dissipate
the spirits, retard the maturation, and oftentimes increase the Fever, and
occasion a Phrenitis, or other deadly symptoms. Vesicatories are attended with
no less jeopardy, not only for that they frequently cause bloody Vrines, and
exulcerate the Bladder, and procure a vexatious tenasmus, (which I have seen to
fall out, when they were applied in other distempers) but because the
ill-conditioned matter being attracted to them, may cause a Gangrene, or
otherwise endanger the Patient: upon which account, I do not remember any that
ever proposed them in this Disease. It Is true, I knew a Person of Honor, who
in France was four times blooded pretty largely before their eruption, and then
had Pigeons applied to his face and other places (because they came not forth
well) and so was recovered: Prosper Alpin. de med. meth. l. 5. c. 9. p. 17^. de
medic. Egypt. l. 4. c. 15.

Melichius A^mament. medic. did 9 in Scholio super Pilulis de ^itro.


It Is true that Prosper Alpinus does commend Inunctions with Nitre and Oil of
bitter Almonds to be used once or twice in a day: but besides what Melichius
records, the practice being novel in England, and seldom used in Europe, I
believe no discreet man will adventure his credit, or the life of the sick
thereupon; but rather acquiesce in the received, warrantable, happy practice of
the generality of Physicians.

In case that there be a great redundancy of the mass of blood in the aforesaid
cases, so that Nature seems oppressed, and to be so straightened, as not to be
able to free her self from the corrupted humors, who can doubt but the
^hysi^ian has more reason than otherwise to phlebotomise the sick in this time
of the Disease? It is a Rule in Physic, That we ought to attend principally in
diseases to that which is most urgent^ ^et so as not to neglect those other
considerations which arise from the nature of the Disease. In this last case
the regard unto plenitude is most urgent. For if there be so great a Plethora,
as that there is danger least the Patient be suffocated, and the natural heat
extinguished, which is the supposition of Avicenna, when he says, Timetur
super eum corruption extremitatis. And if Phlebotomy either has been omitted,
or not administered as 'twas requisite, who can imagine that Nature will be able
to govern and regulate so great a surcharge to the benefit and recovery of the
Patient, but that when the humors separate and extravasate, some part will
mortisie and sphacelate, or the party be suffocated? It is really to be
supposed that the sick person will dye within a short time, except Nature
alleviate it self by a large e^flux of blood at the Nose. It is here as it is
in a Synochus putrida, (for commonly it is a Synochus putrida which accompanies
the Small Pox) in which if either by reason of the reluctance of the Patient,
or ignorance of the Physician, blood-letting be omitted, the case becomes
exceeding perilous, except Nature be very strong, or a great flux of blood, or
plentiful sweat succeed: as Galen relates in the ninth Book, and fourth
Chapter. It Is mere folly here to object, that albeit that Phlebotomy be
omitted, yet ought we to presume w^ll of the Patient, because the Small Pox do
come ^orth: as when sweat appears in a Synoc^us: ^or there is a great dispa^ity
in the cases: The sweat is discharged out of the skin: the Small Pox are lodged
in the surface of the body, and must there be maturated; besides that the Small
Pox infest also all the inward parts; so that the danger is greater ^^re, than
upon the eruption of sweat: Moreover the sweat consists of a more ^ubtle and
Ichorous substance, and finds a more facile and certain exiture; but the Small
Pox are of a grosser substance, and come not forth with equal facility. It is
also to be considered, that as a large evacuation by sweat may happily
terminate a Synochus; so, although the Patient do abound with blood, Nature may
sometimes so expel and regulate the matter, that the party may avoid the
imminent perils: but he that trusts thereunto must well ponder not only how
plentifully the Pox come forth, but whether it be proportionate to the
exigencies of Nature (for whatever is not such, is minute) and what alleviation
insues: not to mention other things. And as when sweat does not appear in due
time, due quantity, with due qualifications, the Patient does nevertheless dye:
So we daily observe it to fall out in the coming forth of the Small Pox. And
therefore I do assent unto the directions of Avicenna, and Augenius, that in
case of this urgency, Phlebotomy be judiciously made use of: and whatsoever
danger may seem to be in it, it is prudence to submit thereunto rather than to
incur greater.

Hitherto I have treated of Phlebotomy as it is an evacuative and relaxing
Remedy; but there is oftentimes occasion for it by way of Revulsion, when not
only the Eyes are in great hazard to be spoiled, or the blood stagnates about
the Heart, Lungs, and Thorax: or that the Small Pox very much affect the
Stomach, and Entrails, or occasion a Diarrhaea, or Dysentery: For in these
cases, it is most probable that the Patient either will not live to the state of
the disease, or dye then. It Is a received tradition from Avicenna d^^nwards, ^
that in case the Patient in the Small Pox do br^^th freely, and suffer no
defect in his voice, there is little, or no danger; unless some accident
introduce a Dysentery: Because that is a sign that the Throat and parts
relating unto respiration are secure. But in case it appe^^ that the inward
parts are infested by the Pox, and that swoonings, vomitings, difficulty of
breathing, a soar throat, and great hoarsness trouble the Patient, it is most
manifest that he ought to be blooded for revulsion; least in the State of the
Disease, the Pustules coming to maturation, may by their purulent stench annoy,
or by their growth and inflammation suffocate Nature, or exulcerate and
apostemate the Lungs. It is usually seen that people dye of the Small Pox in
the State of the Disease (on the sixteenth, seventeenth, nay twentieth day)
though they have seemed plentifully and kindly to come out: and the reason is
(I abstract from all errors) because a due regard has not been had to those
that infested the inward parts: for they have exulcerated the Intestines and
created Fluxes, they have occasioned in their maturation a new and perilous
Fever, a Squinancy, a Pleurisi^, and particularly by affecting the membranes
of the Stomach, they have created Vomitings and Lipothymies, etc. And this will
seem credible to any that by considering what happens in the surface of the
body, apprehend what must ensue upon their maturation within: and those
Ignorants who have admired at these events in the state, and declination, will
cease to wonder, when they assume these thoughts of Physicians, and weigh
attentively the Augment, State and Declination of the Pustules.

To conclude this discourse; who has not seen in the Augment of the Small Pox
large eruptions of blood at the Nose, as also menstruous Fluxes ordinately and
inordinately to intervene, without any peril; sometimes to the great benefit of
the sick? About fourteen years ago I accompanied an eminent Physician to a
Patient of his, in whom the Small Pox were come out well colored, and
plentifully, yet did the Fever continue, together with a deliriousness, want
of sleep, and restlessness: to all which a great Hemorrhagy at the Nose (of
above fourteen ounces) did put a period: and of the latter case, I had (amongst
many others) an happy Instance lately at Warwick.

Instances of the happy success of Phlebotomy in the Augment of the Small Pox,
after they were come forth.
. 7. The illustrious Lord of Poyrin, Botallu^ de venae sectione, c. 5.
a strong young man, was seized with a violent putrid Fever; on the third day
he was taken with a looseness, which resembled what Physicians call a
Diarrhaea: on the day following the Fever and Flux continued with the same
violence, and a multitude of red spots appeared all over his body, with a
little protuberancy: on the fifth day, all symptoms persisted in the same
violence, or rather increased, whereupon I being present caused him to bleed
eighteen ounces; after which operation all those perilous symptoms did so
ab^te, that within two days there was not any thereof remained.

. 8. On the same day that the aforesaid Lord was let blood, and in the same
house, there was a Servant of Mr. Barrussa, who was sick of the same distemper;
but he had no Flux: he had been sick four days, and two days were passed
since the Small Pox appeared: He was of the Age of eighteen years. I took from
him a pound of blood; whereupon all his distemper left him, and he went about
his business, attending on his Master, on the day following, which was the
fifth day of his sickness.

. 9. Such Phlebotomy did also recover Mr. Clermont from a Fever, and the Small
Pox: as also -- Villard, one of the Queens Pages; and another Page of the Duke
of Alencon's, and many others were cured by me in that manner. Also that
learned Physician Pietreus told me, that he practiced this course with good
success upon his own Son.

I come now to the third Question: Whether in the State of the Small Pox
Phlebotomy may be administered? I call that the State of the Small Pox, when
they are come to their full bigness, and become white, and replenished with
suppurated matter: or, in case they are malignant or deadly Pox, I call that
the State, when the Pustules (being green, bluish, or black) are exulcerated,
the subject parts corroded, and a stinking, black or greenish purulency issues.
And here I avow that a Physician may sometimes according to the Rules of Art,
and with great judgment administer Phlebotomy. It Is most true, that I cannot
(to my knowledge) defend this practice by the Authority of any one Writer in
Physic, I. C. Frommannus de venae sect. in declin. morbill. sect. 104.
Hippocr. Aph. 29. sect. 2.
except it be I. Frommannus, who finds some cases in which he justifies it in
the State of the Measils. It Is also true, that the common Precept amongst us
is, not to disturb Nature in the State, when she is busied most about
Concoction; but rather to supersede from the great Remedies. But I have learned
from our Masters, that there is scarce any Rule in our Art, the Obligation
whereof is not suspended by urgency, and that they conclude us in the ordinary,
not enforced procedures: Necessity is absolved from all Laws; and Wisdom it
self prescribes that we should not always take its counsels: it is certain she
meddles not with the regulation of extremities, nor with the conduct of
Despair: She in some encounters dispenses us from those things, which in
others she ordered us. Without offending her, we may cross the fields when
there is danger on the right and left, and try whether an excess will not cure
as^ when other remedies have ill operated^ ^^^cast our selves into the arms of
an enemy, when she is no longer able to defend us. I am told by Vallesius, that
although Diocles, and Celsus, and some others have prohibited Phlebotomy after
the fourth day: Valles. meth. med. l: 4. c. 2.
and though Avicenna profess that venae-section being once pretermitted ought
not to be resumed: yet both these tenets are erroneous: for though Phlebotomy
be most convenient in the beginning of the Disease, yet ought it not to be
excluded in the other times, when occasion requires it. There are few Diseases
whose beginning extends not it self beyond the fourth day: and even in the
declination oftentimes we may beneficially let blood, for the attemperation of
the inward parts, to ventilate the body, and allay its inward fervor: How much
more then in the Augment, and State? Besides, Galen himself laughs at those who
confine the use of Phlebotomy within a certain number of days. G^len. de sang.
missione, c. 20.
Quocunque etenim die mittendi sanguinis scopos in aegrotante inveneris, in eo
praesidium hoc adhibeto, etiam si vig^simus ab initio morbi dies juerit. Quinam
vero fuerunt hiscopi. Magnus morbus, virium robur, excepta aetate puerili, and
ambiente no^ aere admodum calido. In another place he s^yes. G^len. meth. l 9.
c. 5.
There is not any time of a disease in which you may not bleed; but the sooner
it is done, the better. Another says, Vbi m^gnitudo morbi postulet, and vires
permittunt, Hier. Rubeus in C. Cells l 2. c 10. p. 94.
non solum octavo die, ut Hippocrates An ^xioni, sed and decimo, ac vigesimo,
felici successu `venam secamus. This point is excellently prosecuted and
illustrated by ^otallus, B^tallus de venae sect c. 22. Concerning bleeding in
the Augment, (...) and Declination of a pu^r^d ^eaver, see Cas^ar Br^vo Resolut
Medic. p 4. disp 1. sect. 7. resolut. 8, 9, 10.
to whom I refer our Experimentators for to be satisfied. And I must avow
that in other diseases I h^ve never scrupled at this caution, as others, but
practiced it with success in the State, and sometimes Declination. And why we
may not do it in this Disease? is the present Question. It is certain that in
the Small Pox at this time, there happens sometimes a Strangulatory distemper
or Squinancy, sometimes a Pleurisy; sometimes a Diarrhaea or Dysentery:
sometimes an immoderate Flux of the Menstrua: In all these cases 'twere great
indiscretion, if not ignorance, to omit Phlebotomy: If any of them can be
disputed, it is that of a Diarrhaea and Dysentery: and yet that is so vindicated
by Botallus, B^t^l^u^ c. 5. Prosper Al^i^us de med. Egypt. l. 2. c. ^.
and Prosper Alpinus, (not to mention others) and attested unto by a successful
Experi^nce, that it is no longer a Controversy. I have already showed that
Phlebotomy does not draw back the expelled matter: but promoteth transpiration,
which is impeded by the maturation of the Pox, during the State: it ventilateth
the blood, hinders further putrefaction, and diminishes that plenitude,
which, whatever it be, is too much for debilitated Nature to govern: it
revelleth the impacted humors, or such as are flowing to any determinate part:
so that not only in the aforesaid cases; but if a new Fever arise then, or any
danger threaten the Patient in the declination (both which cases often occur)
I do not see why it may not (or ought not) to be done, whatever the peril be
that may happen thereupon. Few there are but have so much strength, as to bear
a small evacu^tion by blood-letting: and he is unacquainted with his
prof^ssion, who has not seen prodigious eff^cts arise from a minute
Phlebotomy. Our Writers do sufficiently explain the signs by which we are to be
assured, Whether the Patient can bear Phlebotomy; and in what quantity: which
conjectures if they be not duly pondered, '^is the default of the Physician,
not of the practice, when any sinister event does ensue. And therefore I can
only recommend to the World this caution, that they make use not of such
Practitioners as talk most, and pretend to new Reasons, Methods, and
Medicaments; but of those who best understand the old Diagnestics, Prognostics,
Methods and Medicaments, in order to a cure: and have from more than one or two
Books informed themselves of the history of Physic, as it relates to
particular cases, and by a diligent attendance on their practice observed the
truth of what they have read, and learned to accommodate their Rules to each
individual. Could a man ocularly demonstrate all the curiosities of Malpighius
by the best Microscopes, or manifest the Ductus rorifer of De Bills unto any
Spectator: nay, what if he could make the volatile Salt of Tartar, or the
Helmontian tincture of Amber, or even the Philosopher's stone, what is this to
practice? How much less are they qualified, who can allege nothing for
themselves then that they are enrolled in the Society of the Rosicrucians; that
so many men extol them, who are obliged to magnify ( justly or undeservedly)
all of their number; and that they are good Wits, ingenious Drolls, Masters of
some Mathematical and Mechanical knowledge? As to the point of Concoction, that
it is not to be hindered; In the Small Pox, if they be salubrious, this
consideration is overswayed by present Vrgency; and if it were not, yet would
that repugne only to a profuse evacuation; and contra-indicate no more, then
does the regard unto the strength of the Patient: a minute and partite
Phlebotomy does not impede any concoction; as our book cases, and daily
practice shows: And in case the Small Pox be perilous or deadly, it is most
certain that there is either no concoction at all, or so imperfect a one, that
it does not at all oblige the Physician to supersede, but rather to proceed
hereunto, except he be timorous and unwilling to disparage so generous a
Remedy, or the Patient and Attendants be averse from it. Neither of which
regards are so authentic as to derogate from the attempts of those who will
not abandon their Patients to the uncertain prognostics of acute diseases:
however they may in some sort excuse those that take a contrary course.

The last Question is, Whether in the declination of the Disease a Physician
may practice Phlebotomy? I call that the Declination of the Small Pox, when the
matter in the pustules is condensed into Scabs, and they dry up, and the
Epidemis with them does pill off, leaving impressions or marks in the Skin.
This Question does not relate unto the mortal Pox, for they have no
declination: Hor. A^g^n. de ^ebr. l. 9. c. 8. Cas^ar Bravo resolut. med. part.
2. disp 3. ^esol. vii.
but to such as are salubrious, and though they may have been accompanied with
dangerous symptoms, yet are now in an hopeful way of recovery. Or if we must
allow a Declination in the pernicious malignant Small Pox, it can be only one
that is uncertain and fallacious; for when any Patient feels an unexpected
alleviation, and such is grounded upon no reason, there is no trust to be
placed therein. Hi^pocr. aph. 27. sect. 2.
It Is quae non secundum rationem sublevant, non oportet fidere: neque terreri
multum, ob mala quae praeter rationem fiunt: pleraque enim horum sunt infirma,
neque diu manner atque durare consueverunt: In this time, I say, there may
happen such cases as require Phlebotomy, and in which it ought to be practiced.
It Is observed that a Flux in the declination of the Small Pox is generally
mortal, Hor. Augen. de ^ebr. l x c. 8.
although it be not accompanied with a Dysentery or exulceration of the Gutts.
It is no critical evacuation, because such happen not at that time: and because
it be falls the Patient in the most unseasonable time of the Disease, when
Nature is most debilitated with the precedent Disease, and ought rather to
testify signs of strength, then of further imbecility: it enforces us to
employ all those cares which a symptomatical evacuation does call for: and in
this case, since purging is dangerous, and astringents full of hazard, there
seems no way so safe as Phlebotomy duly administered. It may also happen that
the Patient fall into a Pleurisy: Thus in the case of Frommannus, in the
declination of the Measils, the Gentlewoman fell into a Pleurisy, which he
indeavered to cure by Phlebotomy, and was defended in the practice by the best
Physicians in Germany.

The Reasons which have been urged already in the other times will many of them
justify the Practitioner in this: and nothing is more certain in Physic, than
that the use of Phlebotomy is not indicated by the time of the Disease, or
contraindicated by any number of days, but by other motives: and that
whenever it is necessary upon any urgency, nothing but want of strength does
repugne thereunto.

It may perhaps be demanded, Whether upon the declination of the Small Pox, if
there be any danger of an Asthma or Consumption to be contracted, it be safe to
let blood, or in order to better convalescency?

I profess it may safely and prudently be done for Revulsion, before the
humors ^e more radicated and (...) there, and the Disease become incurable:
for this is an infallible sign that the Disease is not well terminated: and
then those Rules which oblige us not to intermeddle with any perfect Crisis, or
indication, are infirm, conclude us not. Oftentimes we see Rheumatismes, and
Botches to ensue, and they show that all the morbifick matter is not ejected:
Besides, in order to a better convalescence, if Phlebotomy have been omitted in
the beginning, and that the recovery is likely to be slow, I think (and it is
said to be the judgment of Avicenna) that it may be done: and I have seen it
practiced with a much more happy success than ever I saw Purge given in that
time: But in this last case I refer it to every man's judgment to act as he
please; and request only that they would not condemn others of a different
practice from what they follow.

After all this discourse of bleeding in the Small Pox, I must conclude with
this intimation, that in sundry cases, and some habits of body, it is possible
that Phlebotomy may be supplied by Cupping-glasses and Scarification: and I
profess, that were the Scarification of the Egyptians (mentioned by Prosper
Alpinus, Prosper Alpinus de medic Egypt. l. 3.
and frequently used amongst the Ancients) admitted into our practice, I should
frequently prefer them before any Phlebotomy: Being in Iamaica I observed that
the Spanish Negroes there did much use them: and during my sickness of the
Colic bilious, I had the curiosity to have them tried upon me in the
beginning. I observed that they were as indolent as Prosper Alpinus and Mannus
do relate them to be: but no blood almost ensued thereupon: whence they
presaged to me a long and violent sickness; saying, that all the water of my
blood was translated out of the veins into my bowels: yet I have seen them to
extract one from another a pound, or more, as they pleased.

But I find my self wearied with the prosecution of this Letter; and the
sickliness of the season permits me not leisure to carry on the debate unto the
Scurvey: But whosoever examines attentiv^ly that disease, ^orre^tus l. 20. obs.
xi.xii, Claudinus Emperic. ration. l. 3. sect. 3. tract. 4. c. 5. Joel pract.
l. 2. sect. 5.. 4. ^. Dodon^us obs. med c 33. Eugalen. de scorbuto, p 150.151.

B. Brunerus (sub finem Eugaleni) and H. Bruc^us ibid. Bald^ssar Timaeus cas.
medic. l. 3. cas. 39.

Platerus prax. ^. 3. p 431. ^^nnertus de scorbuto, c. 7. B. Ronsseus de scorb.
c 8. Wierus in curat. scorbuti. ^. Albert. de scorb. 240, etc. M. Martinus,
sect. 145. etc. Gregor. Horstius de scorbuto ^xercit. 2. sect xi.
Mollenbroccius de varis c. 8. and 1^^


will be easily satisfied that it may be beneficial, and oftentimes absolutely
necessary to the cure thereof. In those Countries where it is most frequent,
and where the Climate bears a great correspondence with ours, this is the
practice: as you may see in Forrestus: I add the Authority of Claudinus: Joel,
(who prescribes the repeating of Phlebotomy at least three times) Rembertus
Dodonaeus: Severinus Eugalenus: Balthazar Brunerus: Henricus Brucaeus:
Baldassar Timaeus, (who also reiterates bleeding several times) Platerus:
Sennertus: Baldwinus Ronsseus: Io. Wierus: Solomon Albertus: Matthew. Martinus:
Gregor Horstius: Valentinus Andreas Mollenbroccius: and the College of
Physicians at Coppenhagen (in their advice for the Scurvey, Bartholin. cist.
medic. p. 50^.
published by Bartholinus) I might add others to this Catalogue, but that
'twere needless. It Is true, that in the Scurvey many do not bear well large
Phlebotomy; but that is not the Question: it is enough that they minute
venae-section, and that reiterated, does agree well with them and is
oftentimes so necessary to the cure, that the omission thereof does frustrate
the most efficacious Medicaments. The Disease generally arises from an
obstipation of the Pores, and such an alteration in the texture of the body as
the Methodists would bring under Adstriction: and therefore it seldom
occurreth in hot Countries, except the wind suddenly change into a cold
quarter: and a multitude of Cures are recorded wherein Phlebotomy has been the
leading Remedy. The sick do frequently bleed at the Nose, and Emrods, etc. and
since in distempers of the Spleen I find Phlebotomy commended, it is not to be
denied in this case, without some special contra-indicant, which I am not yet
acquainted with.

I think I have in the precedent discourse enervated all that M. N. has
maliciously and ignorantly suggested against Phlebotomy: neither do I know one
passage in him that can raise any scruple in the breast of a judicious person:
but I must particularly caution him not to give too much credit to the dotages
of Thonerus, a man of little note in his own Country; nor to go about to
delude the World with Fables, as if the North^rn Climates did not suit well
with Phlebotomy: whereas it is notorious that no Nations do bleed more largely^
nor more frequently than they: I will not insist on what they do in their
natural or artificial Bathes, with Cupping-glasses and Scarifications, Th.
Jordan. de^^lu^ orav. p. 13.
whereby they extract many ounces frequently every year; they applying ten, or
fifteen Cupping-glasses, with Scarifications; which sometimes they repeat twice
in one hour.

As to Phlebotomy, in Denmark nothing is more common than whenever the
Almanac recommends bleeding, for every man almost to s^ep into the
Barbers-shop, and having bled, to go about his business: which custom though
Bartholinus condemn, yet does it evince the general use thereof in time of
health: and who can doubt but that they who bear it so well, whilst free from
any Disease but a tincture of the Scurvey: might endure it in sickness? did not
a pueri^e fear in the Patient, or ignorance in the Physician, hinder them.
Adultiores alii in venarum apertione nimis sunt profu si vel audaces, Th.
Bartholin^ medic. ^an. dissert. 9. p 4^1, 432.
quippe visa fascia rubente ante aed^s Chirurgorum appensa, ex Calendariorum
signis dependentium, statim sine alia corporum praeparatione in sella officinae
considentes brachium sine delectu pertundendum offerunt; and peract a
operatione vel itineri se committant, aliisque negotiis conficiendis, vel vini
modium ebibunt: cumulati errores acri censura digni sunt: sed verba perdere
nolo, quia Aethiopem me lavare scio. Monendum tamen duxi, scorbutica nostra
corpora maxima indigere praeparatione antequam generoso isti remedio
subjiciantur. If letting of blood were so pernicious in the Scurvey, 'twere
impossible in so general a practice but the inconvenience would be discovered:
and the people reclaimed from that inveterate vulgar custom of Switzerland; is,
he that blames it, does thus describe. Solent nostrates, Ruricolae inprimis,
ter quaterve in anno venaesectiones usurpare, Wep^erus de a poplex a histor. 3.
p. 12.
and quolibe^ vice duas, quandoque tres, non raro quatuor venas pertundendas
^urant; emittunt soepe binas sangninis libras: Nulla cura est vel temperamenti,
vel sexus, vel aetatis: Videntur quandoque gravidae, quae bis terve gestationis
tempore sanguinem vena secta effundunt, nec etiam partui vicinae a
venaesectione sibi temperant, persuasae salubrius puerperium agi. Vidi senes
octuagenanios hoc remedii genus expertos: nec sanguine fuso admodum solliciti
sunt, qua ratione inanitae venae prestantiore sanguine replendae sint,
frequenter enim statim ac secta vena est, and cibo and potu nimio corpus
inferciunt. I have not read of the like practices in France, Spain, or Italy:
Nay, it is in Germany, that for healths sake very old men bleed largely twice
each year: instance whereof are given by Faber in his Notes upon the Mexican
Herbal. Rolfinc. method. medic. special. l 4. sect. 2. cap. 5.
Reverenda canitie, and septuaginta annorum decursu venerabili prae suli
Ienensi Iohanni Majori plethorico salutaris erat sanguinis per venam sectam
missio. Neque ingraves cente aetate ab ea erat alienus. Attingebat annum 89.
senili confectus marasmo. Out of which it is evident, that whatsoever the German
practice be in Diseases, it is not their Reason, but superstition and imaginary
fear that makes them to decline to bleed therein^ Nor do I find the relations
of M. N. to be consonant to the usage of the German Physicians, except you will
judge of them by the adherents of Helmont and Paracelsus. I might except
against Thonerus, that in his Appendix he prosesseth that he does not
absolutely reject Phlebotomy even in malignant Fevers: and as good, if not a
better Physician than he does give this account, I^. (...) obs. and (...) ep. x
p. 5.
in opposition to him: Experientia testatur quod non solum in Febribus his, sed
and in variolis and morbil^is, venaesectio in initio adhibita cor humoribus non
repleat, sed roboret, ut expellere possit sufficienter variolas, Morbillos and
Petechius.

But I find my self to exceed the bounds of a Letter; but I hope you will
pardon the length of it, since it was an effect of my compliance with your
desires: and if I have not fully answered them, nor polished my Discourses as
they might otherwise have been, be plea^ed to consider the shortness of the
time allotted unto me, the great distractiin with which I write, and the
multiplicity of controversities I have entreated on, and the multitude of books
which I found my self obliged to consult, and transcribe passages out of; and
then I doubt not but I shall obtain your pardon, whereunto that I may have the
more colorable title, I avow my self to be

Your most humble and devoted Servant Henry Stubbe.
Warwick April 3 1671
Passages to be added.
WHere I speak concerning Pests, that though agree in the same Generical Nature
for the most part, yet do they seldom or never appear to be of the same
species, so as to be cured by the same Method and Medicaments: because I find
some so ignorant as to scruple thereat, I add here the testimony of Felix
Platerus the renowned Physician of Basil, who lived amidst seven Plagues.

Felix Platerus prax. t. 2. p. 69. de febr. causis.
Venenum pestilens ejusdem naturae minime esse, sed diversae, effectus illius
tantopere differentes, qui corporis affecti constitutionis solius causa, non
sic variare possent, ostendunt. Cum aliqua regeret pestis, quae sine discrimine
in omnes vel plerosque saeviat: alia vero paucos tantum invadat: alia quae
quotquot tetigerit, interficiat, magnamque stragem edat: alia, qua correptorum
multi sanantur: verum quidnam in veneno latens illius varietatis causa sit,
atque unde proficiscatur, uti and in caeteris venenis, describi minime potest.

The same is averred by Joseph de Medicis a Candiot, who had seen many Plagues
in Greece and Turkey, in Egypt and Palestine, in Tartary, Valachia,
Transylvania, Russia, Poland, Lithuania, Prussia, Denmark, Saxony, Holland,
Germany, Bohemia, etc. and never declined to visit the sick.

Joseph de Medicis Cretensis inter opera Gregorii Horstii t. 2. l. 1. de
^ebribus, page 46.
Se^u^d^m, Assero unamquamque pestem vel morbum pestilentem, propriam habare
naturam and peculiaria accidentia concomitantia vel inseparabilia, neque
ejusdem speciei esse omnes pestilentes morbos, ut etiam plures and diversae
sunt species venenorum.

Tertium, Vt unumquodque venenorum, vel assumptum vel injectum, vel admotum
propria sequuntur accidentia (symptomata supervenientia Medici appellant) and
proinde peculiaria requirit antidota and alexipharmaca; ita unamquamque pestem
habere propria symptomata, and proinde indigere propriis praesidiis: quod
Axioma non advertentes vulgares and triobolares Medici, eandam herbam v. gr.
Tormentillam vel Scorzoneram, quam quondam aliquis in bello Trojano long alia
peste affectus cum utilitate adhibuerat, tanquam Catholicum Alexipharmacum, ac
si esset Theriaca, in omni cujuscunque generis, regionis, and saeculi peste,
indiscriminatim, omni aetati, and sexui approbant, exhibent and cum magno vitae
discrimine usurpant.

The same Author in that most excellent discourse of his, (which contains the
result of those thoughts which forty years practice had created in him) asserts
Phlebotomy in the Plague, Spotted Fever, and Small Pox: and concludes his
discourse with this Relation,

Ibid. page 57.
Vnicam Historiolam placet hic afferre, quod mihi ipsi evenit (...) breviter
narra^e. Anno 1629. Amstelodami (ubi aliquot annos publica stipe altus vitam
transegi) pestis grassabatur, primo quidem solos in pauperes and egenos lacte
and caseo victitantes, sed postea Autumni tempore enormiter ferociebat, and
plebem and patritios indifferenter invadebat saevissimeque depopulabatur, adeo
ut singulis diebus trecenti vel quadringenti deficerent: Nemo mihi nec aliis
phlebotomiam consulentibus annuebat (erant vero tunc temporis ibi magni nominis
Medici ex natione Lusitana, praesertim Zacutus vir eruditione insignissimus,
and multa experientia clarus) sic misere multa hominum millia peribant: sunt
enim Belgae omnes natura (...), i. e. sanguinem mittendi timidi tanto magis
tempore pestis, in quo ipsi suae gentis Medici phlebotomiam de^estabantur;
aliquibus sanguis e naribus ubertim fluens plurimum conferebat, ut etiam
bubones erumpentes in emunctoriis copiosam saniem eructantes, absque periculo
infirmos esse, declarabant. Plurimis in gutture fiebant infl^mmationes, quibus
neque venarum sectio sub lingua, neque gargarizationes vel cataplasmata ullum
emolumentum afferebant, ante enim maturationem strangulabantur. Ego vero cum
eadem lue me graviter oppressum and improba angina fere enecatum viderem, quod
mihi fuit vere novum and inopinabile, cum nunquam peste fuerim infectus, etsi
audenter eadem lue infectos semper visitaverim, sed incolumen me conservaverim,
tertio vel quarto die (tentaveram prius multa media and praesidia an possem a
tanto malo liberari) jussi venam medianam dextri cubiti mihi secari, and
sanguinis sesquilibram mitti, a qua cum nihil detrimenti, vel virium languorem
percepissem, (quamvis neque etiam morbi remissionem) sequenti die tantundem ex
altero brachio exhauriri imperitavi: quae solo praesidio, dei^on abneuente,
totam virulentiam e corpore en^^si, and ^^eviter me a tetrica peste expediri,
atque hos^^^ jugulum pe^etent^m, plumb^o (ut dicunt) gladi^ jug^l^vi: quod
^^l^tare Medicamentum plurimi pos^^a adhibentes a^que (...) vestigia sequentes,
scilicet sanguinis missionem celebrantes, vere e mortis faucibus erepti and
vindicati sunt.

In the account of the Small Pox I omitted the opinion of Franciscus Oswaldus
Grembs, a German Physician of good note, and great admirer of Van Helmont, who
yet allows of bleeding, in some cases, in the Small Pox. His words are these.

Fr. Oswaldus Grembs: Arbor hominis integra and ruinosa, l. 2. c. 3. de febr.
malign.
The danger of the Small Pox does consist in two cases: First, if Nature move
the hot and vicious humors, and is not able through debility, or their
tenaciousness, or the dense habit of the body, to expel them: and then the
Disease becomes deadly, the humors recurring upon the Heart and Vitals:
Secondly, if Nature do protrude them forth, and is not afterward able to
regulate them by reason of their multitude, or malignity, but that the Fever
becomes more malignant then at first, and either dispatcheth the sick, or
destroys some particular parts with a most faetid corruption thereof. There are
four Indications for the cure of the Small Pox: The first is to evacuate what
is redundant: The second is to prosecute the emotions of Nature: The third is
to restrain the venenateness of the Disease: The fourth is to secure some
particular parts. And because the Fever which goes along with the Small Pox is
a Synochus, it requires Phlebotomy; here is no room for purging. In Children
Scarification in the Arms, calf of the Leg, and Nostrils, or Horse-leeches
applied to the Back, Breech, or Thighs, may be used instead of venaesection,
when the Small Pox do not come forth. If the Pox do come forth kindly in the
beginning, none of these things are to be practiced. In grown people a minute
Phlebotomy is to be practiced after the first or second day only, when the
Humors are protruded, it is dangerous (for it draws in the Humors) except some
new accident, as a Pleurisy, does render it necessary. When they are coming
forth Nature is to be aided with Frictions, and Alexipharmacal Cordials, as
Bezoar, Vnicorns-horn, Electuarium de Gemmis, etc. --

A noble Lady of the age of fourteen years fell sick, and bled at the Nose, she
had a nauseousness at Stomach, and great pains in her back: the Physicians
being sent for, a Clyster was proposed of Broth with Cassia, it came away
without any operation: her pains and Fever increased, and certain spots
appeared behind her Ears, which portended the Small Pox: one of the Physicians
commended Blood letting, as the most suitable remedy for a great disease, and
not inconsistent with her years and strength, especially since she was
plethorical; hereby, he said, the blood being diminished, the vessels would be
less distended, the malignity repressed, and pains mitigated: But so it happens
frequently, that we cannot embrace the most obvious counsils, whether it be an
imbecility in our minds, which being distracted betwixt hope and fear, and
sollicitous about the future, forgets the present urgency: or whether it be the
method of Providence, which to effect its designs transports us besides our
selves: The rest of the Physicians seemed astonished at the proposal, and
neither assenting, nor dissenting, proceeded only to insinuate the peril of
that operation: But, that they might seem to do something, they proposed an
anodyne Fomentation to mitigate her pains, which having continued ten hours,
produced no benefit: The ensuing night she was very restless, and on the
morning her strength began to be sensibly impaired: thereat the Physicians were
much troubled, and considering the present exigency, they gave her a Cordial of
Bezoar and the species de Hyacintho: it was not given sooner, because there was
amongst the number one who was extremely averse from giving any Cordials in the
Small Pox, to bring them forth, as it thereby the humors were exasperated, the
ebullition rendered too violent, and the Pustules protruded in so great an
excess as to strangle the Patient, he said that Nature understood her own work,
and could do it best, that she was to be left to her self, and needed no
incentive^: And by these suggestions he intrigrued the determinations of the
Physicians, so as that no Cordial or Alexipharmacon was given sooner. The
Patient having taken some of the aforesaid Cordial, and afterward avoided a
great deal of blood by Urine: which yet some suspected to be a Menstruous
^xcretion: a little after she vomited up a great deal of blood: this same took
to be a Critical effort of Nature, which had alleviated the violent ebullition
of the blood in the greater vessels by discharging a part thereof at the Mouth
and ordinary passages: in the mean space, the malignity of the Disease
prevailed above the strength of Nature, the whole mass of blood being vitiated,
and 'twas a miserable sight to behold the poor Lady as it were drowned in her
own blood, and thus destroyed: all her back was full of large livid setlings of
blood, as if she had been bruised or whipped with cords; and being dead her
body was opened on the same day, all her Bowels were sound, the Liver in no
default, only the Lungs were blackish through the adustion of the blood in the
Disease. And now the Physicians quarrelled one with another; Grembs does there
de^end the use of Clysters by prac^ic^d h^stories: and so does A^g^nius and
many others and I have known them used without any peril.
one blamed the Clyster, which impeded the course of Nature, and retracted the
humors inwards, whose tendency was to the habit of the body: Others censured
the Fomentation, which though anodyne, might close the Pores, and give occasion
to the bloody urine, by repercussion of the pustulary matter. Thus one
Physician inveighed against the errors of the rest; whilst indeed all of them
ought privately to conf^ss, that their great failour was in omitting
Phlebotomy, and that this was the cause of her death. Thus Physicians
oftentimes occasion the death of their Patients, by not doing what they should,
and not only by over-acting: this last is the default of those who attend on
the sick, and first try their own pretended Experiments, then have recourse to
the receipts of the populace, or prescriptions of some practicing Ladies, and
thus by doing what they ought not, they most officiously kill the sick, and
prevent the seasonable advise of wise Physicians, who ought to have been
consulted at first. These kind of persons are in as much default as those
timorous and cautelous Doctors, who dare not administer those Remedies which
are necessary in acute diseases, but by neglecting their Patients, suffer the
Disease to prevail over the vital faculties, and kill the infirm.

Thus far the Helmontian, but (to give him his due) judicious Practitioner: and
I recommend this case to the Abettors of Doctor Whitaker and Doctor Sydenham:
since there appears upon dissection that the Small Pox had not fixed themselves
within, but that a mere surcharge of the mass of blood (either natural, or
contracted from the attenuation of the ebullient blood) was the cause of her
decease.

I forgot in the conclusion of what I writ of the Small Pox, to speak about
Bathing of the hands in the Small Pox, the practice whereof Doctor Whitaker
represents, as having been fatal to the Princess Royal. His words are, page 60,
61.
I observe Riverius above all other Authors to ordain the bathings of the hands
and feet, by reason of the density of those parts, in some more dense than
others, as in Smiths, Carpenters, and Foot-posts, whose hands and feet are
harder than persons of a more tender and sedentary Trade or Profession. I
cannot but acknowledge that humectation, and attenuation to mollify those
parts, is properly indicated; but the mode of this application is observable,
because upon the opening of the porosities by bathing, the ambient air may
obtain the advantage of repelling the morbifical matter from those ignoble and
extreme parts to the more noble, by the ambient air in the course of
sanguineous circulation; and has proved fatal in such as have rare and tender
skins, as is proved by the bathing the Illustrious Princess Royal. --
Concerning that Princess how she was ordered, and at what time of the Disease
bathed thus, I know not: but it is an equitable presumption that in so important
a case so understanding Physicians as she employed, did nothing rashly, or
without reason. I find in the relation of her being dissected causes enough of
her death, without imputing it to this usage: her Omentum was putrified, and
much inflamed toward the Spleen-side: her Spleen was flaccid, and semi-putrid:
her Stomach was inflamed, and on the inside beset with Aphthae: her Liver
spotted, and inflamed even to a Gangrene almost: her Lungs in a manner rotten,
and replenished with black blood, spotted and pustulated in the superficies,
the Parenchyma of her heart was much consumed. But had not these things been,
nothing is more certain, than that of Petronius. Th. Bartholin. ep. medic.
cent. 3. ep. 29.
Quod non expectas ex transver so fit, et super nos negotium Fortuna curat. But
that Riverius does prescribe this Bathing above all Authors, is a manifest
falsity. His words are only these: Ac primum in eruptione Variolarum, Laz.
Riverius prax. medic. l. 17. c 2.
aut dum maturescere incipiunt, ingens dolor vel pruritus interdum aegrotantes
affligit; praesertim vero in plantis mannum et pedum, eo quod densior in iis
partibus cutis eruptionem prohibeat. Cui symptomati medeberis, si parts illas
decocto emolliente diutius foveas, vel in aqua calida detineas. I shall compare
herewith the directions of Horatius Augenius, whose character I have already
given.

He having prohibited the bathing of the whole body, Hor. Augen. de febr. l. x.
c. x.
does add.

Sed non est eadem ratio in particulari balneo, cum scilicet parts aliquaspiam
extremas lavacro calido fovemus, ut ex illis duntaxat citius and facilius
variolae exeant, doloremque mitigemus, ut plurimum, satis insignem: hoc quidem
praetermitti non debet.

Nam plerumque accidit, ut ex volis manuum and plantis pedum varioloe non
erumpant, nisi cum maxima difficultate, et dolor: propterea expedit fovere eas
parts aqua calida aliquando simplici, et aliquando simul decoquendo flores
Camomillae, aut Altheae, aut violarum, vel aliud ejusdem generis, quod fuerit
ad manus. Haecque antiqua extitit Arabum consuetudo; nam Rhases ita scriptum
reliquit: lib de Pestilentia, c. 8. Quod si in volis manuum expullulet, tu
hasce ex oleo tepente, quo gossypia imbuta sint, multum refricato, and in
calida aqua foveto. Verum si dolor non sedetur, nec pestis facile expellatur,
tu sesamum perpurgatum ubi contuderis, and in lacte maceraveris, illico
illinito, and in linteo per totam noctem alligato: dehincubi amoveris, and
calente aqua foveris, rursus illinito. Verum si velis, palmulus ubi contuderis,
and in butyro maceraveris, vel in sesami faece illinito: Siquidem haec, and
similia, cutem remolliunt, faciunt que ut pestis facile excernatur and dolores
cedant. Haec Rhases. Quae omnia judicantur mihi saluberrima in praesenti casu,
nisi quod abstinerem ab oleo, quia facit ulcus ipsum sordidissimum, ac sanatu
difficile. Ego autem nullum inveni praestantius remedium, quam fovere parts
extremas manuum and pedum aqua tepida: vel decoctione florum camomillae and
Altheae. Quod si emollire adhuc magis voluerimus, decoquo simul semina
faenugraeci.

This Bathing is no less recommended unto our practice by the diligent and
learned Forrestus, who speaking of an ancient Woman, (of fifty years old) which
was sick of a Malignant pestilential Fever, accompanied with the Measils,
(that came out on the sixth day) concludes the Observation thus: Huic tamen
(quod fere jam omiseram) ingens pruritus and punctio in plantis pedum ac volis
manuum aderant; pro quo symptomate mitigando, quum maxim eo and
intol^rabiliter affligeretur, Forrestus lib. 6 obs. 42.
ut se potius mori velle diceret, quam illum pruritum and punctionem far,
jussi ut pedes and manus continuo teneret in aqua calida. Quo consilio pruritus
tum puncto cessarunt, et melius per cutem in volis manuum et pedum morbilli
emergebant. Hujus rei experimentum notatu dignum ab ipso Astario Papiensi
medico accepimus, quod etiam Arcanum a Nicolo Florentino medico sui temporis
insigni mutuavit: cum idem sic scribat cap. de Uariolis et Morbillis, circa
finem, de corrigendis accidentibus eorundem. Si fuerit punctio plantae pedum,
aut palmae manuum, ponantur dicta membra assidue in aqua calida: ut dicit
Nicolus; and ego vidi multum confer. Haec Blasius Astarius Papiensis in
libello suo de curandis Febribus, qui adjunctus est praxi Gatinariae: quo
quidem experimento ab hoc symptomate molesto et gravi nostra aegra liberata
est, et brevi, Dei nutu, evasit et in totum sana facta est.

Herewith agrees the injunction of Hoeferus, which runs thus. Hoeferus Hercul.
medic. lib. 7. p. 366. edit. ult.
Vbi in variolis plantae pedum et manus, quod saepius fieri solet, gravi
pruritu vexantur immitte membra in aquam calidam, quod pro secreto habet
Forrestus.

I need not any more Authors: what has been said, is sufficient to justify
the practice to any intelligent person, and to disprove the Assertion of this
Doctor; but as that is most untrue, so are the Reasons he gives no less vain.
Whereas he is pleased to think that there is no such density in the skin of the
hands, as is generally supposed, except in laborious persons: it is certain that
some have it so naturally: Petrus Lauremburg. Colleg. Anatom. disp. 2. sect. 14
as Scipio Nascica, who was therefore in raillery demanded by one, If he used
to walk upon his hands? Moreover, though that which is called by Anatomists the
Cutis be thinner in the hands and feet than in other parts of the body, yet is
the Cuticula thicker there, and it is possible that even it may admit of a
latitude in its native density and porosity in individuals, P. Lauremberg. ubi
supra, sect. 13.
since it is acknowledged and has been observed, that some persons have had a
double Cuticula. It is also certain, that the texture of the Cuticle may be so
changed, that those humors which issued thereout by way of insensible
transpiration, may be at some times intercepted and lodged in the skin and
under the Epidermis: and if so, Why may not that happen in a determinate part,
which does happen universally? In fine, it is frequently observed in Scorbutics
and such as are said to have an hot Liver, that they feel a troublesome heat in
the palms of their hands, and soles of their feet, (notwithstanding that
otherwise they have delicate and tender skins or bodies) which introduces a
dryness in the Cuticle there: and can there be dryness without a condensation
of the Pores? or can there be such an heat, without an obstipation thereof? And
does not such a condensation, dryness and heat indicate a befitting relaxation
and humectation? How then comes it that any man should deny the possibility of
the Phenomenon in the Small Pox (especially since daily events make it
sensibly manifest) or refuse to practice what is indicated? I confess the old
procedure of England is, to anoint with unsalted Butter, or to bathe with
Butter and Beer; which is conformable to the documents of Rhases: But you see
the practice of France, Italy, high and low Germany, does warrant the use of
warm water. He further urges, that upon the opening of the Pores by bathing
thus, it is possible for the ambi^nt Air to gain such an advantage upon the
sick, as to repel the morbifick matter from these ignoble and extreme parts to
the more noble, in the course of the sanguineous circulation. But since
continual practice does manifest (as appears by the Authors cited) that this
does not inevitably nor commonly happen, What is an effect of negligence in the
Attendants, or unknown idiosyncrasy of Patients, does neither disparage the
Physician, nor contra-indicate to the Remedy.

And so much for Doctor Whitaker; to whom the English are obliged for his good
intentions toward them in that Treatise: but not for his performances: it is
his latest Legacy to his Country; but in Legacies it often falls out that the
Legatee receives no other benefit by the gifts of a Testator, than that he is
assured he remembered him, and had some resentments for him.

where I say that letting of blood does not, except by Accident, in some
persons, produce fatness: I do confirm my Assertion further by the Authority of
Epiphanius Ferdinandus, Epiph. Ferdinand. histor. med. ^2.
who in his advice to an Italian Prince how to prevent exc^ssive Corpulency,
does direct a Phlebotomy, and that to be repeated in both Arms. Neither do I
remember any Commen^tator upon the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, who has not
directed that course for the extenuating of Athletick bodies. Holler. in sect.
1, aph. 3^ and Liebaut. Hier. Thriver. ibid. Heurnius ibid.
This is a case in which the Germans are reconciled with the French and
Italians; and wherein Prosper Alpinus accords with Franciscus Silvius de le
boe: the former says, that since frequ^nt and large eruptions of blood do
continue the Patients lean, Prosper Alpi^. med. method. l. 4. c. 19.
or reduce them, that are otherwise fat, to such an habit; that even Nature
seems to instruct an Artist so as to promote such like evacuations. Fr. Silvius
de bo^ pr. med. l. 1. c. 38.
And the latter avows that immoderate growth of the musculous parts is to be
prevented (amongst other accessional courses) by often bleeding.

I think there needs not any more to be said about the point: neither can it
be justly doubted, but that if Phlebotomy had so usually produced this effect
of fatness, it would have been reduced into observation by Physicians before
1650.

Where I treat concerning Phlebotomy in the Small Pox, that it may be safely
administered, even after that they begin to appear: It is justified by a
multitude of Examples, one whereof lately was Sr. W. Roberts, aged above forty
years (as I am most credibly informed) they did not come forth kindly, but most
perilous symtoms did multiply upon him, so that his condition seemed
desperate; yet upon the administration of this generous Remedy, their eruption
was expedited, and all danger ceased, so that he recovered with ease. And at
New College in Oxford, in the year 1660. (or 1661. I remember not well the
year) the Small Pox raged with much malignity, and proved mortal to many; but
it was aparent that few (if any dyed) who were let blood; whereas on the
contrary, those that were not Phlebotomised died all, (or generally) decease:
This I was assured of by more then one, who were then present; though not being
Physicians, they could not inform me of other particular Circumstances.

Concerning Phlebotomy in general, there is one Objection against it, that I
think I ought to take notice of, since it proceeds Originally from some
Virtuosi: And though one that has urged it, be most grossly mistaken in his
assertion that the Turks use no Phlebotomy, the contrary whereunto is not only
evident out of Prosper Alpinus, but is confirmed unto me by the observation of
my intelligent friend Mr. Denton of Q. College in Oxford (nothing being more
frequent at Constantinople then to bleed upon every small occasion, and every
Barber there being a Phlebotomist) yet I believe that in China and Iapan the
Natives do not practice Phlebotomy though the Europeans there do:
Notwithstanding this, I do, not apprehend the force of the Objection as it is
managed against Plebotomy, nor can I commend their judgment who from those
Presidents (which indeed are but one Authority, the Iaponese being no other
then a Chinase-Collony (would put us upon an Essay of practicing without Vene
section. Eor, the difference of particlar Countries and Nations (arising either
from their Temperament, Diet, and Efficacious Medicaments and Method of Curing)
as to render Place this after folio 257.
Phlebotomy useless or dangerous there; whereas in other places there may be
(nay it is certain is) a necessity for a different procedure. I have already
remarqued that at Montpelier, there is a greater repugnancy unto, and danger of
Phebotomy; then at Paris: And the Presidents of the one Province does not
oblige the others: And though it be true that as in China, so in Languidock,
Physic is in a good condition, yet does it not follow that therefore it is in
a bad condition in the other parts of France, Spain, or Italy, etc. It Is no
less certain that in hot Countries (as well as here in Summer and Winter) the
method of carrying varies from what is to be practiced in colder Climates: And
as wounds in the Head and Legs are in some places cured with much more easy
Medicaments then else where: So it is no less manifest that it is irrational to
conclude from the facility of those Cures in the places aforesaid, that those
are impertinent and mistaken, who in other Regions proceed by a more tedious,
circumspect, and vexatious Method. Against that single instance it is almost the
voice of Nature which we allege: and since the learned and Barbarous, Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America (where no Combination or Traditional Doctrine derived
from one to the others can be supposed) do concur to justify the practice of
Phlebotomy against the Natives of Iapan and China, let us reckon it amongst
their singularities (and founded upon motives peculiar to them) or amongst
those Errors which their affectation or ignorance has particularly involved
them in. To conclude, since the Miracles of their Cha or Te do not appear to us
Practitioners in Europe to be true; though the use thereof be so succesful
there; The same Observation is made concerning Rhuba^b, China-root: Guyacum,
Sarsa-parilla, Contraye^va.
the cause thereof is to be ascribed to Circumstances of their Climate, and way
of living, and accessional Therapeutics) so neither is there any argument from
their Omission of Phlebotomy, that we may omit it here; or that we should dare
to imitate them; but of this we may judge better when the Virtuosi receive from
the West Indies such an exact account of all Circumstances as may regulate a
Physician.

A RELATION OF THE Strange Symptoms Happening by the Bite of an ADDER, And the
CURE thereof: IN A LETTER TO A Learned Physician. By H. S. Physician at Warwick.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1671.

TO THE READER.
ALthough the insolence of some pretenders to Experimental Knowledge might
discourage any Physician from contributing to the instruction of this Age; yet
I have suffered my self to be prevailed upon so far as to publish this
discourse. I might have enlarged upon it several ways, and added besides some
Observations upon Adders, the way of preparing Ui^er-wine, and sundry Cures
performed by it, and the prepared flesh thereof. But seeing that all we do of
that kind does but furnish a company of arrogant and ignorant Experimentators
with subjects to oppose us, and undermine the Faculty; I am become inexorable
as to that matter; and will not be in the least instrumental toward the laying
on of those Fetters which some men were preparing, not only for all Artisans,
but all ingenuity and learning. This race of men who had determined to value
and praise none but themselves, and extended their Civilities so far, that all
their mutual Elogies do import no more than a trade of smoke and ceremony, may
now abate of their pride and censoriousness, and be satisfied that they are not
necessary to the World, except one have an occasion to send to the East Indies
to know what grows in America, or to Southwales for an account of Nova Zembla,
or the Countries subject to the North and South-pole: If all History and
Antiquity be to be affronted most impudently; if false Relations concerning
Saltpeter, Cider, Birch-water, etc. seem requisite: If Chimaeras be to be
proposed, or the Education and Religion of our native Country changed, there
is some use for this Association, which considering their Arms, Projects and
Deportment, always puts me in mind of that Poetical Fancy described to be
(...).

Had I written according as they replied, I could have confessed my self mad:
and less than a distracted Brain would never have chosen to desert Aristotle
and Quintilian to imitate the famed Impertinencies of the Orator Posthumus, who
being to plead a case about three Goats that were stolen, began an Haranque
about Sylla and the Mithridatick War, and never touched upon the main
Controversy any more then does the illiterate Ecebolius; who what He designs I
cannot tell by flattering Doctor J. W. and Mr. R. B. and terming an old
Parl^ament Officer (who has the Canker of Presbytery, and the Conscience of an
Olivarian; and who knows nothing by me, a stranger to him, though he hate me
for knowing too much by him) the Loyal C. E. D. Letter p. 32.
And as great a Riddle is it, how this Renegado-Presbyter should dare to say,
that there is not a Man born since 1936. less obnoxious to the Church and
Government. Will the generous Cavaliers endure this from a Rump-Chaplain? Ibid.
Who confesses himself to have been a Preacher in those days, and never gave
his Uote for Episcopacy (but preached against Christmass-Pies) till a year
before the Kings coming in. Certainly he was a very Fool, who could be in those
days so ignorant of the controverted Points; and 'twere an intolerable
extravagance in any but a Uirtuoso to write this now. But I shall call him to a
particular account for all by the next Term.

A RELATION Of the strange SYMPTOMS Happening by the Bite of an ADDER.
Honored Sir,
I Have at last finished the cure of that Man who was so unfortunately bitten
by an Adder here at Warwick, and because of the rarity thereof, I shall
satisfy your desires in penning it.

Upon May the seventh, 1671. Joseph Denny a poor Man in Warwick (usually
employed by me to catch Adders) walked out with his Brother to conduct him a
part of his way homewards, and having gone about a Mile, he espied an Adder
lying in the Sun, it being about six a clock in the morning: he was willing to
show his Brother the curiosity of catching them, and how dexterous he was
thereat: and though he had neither Glove nor Tongs with him (as not designing
that work on Sundays) he did notwithstanding cast himself near the Adder, and
nimbly seizing on her Tail threw her from her Covert, with such celerity that
she could not bite him, and then haltered her with ease: A little after he
espied another, but lodged in a place of more difficult access: In this
attempt, which is performed with so much agility, it was his misfortune to
seize upon the middle of the Adder, and before he could disingage his hand, she
bit him on the inner side of his middle finger, just upon the middle joint; yet
did he dislodge her from the Covert, and took her. There appeared the
impression of the two teeth, (though I speak as of a female, yet it is more than
I know which it was, and usually they are males which have two teeth) but the
pain was no other than one would feel upon the pricking of a pin.

Being sollicitous about his condition, he took leave of his Brother, and
perceiving a little blood upon the wounded place, he sucked that and the
virulency (as he thought) out, and then spate it forth of his Mouth: then he
washed the place affected with cold water, and finding the tumor and pain to
increase (which was not such as happens upon inflammations, but like that
which precedeth a Sphacelus, and was accompanied with a sense of benummedness)
he hastened home unto me, whom he knocked up before seven a clock, and having
only time to signify his condition, at the door, he ran to his own house, to
enjoy the convenience of his bed, and the attendance of his Wife, who
immediately repaired to me for directions; the whole Hand was extremely
tumified, and black, and the swelling began hastily to dilate it self toward
the Elbow: He was seized with a Vertigo, vomiting, swooning, and a cold sweat,
the violence whereof was such, that the drops trickled from his Head, as if his
Hair had been wet with a great Rain, or water: where each Tooth had fastened,
there appeared a blackish Pustule, or Blister; I appointed his Wife to make a
strong Ligature above the tumor, at his Elbow; and having clipped the
Blisters, to hold a red-hot Fire-shovel as near to the part affected as he
could endure it, and to give him a good draught of Viper-wine presently: At her
return she found her Husband not in a condition to speak intelligibly, his
Tongue was swelled, and he faultered in his speech, as those do who have an
Hemiplegia or dead Palsy in their Tongues: Upon the drinking of the first
draught of the said Wine, he vomited up abundance of bitter Choler mixed with
Phlegm, colored yellow, green, and blew; then she gave him another draught,
(at both times half a pint at least) whereupon his vomiting and swooning
ceased, and his speech returned to him: The Ligature had put an happy stop to
the progress of the tumor, but the heated Fire-shovel produced no effect at
all, the tumor and pains still increasing betwixt the wounded place and the
Ligature: By this time I had got on my clothes, and hastened thither with a
Surgeon: I found the man as cold as any dead Coarse, and all over turned as
black as a Tawny-moor, (though otherwise his skin was very white) and amidst
the blackness of his hue, there was a visible mixture of greenish-yellow: I
could not feel any Pulse in either Arm, and he complained of a palpitation of
the Heart: I caused two Scarifications to be made on each side of the Finger
above the joint, as deep as the tumor permitted, and four more to be made on
the back of the hand in the like manner: and upon incision the flesh did cut as
if it had been of a dead body, there issuing neither blood nor any serous
liquor, though he had his feeling there as entire as ever: I laid to the
places a Plaster of Venice-treacle, and gave him inwardly above half an ounce
thereof in some Viper-wine: the operation whereof was not such as to beget any
warmth in his body, or any pulse, or the least alteration in his Arm; whereupon
I sent for some Angelica-water (being unwilling to give him more of the
Viper-wine) and put into a draught thereof at least two drachms of Mixtura
simplex, upon the taking whereof his Pulse returned immediately, and a warmth
diffused it self all over his body, excepting the affected Arm, his cold sweats
ceased, and a red color came into his face, the palpitation of his Heart left
him, and he became cheerful: I repeated the dose, and caused Fire-shovels to be
heated five or six times and held near the scarified places: hereupon he fell
into a great sweat all over (except that hand) the affected part became hot,
and the scarified places bled abundance of florid blood, which I suffered to
flow without any impediment: where the Teeth had fastened there came forth as I
took up the Plaster of Treacle two little pieces of black flesh of the bigness
of a great pins head; and finding him in this hopeful condition, I went to
Church, directing that he should not sleep (to which he was much inclined) and
that there should be given him for food only some Mace-beer, with a little Sage
and Wormwood boiled in it; and that he should take every half hour two or three
spoonfuls of Angelica-water, with some ten drops of Mixtura simplex, and
continue his sweat.

After Sermon I found him very cheerful and well, no pain in his Arm but what
seemed to proceed from the Ligature: whereupon I caused the Arm to be unbound,
and washed with Aqua vitae, and a new but gentle Ligature to be made higher,
toward the Shoulder: and that he should continue the Cordial, and the Sores
were dressed with a mixture of Venice-treacle and Basilicon, and pieces of Lint
dipped therein were put into the holes, whence the mortified flesh had come
forth.

After Dinner I found the man in the same condition wherein I had left him,
only the tumor had diffused it self to the Shoulder and Arm-pit, and sent
pains as far as his right Breast: He had of himself two Stools, in which there
was nothing observable: I directed the taking of his Cordial, and at night half
an ounce of Venice-treacle.

But in a few hours after, there being no considerable evacuation of matter,
there was applied to the Scarifications a Plaster of Burgundy-pitch and simple
Melilote, equally mixed: whereupon there issued forth in good quantities a
yellow ichorous matter, the efflux whereof was continued by the application of
Basilicon and Venice-treacle: where the Bite was, the Sore grew foul, and
thereupon that was dressed with Basilicon and Aegyptiacum mixed: And thus the
Cure was prosecuted to the end, according to the discretion of the Surgeon:
only during the first and second day, the violent tumor of the Finger, Hand
and Arm continuing (notwithstanding the evacuation by Scarification, and
diffusing it self) I did give way to the applying of a Pultice to the Arm (from
the Wrist to the Elbow) made up of Oatmeal, green Betony shred, and Milk, to
which was added in the end a little Oil of Roses, Oil of Mallows, Sheeps Suet,
and Oil of Spike: the which Pultice had been tried in Warwick upon the like
case, when all the discretion of a knowing Surgeon could not secure the like
tumor from an imminent Gangrene, the pain also dilating it self, as in this
case: and to the tumor on the back of his hand was applied green Wormwood
shred, and heated as hot as could be endured.

Being called out of Town, at my return the next day I found the tumor and
pain much abated, the Man so well as to sit up, without any ill symptom, only
he had made no water since the Bite: whereupon I appointed him to take once in
two hours a dram of Sal Prunellae in his Mace-ale: and at the first dose he
made much water, but it was of so deep a red, that his Wife imagined it to be
blood: the next was high-colored, but on the next morning I found its color
to be natural: The tumor on Tuesday being almost gone, and the pains every
where vanishing, I appointed the Surgeon to keep the Scarifications open,
and to order them as common Sores, but to continue to the bitten place (both
holes being run into one) the Basilicon and Treacle: and being willing to
preserve my Venice-treacle, Vide Sontem Ardoynum de venenis l. 6. c. 1. p. 335,
336 ex Serapione. Fortiu^ juvamentum est in comestione alliorum, est enim
curatio fortis vald^.
I appointed he should take a Clove or two of Garlic every morning: which,
howsoever it be commended in this case, did produce such a pain in the Sore,
that I was forced to alter it for some Mithridate, to be taken every night and
morning: The same week he was so well as to take me (but with more caution)
twenty Adders: and now, after three weeks time, the Sores are all well, and not
any tumor remains, he being purged only, in the conclusion, with the decoction
of Damask-Roses.

But after a few days a new and strange Symptom appeared, all his Back,
Breast and Belly became spotted with yellow spots (of different Figures)
resembling exactly the color and bigness of those of the Add^r which bit him:
the rest of his skin being white: and this continued from about the fourth day
till now, with this discrepancy, that in process of time from yellow they
turned brown, and so by little and little disappeared: some remains thereof are
still visible; but he is perfectly well, (excepting a sense of benummedness in
that and the two subsequent Fingers, which seems to shoot from the head of the
radius at his Elbow) and has been on mowing several times; and is more
corpulent than ever before: And that part of the Skin on his Back, Breast and
Belly, which was so spotted, now peels off, and a whiter one succeeds in its
place.

Having given you this account of the Accident and its Cure, I shall add some
remarks thereupon.

It may perhaps be expected that I should have applied the Head of the Viper
unto the wounded place, or some sliced Pigeons or Chickens: but the Accident
being proceeded so far, I durst not adventure the Patients life upon such
Remedies, as if they proved ineffectual might frustrate the use of other more
generous Medicaments.

The use of the heated Fire-shovel you see answered not those praises which Mr.
R. B. honors it with: Mr. R. B's, usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, part.
2: p. 49, 50.

Mr. Charas of Vipers. c. 8.


as little does Mr. Charas attribute thereunto, in the cure of that unfortunate
Gentleman whom He recovered. I add, that the Remedy is older in England than
Mr. R. B. and his Friends: I have read in sundry ancient Receipts both Printed
and Manuscript, where for the sting of a Wasp, Hornet, Be, or Adder, the
application a Coulter red hot, as near to the affected place as possible, is
advised: and certainly the efficacy of the heated Coulter must be greater by
reason of the intenseness of the heat, then his thin Knife or Spatula can
promise. Let us hence learn, that though the Virtuosi do write, yet do not we
improve always in useful Knowledge: and if at any time the Medicaments of the
Ancients do fail our expectation; those of the Moderns (I wish they would not
upbraid us with old Remedies) lie under the same uncertainties.

I did not cauterise the place that was wounded, because it was so near the
ligaments and nerveous parts; besides, I had no great opinion of its
successfulness, for the venom having diffused it self so far, could receive no
stop by such a cautery: I add, that when Baccius had so cauterised his
Apothecary, Andr. Baccius de venenis, page 16.
who was bit in the Thumb, and that within half an hour after the bite,
notwithstanding that, he fell into most virulent vomitings, and other dangerous
symptoms, and had in all likelihood died, had not he been carefully attended
and followed with Antidotes forty days: Whatsoever is said of such
cauterising, it strengthens the part, hinders afflux of humors, and their
efflux also, whereby the venom is continued in the Body; but it is our
intention to evacuate it by the place bitten, as every man knows.

In the Cure it is observable, that the Man principally attributes his recovery
to the Viper-wine; though I much doubt whether it would have been so effectual,
had I not uncessantly administered unto him the Mixtura simpla, or until I threw
him into a sweat. However you see that there is no such absolute necessity of
the Volatile Salt of Vipers, that Mr Charas so much magnifies: my Cure was more
expedite by much than his, though the Wound were more dangerous: and he acts
the Virtuoso, not only in stealing that preparation of the Salt of Vipers from
the candid and learned Zwelfer, Vide Zwelfer in pharmacop. August. in notis ad
Sal. Theriacal.
and never mentioning him, but in boasting so much of a Remedy which the
Galenists may want without any prejudice, and which in many cases I have found
far inferior to Viper-wine, and of no other effect than what you may expect
from the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn fixed in the like manner.

As to the Symptoms which befell this man, most of them are taken notice of by
several Authors, though all that are bitten do not suffer all the same
Accidents: the idiosyncrasy and anger in the Adder, and the diverse
constitutions and apprehensions of the Patients creating such variety of
Accidents: but in many things did our case differ from what is related by any
one Physician, as you may see in Sennertus, and Santes Ardoynus, Paraeus, and
Doctor Read. The rising of the black Pustules, and the stoppage of Urine seems
to be designed by Sennertus and Santes Ardoynus by their Difficultas Vrinae.
Santes Ardoyn. de venenis, lib. 6. c. 1.
But how far it was from any inflammation (which some speak of) you may judge
by my Relation, which favors the Opinion of Galen, Mesve, and Aaron, that
the poison of Vipers is cold.

Upon his sucking of the Wound, and the evil consequents thereof, it is
observable how unsafe that direction of C. Celsus ( Vesalius, Forrestus and
others) is, C. Celsus medic. l. 5. c. 27. Vesal. chirurg. mag. l. 3. c. 14.
who advise that a man should suck the bitten place. In Amatus Lusitanus you
will find a relation of one who dyed by sucking of the place bitten by a Viper:
Amat Lusit. cent. 3 cur. 14
The same is avowed by Matthiolus, as Paraeus records the Story out of him,
Ambr. Par^us chirurg. l. 20. c. 16, 23.
and instanceth further in a Patient of his own, who was much endangered by by
sucking, upon the bite of an Adder. Epiphan. Ferdinand. cas. medic. 81.
It is also disliked by Epiphanius Ferdinundus.

I forgot to tell you one Accident, and that was on the third day, when he was
taken with so great a pain in the bottom of his Belly toward the Perinaeum,
that he (to use his own expressions) seemed to be torn in pieces thereabouts:
of which symptom I have not read any thing, unless it be that amongst the
consequents of such Bites the great Paraeus does say, that Torsions in the
Bowels do by fits afflict the Patient. Tormina ex intervallis excruciant.
Paraeu^ chirurg. l. 20. c. 16.
But this happened after that he made water freely, and without any pain but
what he felt by way of debility in the Muscles subservient to that evacuation.

I might prosecute the Discourse so as to discourse about the venom of the
Adder, wherein it consists: but much has been said on that Point by Zwelfer
(out of whom Choras does steal much of his Book) and others.

That a Viper is not poison, when drowned and putrified (if I may so call it)
in Wine, appears by the Relations of Galen: Galen. de simpl. l. 10. Prosper
Alpin. med. meth. l. 4 c. 4.
And Prosper Alpinus says the same of those Snakes which the Italians call
Anzas: and daily experience shows the truth thereof; nor do I believe that
any ever reaped any inconvence from Viper-wine made in that manner, except it
were by accident, though for some Reasons I do not follow that way. I have
drunk of the Wine made so, even when I have angered the Adder before I put it
in. I have tasted the Gall and that yellow juice which lies about the Teeth,
without any hurt: the yellow juice did to me seem insipid, or a little
sweetish, if it might be said to have any taste: Mr. Charas of Vipers, sect 8.
Mr. Charas says he found the taste of a Salvia or Spittle sufficiently flat,
and approaching enough to the taste of Oil of sweet Almonds, in the yellow
liquor of the Gums. Herewith agree Amatus Lusitanus: Zacchias qu. medico leg.
l. 2. tit. 2. qu. 7. sect. 10.
though Zacchias say that his Apothecary tasting thereof found it to be Saporis
insipidi cum ponticitate: And it seems to me indubitable, that the venom of
the Animal proceeds from its indignation: (which opinion Poterius, Helmont, and
Zwelfer proposed before Charas) and that there is a virulency in the Wound
appears by the evil accidents upon sucking thereof: Yet must I note, that
Veslingius says of the Teeth, that the poison does formally lodge there, and
that the Teeth being taken and rubbed upon any Weapon do give it an impoysoning
quality, if any be wounded with it.

But I shall detain you no longer, though I could show some defaults in Charas,
and illustrate the History of Adders, by Observations upon the several Animals
into which I have suffered the Skins and Livers to putrify: But I shall
conclude with the profession of being,

SIR, Your most humble Servant Henry Stubbe.
Warwick June 12. 1671
FINIS
A PREFACE To The READER.
ABout Christmas, I was earnestly pressed by some Persons of Great Learning,
and of no Common Repute, to make some Reply unto -- G. Thomson; not only to
chastise his Insolence toward me, (for which he had made me Sufficient
Reparation by his Postscript against D. M.) but to punish him for the
Indignities he had put upon my Faculty. Having finished that Treatise, I was
importuned to write something about Phlebotomy, since he had made such a
clamor about it against the College, and that this Point had not been handled
by the Adversaries of M.N. how necessary soever he had rendered it by the
Publication of Medela Medicine. The Request seemed very Just, but how I should
be able to perform the Undertaking to my own Satisfaction, or that of others, I
knew not: For this Age seemed so to have charged the Methods of Ratiocination,
and so altered the Principles of Physic and Philosophy, that for a man to
argue as our best Writers do, were to subject the Case to all manner of Scorn
and Contempt: And how I should reduce the Phenomenon which are undeniably
consequential to Plebotomy, under one plausible Hypothesis, I did not well
comprehend: For I had no Collections upon the Subject (indeed I never made any
in my life upon any, but remit all to the strength of my Memory, and that now
declines) nor had I ever framed to my self any Idea of things that might
accomplish me thereunto: Though I have for sundry Years been contriving some
Materials in order to it: And had seriously gone about it, but that my Contests
with the Virtuosi have diverted me, and the Troubles and Dangers they have ever
since alarmed me with (even to the hazard of my Life, and Fortunes) made me
unwilling to begin what I should never have opportunity to conclude. However,
since they were pleased to have some Opinion of my Abilities, and promised to
acquiesce in what I could do under so little Leisure, as my Practice affords
me, and so great Disadvantages as my Disfurnishments created me; I did submit
to the Task. And thou have here, Reader, what my Thoughts could Recollect and
Digest in the Space of a few Weeks, and those Interrupted with other
businesses, amidst so ^lender a Library as mine is; the Defects whereof, I
could not supply any ways, many of the Books which I would have made use of
(and which I lost by the late Fire) being not to be found in any Library, or
bought in England: So much decayed is the Trade of Book-selling, together with
the present Declination of all Learning. If, to have refuted my Adversaries, be
all that thou expectest, I have done it perspicuously, and fully: If thou
look for a complete Hypothesis in defense of the Physicians Practice, I
acknowledge the present Treatise to be deficient. For, as to the Nature of the
Blood, though I have made many Essays in reference to the discovery thereof,
yet one Inquiry has so multiplied others, and there is such a variation
thereof not only in Individuals, but according to the Seasons and
Seasonableness of the Years; that I am better able to convince others of their
Errors, than to demonstrate other Principles: Something I have done in order
thereunto; and some things I could have further prosecuted, but would not: For
I have no mind to instruct others too far: Let them study (or, to speak in the
Dialect of my Enemies, let them Read Index's) as I have done: To what purpose
should I add strength to those Fetters which are preparing for my Faculty? Or
prejudice Learning, by qualifying a sort of Ignorant, Idle,
Talkative-Insolents, to maintain Conversation in any Company! If I could see
that the Parliament would, in pursuance of the Prudent Laws made by our
Ancestors, regulate our Faculty according to Real Policy, and the Precedents of
the best Governments, I would not only Contribute all I could to the public
Utility, but propose such a Design, as should add more to the Advancement of
Useful Knowledge, and that Learning, which is necessary to the Support of this
Monarchy, as no Age did ever parallel; which should be Facile, Practicable; and
the Effects thereof, should be more Uisible in three Years, than theirs have
been, who boast that they have done more in six Years, than the Aristotelians
in more than thrice so many Centuries. But let these men have their Desires;
Plus ultr^. p. 8.
Let them be loaded (according to their own Overtures) with all that contempt
which is usually the Reward of vain and unprofitable Projectors.

I cannot but look upon it as a singular Act of Providence, that I should fix
upon the present Title of this Book; and direct my Censure against the Lord
Bacon, and those that pretend to be Followers of Him in Philosophy; seeing that
it has happened so, as that Ecebolius Glanvil has made use of that Great
Name, to excuse his Errors and Insolence; In his Letter to M.S. p. 8.
and thinks it a sufficient Apology, If he can show that the substance of his
most Obnoxious Periods and Passages, are to be found largely, and often
insisted on by so Great, Learned, and Wise a man, as my Lord Bacon. Which
defense, though it be no other than he might make, who should tender us a wrong
Account of the Sweating-Sickness; or avowe that Coffi were Narcotical; or
obtrude upon us a thousand Falsities out of the Philosophical Writings of that
Lord, and Lawyer; yet does it seem requisite that I should say something more
in reference to his Authority, lest, what imported little in the Age when he
lived, should be prejudicial, and destructive to that which succeeds. I will
not deny that he was a man of good Literature, and great Eloquence, accompanied
with a popular, and florid way of Expressing himself: By Profession, he was a
Lawyer, and the principal part of his Studies were bent that way; and although
therein he were surpassed by others, yet it is there that his Credit must seem
most Authentic, or no where: We acknowledge no Chancellours of Philosophy,
Philology, Medicine, etc. Nor do Artists suffer themselves to be over-swayed by
the judgments of men, that are either totally unacquainted, or have but
transitorily, and superficially looked into the Subjects they treat of. No Law
ever made him our Dictator, nor is there any Reason that concludes him
Infallible: Nay, it is manifest that he was frequently deceived. And, See M.
Aust^ns Observations on his Natural History.
since the Gardiners have protested against him, and that justly: Since the
Chemists, and the Mathematicians disclaim him: Why may not a Physician refuse
to be tried by him? Not that this does introduce a Comparison of Abilities in
general, but of knowledge in particular Cases; and the World has always
allowed, that A Person, otherwise Ignorant, even a Fool, may know more in his
own House, than a Wise man does in another's. Besides, I hope my Adversaries
will permit me to retort upon the Lord Bacon, what they (though most
injuriously) urge against Aristotle: And to propose it to their judgment,
Whether 'twas likely that my Lord Bacon was so far beyond other Scholars in his
Intellectuals, See the Letter against Aristotle at the end of Scepsis
Scientifica^ p. 90.
as these latter Times have presumed; when He came so far short of most of them
in his Morals? I believe there is a near Connection between Truth and Goodness,
and there is a Taste in the Soul, whereby it relisheth Truth, as the Palate
Meats; which sense and gusto vice depraves and vitiates. So that, though Wit
may make the vicious cunning Sophisters, and subtle Atheists; I doubt, seldom
the most exercised Philosophers.

I shall not prove this Charge by alleging Writers who were not Born till
above many Centuries; Nay, above a thousand Years after: Such is Suidas, (who
is very Fabulous) and S. Jerome. N^r impose upon my Reader Authors who write
quite contrary to what is to be averred; as See the Words of Aristocles in
Casaubon 's Notes upon the fifth Book of Diogenes Laertius: In the Edition of
Menagius, p. 41.42.
Aristocles, and Arrian: Nor represent as befitting Witnesses, a company of
Buffoons, and notorious Liars, such was Timaeus.: But refer you to the Common
Opinion about Passages within the Memory of man, and to his Accusations in
Parliament (which are Recorded): and since He durst not stand the Trial, but
cast himself upon the Mercy of the House; his condition admits of no
Uindication; and I again retort the Words of Ecebolius upon him: Thus then you
see an ill Character of the Lord Bacon's manners from dis-interested
Authorities; on consideration of which, See Menagius 's Not^s on Laertius, lib.
5. p. 110. and Ionssius, l 2. c. 2. p. 125. Uti supra, p. 91.
it is to me matter of some Wonder, that the Memory of the vicious should be so
blessed, and his Authority so Irreproveable. -- But to pass by this Argument,
which I confess to have been Weak, when first urged; but is Strong, when it is
retorted: I do say, that the Credit of no man is such, as ought to sway us
against manifest Experience; and if Aristotle teach me that what is most
Rationally insisted on, if it be Sensually refuted, cannot be adhered unto
without an Imbecility of Judgment: I am to be pardoned, if I submit not to the
Inartificial Argument of my Lord Bacon's Authority, when his Assertion is
apparently False: And so it is in more Cases than that of the
Sweating-Sickness. So it is in that Saying of his (so pressed by Ecobolius)
that he never names any ancient Author, U^i supra, p 84.
but to Confute, or Reprove him: Aristotel. polit. ^. 7. c. 4.
For he cites an hundred Authors in his Works by way of Illustration; makes an
Honorable mention of Hippocrates, and no where reproves him. Not to relate
the Altar and Inscription which he erected to Plato; and other Instances that
might ^e made of his mentioning Ancient Writers in places where he no way
disparageth them, nor Animadverts upon them. So it is in the places alledged^
now by Ecebolius. For if it be evident, Aristotle did resolve his Philosophy
finally into Sense: If it be evident, that Aristotle did propose, and pursue an
History of Nature (which was carried on by his Successors, as Theophrastus,
Erasistratus, Herophilus, and others) and esteemed no Universal Propositions to
be true, but what are verified in every Individual (which is the Foundation of
all he Writes about the Art of Reasoning:) If it be evident that the Glorious
Body of Physic which we now possess, was principally erected upon his
Physiology and Deductions (which he that Reads Galen, Mercatus, or Fernelius,
may s^e) and our Practice is not only regulated happily thereby as to known
Diseases, but directed in order to the Discovery of New Medicaments, and the
Cure of New Diseases, (not to mention the Natural Improvements): If these
things are evident (which no Scholar can deny) what Truth can there be in those
Citations or Aphorisms of my Lord Bacon, so much enforced against me by
Ecebolius in his late Letter? P. 9.10.
What does he bring but fresh Testimonies of his intolerable Impudence and
Ignorance, and create new Umbrages upon that Lord, when he recites an egregious
mistake of His? Si -- id minime eventurum fuisset, quod per annos bis mill jam
fieri videmus: Nov. Orgat. Aphor. v. 74.
Nempe ut Scientiae suis haereant vestigiis, and in eodem fere Statu maneant,
neque augmentum aliquod memorabile sumserunt; quin potius in primo Authore
maxim floruerint, and deinceps declinaverint. This being said of the Sciences
in general, is an Insufferable Untruth: For who knows not the large
Improvements that the Mathematics received by Euclid (who lived after
Aristotle) and others, Who had then advanced every part of the pure and mixed
Mathematics long before the Verulamian Philosopher writ this? Who knows not,
how Herbary had been improved by Theophrastus, Dioscorides, the Arabians, and
other Peripateticks, in like manner? Who can deny that Physic (in every part
of it) and particularly Anatomy was improved by Erasistratus, Herophilus,
Galen, Vesalius, Fallopius, etc. before the Lord Bacon ever sucked? And what
accessionalls had Chemistry received by the cultivation of the Aristotelians,
before that the House of Solomon was dreamed of, or the New Atlantis
discovered? Let us therefore not be concluded by the Aphorisms of this Lord:
Let us not take his Assertions for Legitimate Proofs: Let these insulse
Adherents of his buy some Salt, and make use of more than one Grain when they
Read Him: And let us believe better of the Ancients than that their Physiology
advanced nothing; or that Their Methods of Science are so unfruitful, as in so
many Centuries not to have brought the World so much Practical beneficial
Knowledge, as would help toward the Cure of a Cut-Finger. Because the
pertulancy of my Adversary does enforce me thereunto, I do declare, that the
Lord Bacon did steal the principal part of his Novum Organum out of Aristotle,
and only disguised his Suggestions in a new Mode and Dress; As he likewise
borrowed the best Rudiments of his Advancem^nt of Learning from Ludovicus Uibes
de causis corruptarum Artium; What was his House of Solomon, but the Ectype or
Transcript of the Peripateticks establishment at Alexandria in the Musaeum of
Ptolemaeus Layides, and Demetrius Phalereus? It Is by his great Example that the
Baconical Philosophers are such Plagiaries, and Relators of false and defective
Experiments; Contemners of the Ancients, and opinionated concerning themselves.
The only judgment I can make of my Lord Bacon's Actings, is, that being so
Flagitious, and so Ignominiously degraded: He determined to redeem the Infamy
of his past Life by amusing the World with New Projects; and to gain a
Chancellourship in Literature, when he was excluded from that on the Bench: And
to revenge himself of the Nation whom He had exasperated, by diffusing Heresies
in Philosophy, and creating in the Breasts of the English such a desire of
Novelty, as rose up to a Contempt of the Ancient Ecclesiastical and Civil
Jurisdiction, and the Old Government, as well as Governors of the Realm: And
the Root of all our present Distractions was planted by His Hand.

The mention of Ecebolius Glanvill seems to give me just occasion to digress
here, and to give my Reader some Account of his late virulent Books against Me.
I gave him no Occasion for to Write in that manner; nor did I Transgress the
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion to depreciate the Virtuosi, though they were much
more obnoxious than I: Whereas He, to accomplish a Revenge, does begin with the
Brea^h of Divine and Humane Laws: The Penalty in the Act of Oblivion determined
after three Years; but the Command is no less than Utter Oblivion: So run the
Words of the Act. P. 4.
The Rectour of Bathe tells me that, "If I think so in earnest, the Law is
open; I may take my Course. -- But this Divine might have known, that there are
more Injuries, more Sins, than the Temporal Laws prescribe a Punishment for:
And that the Obligation of the Law does not depend upon it is having a Penalty
annexed. The Commandment of the Sabbath was given, and the Violation thereof, a
Sin; and he that had gathered Sticks thereupon was apprehended, and put into
Ward, till God should determine how he should be punished. Numbers 15.32, 33,
34.
Is not this a fit Person to be entrusted with the Cure of Souls! But to pass
by His Impiety, and proceed to his Indiscretion; Is it not extraordinary, that
He should upbraid me with adhearing to my Patron out of Gratitude, when He
complied with the Same Parties out of Interest, and to advantage Himself? I
could trace the Saint from Excester-Colledg to Mr. Rouse's; and the L. -- W.'s,
and from the Rota of Mr. Harrington, unto the Lord Mayor's Pulpit, when he
Preached the Sermon about Catholic Charity. What Prayers, what Graces he
uttered in those Families? it is easy to conjecture that they transcended a
Negative Loyalty. But as for his Abettours, I have seen one of them Sneaking at
Sir H. V.'s. He was Tutour to his Nephew, and Intelligencer during all the late
Usurpations. He says, P. 56.
He blames me not for Writing against Doctor J. W. but for treating him so
opprobriously. I answer, that I gave him such Language as his Ignorance (in
those Questions) did deserve: And I refer my self to all the Royallists, if any
Language could be Malicious and Scurrilous, which was used against the
Sub-Scribe to the Tribe of Adoniram, who had been an Active Preacher in the
first War, and Decyphered (besides others, to the Ruin of many Loyal Persons)
the King's Cabinet taken at Naseby, and, as a Monument of his Noble
Performances in behalf of the Cause, deposited the Original, with the
Decyphering, in the Public Library at Oxford? As for Mr. R. B. who writ the
Holy Commonwealth, and the Key for Catholics: He having reviled on, and
belyed my Patron, (as he did also the Church of England) and refuted his
Notorious Lies, and discovered the Ignorance of a Man who (till then) had in
the Nation some Esteem for Learning; If this was not a considerable Service to
the King and Episcopacy, I understand nothing: And though I did not intend it
as such (which I yield) yet they are so generous and just, as to distinguish
betwixt those who (though Undesignedly) served them, and those that did all
they could to Destroy them. The Key for Catholics is Unrepented of; and I
recommend that Book to the Perusal of the Episcoparians, and let them judge
whether He that writ it, or He that opposed it (though in defense of Sir. H.
V.) and pleaded earnestly for an Indulgence toward them in the Liturgical way,
deserved best at their Hands? Take notice that the Pia Phil^s^ (...), and the
P^e^fatory Discourse against me, came out b^th together, and were sent to me
Bound together^^ So that I may be excused for mixing the Elogies bestowed upon
Mr. R. B.
I say, I could not abuse Mr. R.B. in those Days: And I cast my self upon the
Royallists for my Judges; What say ye Gentlemen? Was He the only Man that
spoke Sense in the Age of Nonsense? Was He Reverend, Learned, and Ingenious?
But, What is it that Ecebolius does purpose to himself? Would He ov^r^hrow all
our Laws as well as the Act of Oblivion? Why does He now caresse this Party so
highly! He adds, That it is to be hoped there are not any more Criminal than I
on this side Charing Cross, P. 5.
Tyburn, or Tower Hill. Is not this all one, as to bid Derrick take the Author
and Approver of the Pindarick Ode! Is it not to Sentence unto Death the Actours
of the first War ('it is well his Patron Mr. Rouse is dead) the Trooping Divines,
the Decipherer of his Majesty's Letters, the Followers of Oliver, and King
Dick, not to mention others? The truth is, O most generous and candid
Royallists, being a Poor Boy at Westminster-School (as my Reverend Master, Dr.
Busby can tell you) aged about Ten years old (there are but few years
difference betwixt my Age and that of Ecebolius) Sir H. V. casually coming to
School with Dr. Osbolston, did take a kindness to me; and frequently relieved
me with Money, preferred me to be a King's Scholar first, and afterward to
Oxford: At such times as I had convenience, I had the liberty to resort to his
House, and fill that Belly, which otherwise, had no Sustenance but what one
Penny could purchase for my Dinner: I had not any Breakfast, except I got it by
making some bodies Exercise. My Mother had two of us to maintain by her Needle
at London, after we had Traveled on Foot from Leverpool thither. I was not a
little obliged to the Charity of my good Master, for Money to buy Books, and
Clothes, besides that He gave me my Schooling. I was sent to Oxford after the
late King was Beheaded, being aged about Seventeen, and very Little of Stature.
The Quarrels, and Animosities growing high betwixt the Presbyterians and Sir H.
V's. Friends, I sided with him. Was it, Generous Sirs, any Faction in me, or
the Testimony of a Factious Spirit to oppose the Presbyterians? or, was it a
Crime then to serve my Patron? Twice I with Tears implored the Protection of
Sir H. V. and C. L. to save Westminster-School (that great and known Seminary
of Royallists) from that Destruction which the Presbyterians, and Independents
menaced it with: And my Master shall witness how I interceded for Him. 'Twas I
brought the Engagement down to Oxford (though I took it not; being an
Under-Graduate) and having got Doctor S. F. and Doctor R. to be turned out, I
saved the remains of the Cavaliers in Christ-Church, and Queens College, and
gave them an opportunity to live securely, and Educate others in their
Principles. All the retribution I could make to my generous Patron, for
gratifying a poor Stripling, and permitting him to be Grateful, was, To
promise, if ever I were able, to serve him ^ff^ctually. Which I did (maugre the
Power and Greatness of the Presbyterians) in opposing Doctor J. W. who was then
the Glory and Pride of that Party. Afterward, to terrify the Presbyterians,
and make them more Complacential, I writ those so Invidious Queries; yet
withal, protested that they contain no Tenets of mine, (for I knew they were
not defensible against the Learned and Judicious Episcoparians: Though they had
force and address enough against the more Ignorant Presbyterians) but were writ
to excuse those who had made those to be their Assertions, which were my
Doubts. This I declared in the Preface: yet would not Ecebolius take notice
thereof, to the end I might s^^m more Odious, and that I might be upbraided
with contradicting my self: Which I am very glad I do: And that my Principles
(if those be them) are a^ much changed as my H^ir. In fine, (for I would not be
tedious about th^se Impertinences) whatsoever I writ, was against the
Presbyterian Clergy, the Presbyterian Universities, the Usurpations of Oliver
and Richard. Against his Majesty, or his Father, or the Church of England,
there is so little expressly, that less could not be said by One of that side:
And to have had any one so Active in those times, and to do what I did, it is
not to be doubted but his Majesty would have dispensed with it, and
acknowledged my Serviceableness. Could I but assume the Impudence of those
Cromwellians and Renegadoes, and tell you Renegadoes, I did all this for to
facilitate the Kings return, how plausible would it seem? But though I knew
the tendency thereof, I scorn to say, This was my Design: I say, I served my
Patron therein; and bore no Malice to the Royallists, who were then Ejected out
of the Universities, and all Churches. Had I not contributed to those
Imbroylments, perhaps things had not been in the same condition as they are in
now; And Ecebolius (as well as others my most bitter Adversaries) had been
Praying, and Preaching, as before: I prepared those Algerines to repent, and to
Conform; and you may, if you please, put the Latitudinarians (upon whom
neither Religion, Morality, or Generosity have any Obligation) into a condition
to betray You again. In the mean time, I beseech you, Generous Episcoparians,
not to make your selves Instruments for their Rage, nor suffer them by your
Means to revenge upon me the Affronts done to the Presbyterians, Oliver, and
Richard Cromwell: Think not that they love you, or the Government: Nothing is
dear to them but themselves: Nor are they swayed by any thing but Interest and
Ambition: They attend to Opportunities not Principles; and value not Right, but
Fortune and Power. If they make it a Malignity of Temper in me, to have reviled
(in those days) Doctor J. W. and Mr. R. B. If it be Hypocrisy to defend the
Monarchy, Religion, and Universities of this Nation: What Bottom do you stand
on? Or^ How do you expect to be s^rved? Mr. R.B. in his Saints everlasting
Rest, (not to mention his Key for Catholics) has transferred Mr. Pym, and
Hambden into Heaven: And Ecebolius tells you, that it is to be hoped, that on
this side Tyburne there is not one whose Crimes have transcended mine: Thus
it is made a more hanious Fault to have opposed the Rigid Presbyterians, Oliver,
and Richard Cromwell, than to have acted in the First War, to have brought the
late King to the Block, or to have cut off his Head. Sir H. V. was no Regicide:
I was not concerned in all those times: I never made any Application or Poem to
the Renowned Prince Oliver, nor insinuated my self into the Court of Him, or
his Son. When it pleased Almighty God to r^store so happily his Majesty; I made
early and voluntary Applications to the Bishop of Winton (that now is), for his
Protection in my Retirement, assuring his Lordship of an inviolate Passive
Obedience, which was all I could or would pay till the Covenant were renounced:
He has it under my Hand, and higher streins than these. I need not recite
either the Kindnesses of that Reverend Prelate unto me, or his Majesty's
Favors at my going to Jamaica: It Is enough to say, that I was not deceived in
the Opinion I always had concerning the Generosity of the Royallists. When the
Restoration of the Bishops, and of the Church of England had revived me: at the
first motion of the afor^said Right Reverend Father in God, and at the first
opportunity I ever had in my Life, I received Confirmation publicly at his
Hands: And immediately took occasion to publish a Treatise of Bartholomaeus
Casa paraphrastically translated: And in the Dedication thereof, to that Loyal
Gentleman. Sir Chapter Littleton declare; I have, at length, removed all the
Umbrages I ever lay under: I have joined my self to the Church of England; not
only upon the account of it is being publicly imposed (which, in things
Indifferent, is no small consideration: as I learned from the Scottish
Transactions at Perth) but because it is the least defining, and consequently
the most comprehensive, and fitting to be National: Have my Adversaries? has
Mr. R. B. declared thus much in Print yet?
Wherein any unprejudiced Person (not-resolved to mistake particular men's
Actions or Opinions, for Church-Principles and Errors) may observe all those
Circumstances to continue in order to the promotion of Sober Piety, which the
Angels proclaimed at the Birth of the World's Savior. viz. Glory to God in the
highest, Peace on Earth, and Good will toward men. In fine, it bears the
Impress of what is Ancient and Apostolic, as well as True: I always had a
Reverence for the Primitive Christians, and it is with a Sincerity not
un^ecoming them, that I thus declare my self. -- Thus did He unrequested
declare himself, most Generous and Candid Episcoparians, who pleaded for your
Toleration, when you were in distress, and when his Adversaries were Praying,
Preaching, and Acting against you, and Mr. R. B. writ his Key for Catholics:
Thus He declared three Years and more, before Ecebolius published his Sermon
upon the Kings Marder: Thus He declared, without any Hope of Advancement, or
other ends, than to live as became a Peaceable and Quiet Subject, and Son of
the Church. If after all this; if after the taking of the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and the having done all that the King and Church required, I
have not yielded you sufficient satisfaction; pardon me, if I say I understand
not what is necessary to the Civil, and Ecclesiastical Peace; and you do exceed
the Precedents of any History, or any Policy, which I am acquainted with.

I think this Discourse to be the most pertinent Answer I could give to all the
Railing of my Adversaries; without descending to Particulars, the Prosecution
whereof (and even Repetition) would seem tedious, and in these times
unseasonable. I now descend to other Passages in Ecebolius. He said, my Head
was Red-hot. By the difference of the Character, P. 28.
who would not imagine that he reflected on me as Red-Headed? He has now
varied the Letter, and says Red hot; is not this the Sophistication of a gross
Lie? He adds another: If I had said, your Head was Red, I had not been such a
Liar neither; it was a direct Carrot, last time I saw it. -- It never was of
other Color than of the pale Hungary Gold; and in time altered to a Light
Brown: 'Twas such as the Ancients did ascribe to Apollo and Mercury (though
very thin) and as the Wisest Nations have, and do desire to imitate by
Artifice. -- But his words were, his Head is Red-hot. Which is a Lie. And if it
were not, so much to be said for that Color, that I should not be ashamed
thereof: Besides that some of the R. S. must suffer in the contumely, if it be
one: Yet I neither take that, or the other of Bald-Pate, to carry any thing of
Ignominy in them. He had also said, In testimony of his great Love and Devotion
to the King, he thus subscribes the Title of his rare Book of Chocolata, by
Henry Stubs, Physician for his Majesty in the Island of Iamaica. Now (no doubt)
he is Physician for his Majesty too in the Town of Warwick, and He intends to
be Physician for his Majesty in the City of London. -- I could not but look
upon this as a Lying Insinuation, as if I had dared to Usurp that Character,
which indeed his Majesty did Honor me with: And who would not, as the words
import, conclude, that either I was not Physician for his Majesty at Jamaica,
or no doubt am now Physician for his Majesty at Warwick? which for any man el^e
to say were a Lie; but in Ecebolius and Vertuoso it is only Raillery. Such
Raillery it is when he speaks of my Spitting fire in a Feavour, and Reading by
the Light of his Spittle. Whereas I neither had any Feavour those many Years,
nor did ever such a Phenomenon befall me in one. Several Months after I had
been sick of the Colic Bilious (which neither is a Fever, nor was attend^d
with any) upon the taking of a certain Course of Physic, and Indulging my self
in the taking of Snuff (I do not take it for a contumely, to be told of my
Snuffe-Box) I observed that sometimes in the dark, as I blew my Nose, a stream
of Light from my Eyes and Nostrils would issue out, and accompany the Pituita,
ev^n to the Ground; so that I could discover a Straw or Pinn. But what is all
thi^ to a Feaver-Fire, and Reading by it? If this be not a Lie, it is not more
certain, that Truth is not to be spoken at all times, than that in this manner,
it ought never to be spoke by a Divine; though Ecebol^us may say any thing. All
the Odious Sto^^es in him and D. M. ar^ thus disguised: They have ran acked a^l
C^rn^rs, inq^i^ed into the Cabinets o^ P^ivate pers^ns, and ^ought out some
L^^t^rs of Raille^y written by me, to provide Mate^ials for the^e L^b^lls.
I imparted this odd Phenomenon de luce animalium to one of the R. S.
desiring to know his judgment, I^ it might be the effect of the Physic, or
such Sn^ffe as I then took. From him it is now transmitted to Ecebolius: As many
others (whom I know) contributed their Symbols to this Farce, as well as that
of D. M.s. Yet does Ecebolius deny that any ever saw his Writings before they
were Printed: No man, except my Transcriber, ever saw my Book till it was
Printed. -- This is a notorious Lie (except He Aequivocate) for one of his
Neighbors saw the blotted Manuscript of Pius Ultra. And he sent it to Doctor
More to peruse, before it went to the Press: The Doctor told me he altered
nothing indeed; but remitted it with a Proverb (for Proverbs and Poetry, he is
equal to Mr. Cross) to this purpose, as if Ecebolius had over-acted in the
Dispute. This, Ecebolius confessed to me at Bathe before Doctor F.C. and
repeated the Adage^ yet said, that he added nothing thereunto. Which I believe
may be true: But yet hence it is evident, that he is a Liar. Except the
Virtuosi be Daemoniacks, two must have s^en his Prefatory Answer long before it
was Printed, and they above one hundred miles from Bathe: For they repeated it
(and I from them to him at Bathe) and said they had seen it: And Doctor M.
communicates some Heads of it, which I believe he had not by Inspiration. I
could name more; but this is enough to satisfy the wo^ld of the Integrity of
our Vertuoso, and show what Credit he deserv^s. Yet I must add, that the
Renegado at Bathe does transmit his Papers, and hold strickt Correspondence
with H. O. a London-Renegado, and he conferrs with the rest of the Renegadoes.
Ecebolius did ask Doctor G. of Bathe (as his intimate Friend told me) to help
him with an account of the New Inventions in Anatomy: Upon the Publication of
Plu^ ultra, there was some misunderstanding about it: Prefat. Ans. P. 190.
The Cause, I know. -- About Mr. Cross, that He hired me^ the Gazettier of
Chugh does thus write. The Reverend Disputer after this careshed and courted
him highly, treated him at Bathe, and entertained him diverse times with dear
welcome at his House, so that at last He was fastened. I was at his House once,
and no more: My welcome was as great ^s he could at that tim^ express: But not
so as to be reported dear unto him. I have els^where published the Truth, nor
does E^cbolius disprove it; In his Letter. P. 29.
but thus Apologizeth for himself -- I insinuated what I thought, and had heard
in other terms, and if I Lied, in Thinking^ and Hearing, and giving some Hints
of what was reported, and was lik^ly enough to be believed. This is all he
replies for words so Positive and Peremptory: It Is no Insinuation, but
Assertion: No mention occurres that He was told so, or Imagined so. This
Defense recalls to my mind some Passages when Doctor F. C. did bring us two to
an Enterview: I complained to him of a multitude of Lies which he writ, and was
going to Print: and desired he would not trouble the world with such Popperies;
for though they would give me Advantages over him^ yet I had not Leisure to
pursue them. I told him that He had w^itten a Letter (of which I had seen the
Original) to Doctor J. Gardener, how I went from Bristol to Chue in the Company
of a Quaker, and that Mr. Cross and I fell out there, and had gone together by
the Ears (or to this effect) had not the Quaker parted us: That afterward the
Quaker and I came to Bristol, and there quarrelled, and abused each other. This
he Comically related to his Friend; But this Relation differs much from that of
my Dear welcome at Chue. I told him the Person that accompanied me was no
Quaker, He is a very hopeful Intelligent young Gentleman, and now a Scholar at
Cambridg.
though his Father was one: That I was willing to embrace his Overture of
guiding me to Chue, being as great a Stranger to the Way, as unto him. That I
was not ashamed to be in his Company, who was so well known to the Lord
Brouncker, and the Bishop of Chapter In sum, I said I was confident that He was of
the R. S. and in their Catalogue: He denied that, and upon the wager of a
Guinny, the History was consulted: But it appeared not that He was there
(though I was sure He had been at the R. S.) and I Paid it. This has given
Ecebolius so much matter of Triumph, whereas it was not a trial of any Citation
in the Book against Him. I convinced him before Doctor F. C. that we had no
Quarrel at Chue, nor did I return to Bristol, but left Mr. M. S. to return
alone, and departed straight to Bathe, and Warwick. He then replied, that He
was told so. Just so D. M. having Printed, that no Civil woman would make use
of me at Warwick; Defended himself, That he found now that All his Intelligence
was not Gospel. Does any man imagine it possible that Civil Society can
subsist, if such Practices as these be tolerated? Prefat. Answ. p. 107.
Thus Ecebolius tells us of an Oxford Doctor, that should say to this purpose:
That Mr. Stubs is so great a -- that if he tell you that He was at such a
Gentleman's Table, where this, or that Discourse happened; you are not to
believe as much, as that he knows the Gentleman, or ever saw him. -- Whosoever
that Doctor were, and if ever there were so mistaken a Person, It did not
become Ecebolius to publish it, who had seen me more than one Summer at Bathe,
attending on the Healths of as Honorable Patients as any that Doctor ever was
I think in company with. But not to insist on any more Lies (which I am averse
from pursuing, to save my self and Reader some trouble, and the Clergy that
disgrace, lest it should be said of one of their number, He was the most
Impudent Liar in the World). I do hereby demand Ecebolius for my Uassal and
Uictime. By his own Promise he is obliged to render himself, and if there be
any Generosity in my Adversaries, they will see that He perform it. After he
had asked his half-Brother if he were a Thief, and brought his Certificate, and
the Attestation of Jo. a Court to prove the Truth of his Relation of the
Conference with Mr. Cross (which yet I am so far from crediting, that I will
prove out of Ecebolius himself that they attest a Lie, and that it was not
exactly and sincerely such as it is reported) he adds: Prefat. Answ. p. 161.
Thus I have proved my Relation for Mr. Stubb's Satisfaction: And there is no
other matter I have related concerning either of them, but I shall make it
good, whenever I am called upon to do it: Yea, if they please I am ready to
lay the issue of all here. If I cannot prove every matter of Fact, that I have
printe^ about them; I shall humbly lay my Neck at their Feet: And if on the
other hand, either of these Adversaries can prove one of those reproachful
things they have alleged against me, I Will be their Uassal and their Uictime.
-- In his Letter now He writes. I never said any thing of you, that I will not
justify to a Tittle. -- I writ unto him upon the coming forth of the Prefatory
Answer, p. 27.
and having showed him more Lies, and Specimina of his Ignorance than he now
takes notice of; I told him to this purpose; 'Twas in vain to pester the world
with Books of Railing, that I demanded him for my Uassal, and would convince
him Formally where, and when he please, either before indifferent Persons at
Bathe, or before the R. S. and my Lord Brouncker: And that, if He declined
this, I would proceed to Post him at London, Oxford, Cambridg, Bathe, and
Bristol. All the Answer I received is this in Print, which is as pertinent to
what I demanded, as all He else writes is to what I object. I do here publicly
make the same overture: I will openly in any convenient place, and before
Intelligent Judges, prove him a Liar, and so Ignorant and Illiterate a Fellow,
that He is not fit to come into any Learned company, or to open his Mouth
amongst them. I have already evinced his Ignorance: And all the Impertinence I
am guilty of is this; that my Antitheses are Logically and Directly opposite to
his. I will give an Instance or two, by which the Reader may judge.

Mr. Glanvill. Plus ultra. P. 7.
The unfruitfulness of those Methods of Science, which in so many Centuries,
never brought the World so much Practical Beneficial Knowledge, as would help
toward the Cure of a Cut-Finger, is a palpable Argument, that they were
Fundamental Mistakes, and the way was not right.

The Antithesis of H. S.
I suppose that the instance against the Ancient Methods of Science, since it
is restrained to their Utility to cure a Cut-finger, is particularly directed
to Physic: For, against any other Method of Science the Objection were
ridiculous: And in opposition to this Assertion, I do say, I have proved, and
will do it to any (...), that

The Ancient Methods of Science have brought Physic to a great perfection,
have explicated so the Causes of Diseases, and their Cures, and do so enable us
to pass a further judgment upon new Plants, and other Discoveries in the
Materia Medica, as well as new Diseases, besides that they direct us upon their
Principles how to Compound Medicaments according to all Intentions, that
neither were they heretofore, nor can any understanding Person (who acts on
their Grounds) be at a loss for the Cure of a Cut-Finger.

Mr. Glanvill's Epicrisis.
Prefat. Answ. p. 111
Do I speak of the Methods of Physic, Surgery, or any Practical Art? If I
had done so Master Stubbs had had reason. But it was nothing thus, I had not to
do with any thing of that Nature, but was discoursing of the Infertility of the
way of Notion and Dispute, concerning which I affirmed, that it produced no
Practical useful Knowledge. Ibid p. 112.
-- And unless he can prove that they did it by the direct Help and conduct of
the Notional Disputing Physiology, he will not Sacrifice me to Public Obloquy
here, nor say any thing in which I am concerned at all.

Who ever denied that Diseases were cured by these Physicians, In his Letter,
p. 12.
using Reason, Experience, and General Rules? But when do you prove that the
Doctrine of the First Matter, and Forms, do directly, and of it self, lead to
any Discovery by which they were assisted in Cures? This I told you was my
meaning in these Words, which you force to a sense which best befits yhur
malicious purpose.

The Dialysis by H. S.
I did not expect that a man should pretend to Common Reason, and yet by
alteration of the terms to vary the Subject of the dispute. At first your
Assertion was concerning all the Ancient Methods of Science, of which even the
Empirical Physicians did follow one; The Methodists, or Corpuscularian
Physicians another; and the Dogmatists or Hippocratick-Galenical Physicians, a
third; You now recede from hence, and do not only exclude the two former from
the Controversy, but the latter. You grant that Diseases and Cut-Fingers were
cured by them, they using (or rather proceeding upon) Reason, Experience, and
certain General Rules: But you say first, that you are not to be understood
concerning Physic, or Chyrurgery or any Practical Art? Truly, had not you
limited your Discourse to Physic, all the mixed Mathematics had been concerned
in the Quarrel: But I pray learn Logic, especially the Doctrine of
Proposition, that you may know how the Predicate and Subject are modelled
therein. I appeal to any intelligent University-man, whether I could understand
you otherwise then about Practical knowledge, Physic, and Chyrurgery, since
you demand a Practical effect, and that to be in Physic or Chyrurgery^ The
course you now take is,

Delphinum sylvis appingere, fluctibus apros. You would have me prove that
those things may produce Practical Knowledge, which consists in mere
Speculation, and terminate there. If you ever were so good a Disputant as you
pretend to have been, Plus ultra. P. 123.
and misspent so much time in your first Studies at Oxford (which I believe you
did not) you could not be unacquainted with the Distinctions between
Speculative and Practical Sciences and Arts: And you would no more have
expected from the first the Effects of the latter; than you (but alas! you
have no insight into the Mathematics, as Doctor H. M. confessed to me lately;
and the learned Prelate has avowed to twenty persons; he to whom you sent your
Book, and who sent you an obliging Letter of thanks, not for your performances,
but your Present) then you would expect from pure Mathematics the productions
of the mixed. Keep your self to this Position that you were not to be understood
of any particular Art, Physic, or Chyrurgery, and I will only say, you are
Hair-braind, or a Madman; as you call me. But you again change the state of
the Question; for you demand I should prove that the Ancients did their Cures
by the direct Help and Conduct of the Notional Disputing Physiology; and
without I prove this, I do nothing. If the, Physicians do their practical
Science are not spoken of nor intended I am not concerned in the Quarrel:
However to gratify you with some Reply; I tell you, that if you mean by
Physiology, that part of Natural Philosophy which is accommodated unto, and is
the basis of the Dogmatical Physicians (in Italy and Spain especially) I do say
that by the direct help and conduct thereof, they do their Cures; but I must
tell you, that in a practical Science, or Art, it is not necessary that every
part and parcel thereof be Practical, as you might have learned at Oxford:
Neither is it any more necessary that to complete Physic, every point be
determined, and not disputed; then it is to Mathematics that it be decided,
whether there be any such thing in nature as a Mathematical Point, or Surfaces;
or whether the Circle can be squared? Though it has been disputed, and is
still, How Uision is performed, and where? Yet do men See, and the Masters of
Optics do Wonders. But you again change the state of the Question, whilst you
demand I should prove that the Doctrine of the first Matter and Forms, did
directly, and of it self lead to any discovery, by which they were assisted in
their Cures. I am hereby obliged to prove that a part shall do as much as the
whole: That one Round of a Ladder shall mount a Man to the World in the Moon:
Now that the hopes of flying thither are disappointed, I am to prove that the
Ancient Methods of Science did enable to cure a cut-Finger: The Doctrine of the
first Matter and Forms is neither a Method of Science, nor Science, though a
part of Physiology. Who is now the impertinent? Where lies the charge of
impudence.

Thus this Illiterate Ecebolius does serve me in every Case, that he seems to
reply unto almost: the Citation of Me. Boil is true (bateing the error of the
Press, whereupon he triumphs, I appointed it to be Printed by the Book he
followed: And I derive no advantage from the Variation. For does Mr. B. say the
Spots were not there, but that during many Months, they appeared much seldomer,
than it seems they did before. Is it a true Maxim in Natural Philosophy, which
in Law sometimes passes currently? Idem est non apparere and non esse. The
Latin Edition of Mr. B. which was approved by him, and which I followed at
first, says. Quae [maculae] per menses aliquot continuos tanto quam antea (uti
videtur) rarius apparuere. P. 145. Edit. Ams^elc dam^ 1667
He is thus cautious I believe, because any man that has inquired into the
Caelestial Phenomenon, must know that it is Recorded how two or more using
Telescopes at the same time, have related different Observations: At the same
time that Galilaeo and Scheine^ made their Observations of those Spots, other
Learned Inquisitive men could not see them, or not in the same places: For
ought I can guess, at the same time that Mr. R.B. could not see them the
dilligent Zucchius might see them with his Telescopes, which seem to be the
most accurate of all, because the most constant; nor does it appear that Mr. R.
B. by reason of the Weakness of his Eyes, or any in England understood their
use so well as He. It Is his assertion, Assero primo, satis constare consensum
apparentiarum, sive in locis proxime, sive eadem die, sive pluribus longissime
dissitis; sive continenter diebus a peritis Observatoribus adnotentur. Zucchius
philos. Opt. part 1. c. 18. Sect. viij. p. 232.
It is not to be doubted but that skilful Artists understand the use and
placing of Telescopes of all sorts: It Is not to be doubted, but that their
Telescopes were as true when employed on terrene Objects at a due distance,
with a proportionate Medium, and convenient apperture, as the Figure and
confirmation of them did admit of, and was requisite to verify their
Observations on Earth: But even on Earth there would be no certainty of the
exactness of their Discoveries, could we not by near approach and sensible
Examination convince our selves further. Ricciol. Almagest. nov. l. 10 Sect. 6.
p. 660. Prob. 50. See Mr. Glanvill if you can find that in the Index.
Besides even in this Air there happens such secret Alterations, that Kircher
could on some days discover Aetna from the Islle of Malta, which on the next
day when the Sky seemed much more clear, he could not see. Now if we apply all
this to the Caelestial Phenomenon observed by Telescopes, concerning the
distance whereof, the Medium and the Nature of the Objects and their Colors
(whether Emphatical or Real) we can make no sensible and near Inquiries: How
far are we short of all that Ecebolius does prate of? What consequence is there
in his Argument, that because they do not deceive us on Earth, therefore they
will not in the Sky? In fine, I have demonstrated; That Telescopes are not so
certain as our Eyes: That Telescopes do vary their Objects in some things,
besides their proportions; nor are their Informations the same in all things,
but the mentioned Difference. Which is contradictory to what this Ignoramns
says; and whatever Mr. Cross said, (of which I am uncertain) it is a shame
that this Arrogant should Talk or Write thus: and they may blush who were
present at, and had a share in, and witnessed unto so ridiculous a piece of
Conversation. I am to learn a new Logic, if my Antitheses be not contradictory
to his Tenets: and if they be, let him confess they are pertinent, and prove
them to be false: Which the Virtuoso says, that He has done: Since all he
has said, or is likely to say for ever, In the Preface to his Letter.
is already answered in his former account of my Spirits, and Performances.
Now, Gentlemen, it is clear that the R. S. found out some of the Five
Instruments so famed for advancing Knowledge. Now it is evident that the R. S.
did first propose and practice the Transfusion of Blood: Who can any longer
deny, but that the Romans held it Unlawful to look on the Entrails? And that
Chemistry was not in use with Aristotle and his Sectators? Let it pass that
Tertullian severely censured an inquisitive Physician of his time for this
practice [of Anatomy] and that one of the Popes (he takes it to be Boniface
VIII.) threatened to Excommunicate those that should do any thing of this then
abominable nature. All these things (and many Falsities more of which his Plus
ultra yields me an Additional supply) are answered (and that pertinently, and
as becomes a Virtuoso) by the Demonstration of the Malignity of my Temper, and
Hypocrisy. I showed how Eccebolius complained that all his first Sudies at
Oxford did not qualify him for the World of Action and Business: I do here
solemnly avow, that they have Ruined me: For I thereby am come to so gross
Ignorance, as not to know what is pertinent, or what it is to oppose, and
Answer: and for this Discovery, I am redevable to those generous men that have
conversed with real Nature, undisguised with Art and Notion: I defy Aristotle,
and renounce the Documents of his Rhetoric, wherein he told me that all the
Bitterness and Exaggerations, whatever tended to raise Indignation or other
passions in the Judges, were Impertinencies to the Cause in debate and that the
use of them to Judges was as ridiculous, as if one would try to make the Rule
crooked, the which He would make use of. I will set down the Passage, to
demonstrate to the World what a Fool he was, and what a crowde of Silly
Fellows were the Areopagites of old; and I will set it down in Greek, though I
know Eccebolius can do little more than read it (and therefore corrected the
Erratum of Doctor More's Letter by committing two New ones: As also mistook the
Text and title of his Sermon, about Reason and Religion) the Passage is this.
(...). Away with those Venerable Seats: Confound that Notional Learning: Those
Logical tricks about shuffling and ordering Propositions and Forms of
Syllogism, the distinctions of Secundum quid and Sympliciter, the
praedications of Genus and Species^ etc. are justly rejected, and railed upon
by this Uirtuoso: It Is they have betrayed me to this Baffle: It Is this has
made me turn over Indexes (and read Books, that I might know what to look for
in the Index of such and such an Author, and supply the defects and want of an
Index) were the Mechanical Education received, and the Jesuits Morals
substtituted instead of Aristotle, and Thomas Aquinas (perhaps this was
intended in the puny Society contrived at Bathe and Bristol, where new
Hypotheses of Morality were to be proposed) then Lying (if serviceable were as
good as Truth, and Poor Robbins Almanac, Montelion, or Glanvill, as good
Authors as Ricciolus, and Zucchius: The authority of Hadrianus Junius should be
baffled by those who had not opportunity (or were negligent) to enquire exactly
into the Original of Printing: And let the States of Zealand inquire, and judge
never so uprightly concerning matter of Fact (done in their own Country,) and
let Borellus publish it in Print; yet shall Metius have the glory of the first
Invention, and Galileo be he that first applied it to the Stars. But upon
second Thoughts, I believe that the World of business and Action is not such as
Eccebolius talks of; Plus Ultra p. 42.
that the Mechanical Education is the most Extravagant Folly imaginable: That,
to Preserve our old Religion, it is absolutely necessary that we retain our Old
Learning: that there is a greater value to be placed on Controversial Divines,
then our Virtuoso do allow of in their Letter against me: and perhaps one
Jewel, Lawde, Andrews, Davenant. Whitaker, Chillingworth, Scaliger, Grotius.
Seldom, Causabon, or Salmasius may ere long be more serviceable unto Monarchy
than a Fleet of Ships, Thirty thousand Horse and Foot, or Three hundred
Thousand Virtuosi: I do not reckon my Adversaries amongst the Military strength
of the Nation, because they have abandoned their Standard: The Standard of
English Eloquence: and when the people have a little more observed them, the
Works which they have achieved in Six Years above all that ever the
Aristotelians ever effected, will only conduce to the Improvements of Raillery;
We shall perceive that we have been out of the Way all this while; that the
interests of a Lineal and Hereditary Monarchy are different from those of any
Usurper; and if my Olivarian Addversaries may understand what Arts are
subservient to the advancing, or continuing of a Cromwell, a Regecide: I am
content to dissent once more from them in behalf of the present Monarchy, the
Church of England, the Universities, and my own Faculty: And I think it is no
ill Prayer for me to use, nor no argument of Faction and disloyalty to wish,
that God would endew many others with such a malignity of Temper, and such
Hypocrisy as I am now possessed with. They hindered Four Books of mine in
Michelmas Term from being Licensed, though they contained nothing repugnant to
the Monarchy, Church, or Good Manners


I shall not dismiss Eccebolius nor the Quarrel thus: I desire that all
ingenious Persons would solicit for me to have the Liberty of the Press; and
importune the Virtuosi, that Eccebolius may render himself my Uassal, and do
his Homage and Swear Fealty: if he do so. Sir H. Spelman will tell him his
Style is a Lewd Fellow, and a Uillain: if he do not make good his word. He will
deserve those Elogies upon another account. I will not make a Uictime of Him;
the Christian Law has put an end to all Sacrifices: And that which is
Levitical, does exclude Unclean Beasts from the number of Temple Offerings: I
am not so angry as to turn Paynim, that I may be revenged on the R --
otherwise, since Dogs and Asses were of old Sacrificed to Mars, and Black
Sheep to Pluto; the World could not yield a more Agreeable Uictime for either.
He shall live for me (which is more then my Adversaries desire I should do)
except the Devil claim his due, (...)
and then I ought to be just, if Old Proverbs may pass current amongst New
Philosophers: They are more of kinn, and a greater is the affinity of the Name,
than Stubb and Stubbs yet to show my Pedigree, he tells me in the preface to
the Preparatory Answer, of the Stubb's that were hanged for Treason: it is a
Thin kindred that yields neither Whore nor Rogue: There are more of the
Glanvills besides him that disgrace the Family: However, He should not have
changed the Terms again, and given me Allegations of one Francis Stubbs that
was Executed, and one John Stubbs, whom Cambden and Marten admire for that
Bravery which he showed at the Cutting off of his Hand: He took off his Hatt
immediately thereupon with the remaining hand, and cried God bless the Queen,
nor did He suffer for Treason, his Book contained not so much of Reproaches
against the Queen, as Reasons against her Marriage with a French Papist. Now
let us observe from hence the Logic of our Virtuoso: How does it appear that
the Stubb's were hanged for Treason in former Reigns: Here is but one so
Executed, and he not of my Name; and I am too little acquainted with my
Pedigree to claim Kindred with either of the Persons alleged.

As to the Universities, although it matter not what Ecebolius says in behalf
of them, because he does not understand What he commends; yet ought he to be
blamed for detracting from them, l^st it turn to the universal Detriment of the
Monarchy and Religion. The passage I cited, is too odious to be thus excused:
And even now he rejects their Logic, Natural Philosoyhy and Metaphysics; each
whereof he is unacq^ainted with. As much as he pretends to have studied
Aristotle (whom I am sure he cannot Construe) and the Peripatetick Physiology,
yet did he not know that Aristotle held the Gravity of the Air, and was therein
f^llowed by the Avinceninsts and Averroists, whose Authority alone was
principally received in the Arabian Schools, and generally amongst the Western
Christians, till the Laterane Council put a check to the Averroists. As for
Logic, he knows not what it is, either in the Practice or Notion; without Good
skill therein, it is impossible for a man to benefit himself considerably in the
Studies which our Virtuoso does allow of: or without Metaphysics to defend the
Christian Religion and Protestancy, or explain the 39. Articles, Athanasian,
and Nicence Creeds. But He spoke in my hearing with much contempt of the Thirty
Nine Articles, saying, Three of them were calvinistical: And as to the
Athanasian Creed, He does never read it, and usually declaims against it; and
told Doctor J. M. that He would Burn before he would read it. Thus he (not to
speak of his curtailing the Common Prayer, and dis-use of the Surplice lest the
pulling it off should Discompose his Periwigg) observes his Subscriptions and
the Laws of the Land! As to what he cites out of his Letter against Aristotle,
had he prooceeded the words would have been these: I blame not therefore the use
of Aristotle in the Universities among the Junior Students, though I cannot
approv the streightness and sloth of Elder Dijudicants, from whom a more
generous temper might be expected, than to sit down in a contented despair of
any further Progress into Science, than has been made by their Idolized Sophy
and depriving themselves and all this World of their Liberty in Philosophy a
Sacramental adherence to an Heathen Authority. And I confess 'twas this,
Pedantry, and Boyishness of humor that drew from me those Reflections I
directed against Aristotle -- This too must pass as allowable; must it?
Pedautry and Boyishness of Humor is fixed upon the Governors of the
Universities, how Sage and Reverend soever they be, and what rank soever they
hold in Church and State; The man of Stagiaa is said to be their Idolized
Sophy, and they charged to deprive themselves and all this World of their
Liberty in Philosophy by a Sacramental adherence to an Heathen Authority. I
will not exaggerate this passage, but leave it to tho consideration of all
Intelligent men, whether this be not a Libelling of the Universities, and the
King their Founder, and from whose Authourity their Statutes have force. Is it
fit that such an Ignorant, Inconsiderate Fellow as Ecebolius should thus
animadvert upon the Demeanor of those who are so much his Superiors, who act
according to their Statutes, and who understand the danger of any Innovation in
Learning under an Hereditary Monarchy, as well as they do the Civil
Consequences it would draw upon the Church: They are sensible of the present
damage which it has done; they know the Character of us Islanders too well,
to comply with it: they know it is not requisite to the Being, or Well-Being of
an Ancient Government to introduce such a charge; and that it is absolutely
necessary that this do oppose it. Besides the Fatal presidence which Ancient
History, and even the Records of both Universities, to suggest in reference to
Changes of lesser moment, they know that the Papists do allow this
Philosophical Liberty to some of their Members rather to distract us, then that
they approve it; and, that their Church has a power to remedy any
inconvenience, which we have not: That in their Colleges they reverence
Aristotle as much as we: See the Judgment and Reasons of the Lavain Doctors, in
the end of the second Edition of Plempiu 's Fundament. Medica p 3^5 etc.

Jac du bois contra Witticheum. in pres.


That the University of Lovaine has censured Cartesian Philosophy; and that
the Belgic Universities have suppressed it publicly. I shall relate the
degree of Utrecht, because it contanis the Motives they went upon, and the
prejudice they found to arise from the New Philosophy.

Ultrajecturiae Academiae, judicium hoc est, Professores Acad. Vtraij reijcere
Novam istam Philosophiam; primo quia veteri Philosophiae, quam Accademiae toto
orbem terrarum hactenus optimo consilio docuere, adversatur, ejusque fundamenta
subvertit.

De ^^de quia juventutem a vetere and sana Philosophia (...), imped^que
quominus ad culmen eruditionis pro^^hatur, co quod istius praesumptae
Philosophiae (...) techanologemata in authorum libris, Professorumque
lectionibus ac disputationibus usitata percipere nequit. ^ osiremo quod ex
eadem contrariae falsae and absurdae Opiniones partim consequantur partim ab
improvida juventute deduci possint, pugnantes cum caeteris disciplinis ac
facultaribus, atque imprimis cum Orthodoxa Theologia.

-- To what an height of Impudence and Arrogance it has transported
Ecebolius, is manifest: Nor are his Abettors less moderate: The History
contains the like Suggestions as I have showed: And the Anonymous Epistoler
does fly as high: It Is strange a Doctor of Divinity should write so; and more,
that he should thus defend the passage I animadverted upon, in a Manuscript not
yet published, but communicated to others; the reply to what I say (p. 42. and
29.) how he makes the Universities Lands alienable, is: They most were designed
for another kind of Worship than what is now in use: And they may be changed in
one as well as in another Particular for the better. But I speak not against
useful and modest disputations, but against Barbarous and conceited Terms. --
Reader, The Subject of the Question betwixt him and me, is Controversial
Divinity; not the Barbarous and conceited Terms therein. Who can Dispute with
such men as these?

It may not be impertinent to this subject for me to take notice of a passage
of Mr J. E. concerning the Universities, which though it be more favorable to
Theology then this last Author would allow of, yet did it not become Him to
write, it being very derogatory to the Universities. -- That might redeem the
World from the Insolency of so many Errors as we find by daily experience will
not abide the Test, and yet retain their Tyranny; and that by the credit only
of, and addresses of those many Fencing-Schooles which have been built (not to
name them Colleges) and endowed in all our Universities: I speak not here of
those reverend and renowned Societies which converse with Theology, cultivate
the Laws Municipal or foreign; but I deplore with just indignation, the
supine^ neglect of the Other, amongst such numbers as are set apart for empty
and less fruitful Speculations. -- These are his words in the Dedication of
Nadius's Instructions concerning a Library (out of which Dedication I find T.
S. to have stolen his Dedication to the King, only he multiplied the Errors
of his Original) out of whih it is manifest, that Mr. J. E. did not understand
the Constitution of our Universities; for we have no such Fencing-Schools (not
to name them Colleges) built and endowed to any such purpose as he speaks of:
nor any numbers set apart for less fruitful and empty speculations, then the
Virtuosi do pursue. It Is true, there is a Professor of Natural Philosophy in
Oxford; and that the Scholars in the Course of their Studies, are obliged to
employ a part of their time in Logic, Physics, and Metaphysics: And the
reason, is because that the interest of our Monarchy is an Interest of
Religion, and the support of the Religion established by Law is complicated
with, and depends upon those Studies: It Is no less then impossible for any man
to understand or manage the controversies with the Papists (and our Church is
framed principally in opposition to them; as appears by our Articles, and
Homolies: and the Monarchy subsists only by that opposition) without a deep
knowledge of those Sciences: As any ma must know who has inspected no more
than the Controversi of the Eucharist, wherein the Doctrine of substance; and
accidents, of Quantity distinct from Matter of Ubication, etc. is so requisite
to be understood, that the protestants sustain the dispute without them: For if
we change our Notions in Natural Philosophy, we then differ in the principals
of discourse; and where men differ therein, it is impossible for them to
proceed. In all discourse there must be some common suppositions and
definitions admitted of; and every man that is convinced, is convinced by
somewhat which he already holds: By the change agitated, and now pursued, we
make our selves incapable of convincing a papist: and considering the
prejudices of long Education, and the Authority of the Catholic Church, we
must render our selves in their judgment as Perfect Fools; and not be able to
proceed, is in this case all one as to be baffled. Besides, I cannot
comprehend, and I do inculcate it to our Church and Statesmen, That no new
discovery in Natural Philosophy can countervaile that damage which the public
will receive by this change of Phsioligical principles: for besides what we
shall suffer in the present management of disputes, and those dangers which
usually accompany all Changes (which are such as no wise man would introduce
them, in a settled Government, though he comply therewith when they are
unavoyd^ble) we shall so disparage all the Reverend Fathers and Writers of our
Church, and of precedent Ages, that their Authority and Repute will cease and
what they have written become universally contemptible, when their
Philosophical Notions shall be despised, and each similitude, or illustration
seem ridiculous to every boy. It Is most certain, that we know the
inconveniences of our present condition, and know we can subsist and flourish
under them: but we do not know the inconveniences we shall run into, nor any
befiting remedy for them.

I did in a private Letter upbraid Ecebolius with K -- in omitting a passage of
Dr. H. Moor's Letter, wherein he declared, that He paid not any of those
weekly Contributions, no nor so much as Admission-money; as was usual. I could
not believe the Dr. so Disingenuous as to deny it, or equivocate, as he seemed
to do in the Case: but he himself told me what was omitted, he was troubled at
it, and protested upon the Faith of a Christian, that 'twas done without his
Knowledge: and that He empowered Ecebolius to print the whole Letter. P. 33.
Let the World now judge of the demeanor of Ecebolius, imagine how He serves
me, who thus abused his best Friend. He replies for himself, that he omitted
that Meaning, because it seemed to be ridiculous. But he might have known, that
I reckoned upon all those Catalogues of their Fellows, as false, where such
were accounted on, as neither hold Correspondence with the rest, See my Preface
against T. S.
nor Pay the usual Contributions. All the mistake of mine was that I supposed
him to have paid Admission-money; and so to have been heretofore of the R. S.
Whereas He never paid so much as that; and the Finess is more manifest, that
they pick up a company of men, and desire they would augment the Speciousness
of their Catalogues, and ducquoy others; and they will ask no more of them. The
excuse of Ecebolius is the more unpardonable, because at our Enterview at
Bathe, I told him this very thing before Doctor F. C. In his Lett^^ p. 12.


I forgot to take notice of one passage in Ecebolius ab^ut Flavius Goia, that
He invented the Compass. He acknowledges that it is a mistake: but it is an
error of the Press: it should have been Flavius, or Goia. He is confident it
was so in his Copy: and that he was sensible of the mistake committed about it
elsewhere. But I am confident the mistake was not in the Printer, but Author:
for in his Plus ultra, He does make Flavius Goia of Amalphis to be the
discoverer of the Compass: P. 80.
whereas all the best Writers say, the inventor was either Flavius of Amalfi;
or Johannes Goia (or Gira) of Melfi.

FINIS.

