Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT Concerning SUBMISSION TO Usurpers.

LONDON, Printed by for Richard Marriott. MDCLXXVIII.

Bishop Sanderson's JUDGMENT Concerning SUBMISSION TO USURPERS.
SIR,
WHEREAS you desire to know what my judgment and practice is concerning the
using or forbearing the established Liturgy (either in whole, or in part) in
the public Service of God, and Office of the Church: If it be any satisfaction
to your Friend, I shall fully acquaint you what my practice is (whereunto if my
own Judgment be not conform, I am, without all excuse, my own condemner) and
upon what considerations I have, according to the variation of the times,
varied from my self therein.

So long as my Congregation continued unmixt with Soldiers, as well after as
before the Promulgation of the Ordinance of the two Houses for the abolishing
of the Common Prayer, I continued the use of it, as I had ever formerly done in
the most peaceable and orderly times, not omitting those very Prayers, the
silencing whereof I could not but know to have been chiefly aimed at in the
Ordinance (viz.) three for the King and Queen and Bishops; and so I did also
though some Soldiers were casually present, till such time as a whole Troop
coming to Quarter in the Town (with a purpose to continue a kind of Garrison or
Head-quarter among us) were so enraged at my reading of it the first Sunday
after they came, that immediately after Morning Service ended, they seized upon
the Book, and tore it all in pieces. Thenceforward during their continuance
there for full six months and upwards (viz.) from the beginning of November
till they were called away to Naseby Fight in May following, besides that for
want of a Book of necessity I must, I saw that it also behoov'd me, for the
preventing of farther Outrages, to wave the use of the Book for the time, at
least in the Ordinary Service; only I read the Confession, the Lord's Prayer,
all the Versicles, and the Psalms for the day. Then after the first Lesson in
the Forenoon Benedictus or Iubilate; and in the Afternoons Cantate. After the
second Lesson also, sometimes the Creed, sometimes the Ten Commandments, and
sometimes neither, but only sang a Psalm, and so to Sermon. But in all that
while, in the Administration of the Sacraments, the Solemnization of Matrimony,
Burial of Dead, and Churching of Women, I constantly used the ancient Forms and
Rites to every of them respectively belonging, according to the appointment in
the Book; only I was careful in all the rest to make choice of such times and
opportunities as I might do them with most secrecy, and without disturbance of
the Soldier. But at the Celebration of the Eucharist I was the more secure to
do it publicly, because I was assured none of the Soldiers would be present.

After their departure I took the liberty to use either the whole Liturgy, or
but some part of it, omitting sometimes more, sometimes less upon occasion, as
I judged it most expedient in reference to the Auditory, especially if any
Soldiers, or other unknown persons happened to be present. But all this while
the substance of what I omitted I contrived into my Prayer before Sermon, the
phrase and order only varied, which yet I endeavored to temper in such sort,
that any person of ordinary capacity might easily perceivve what my meaning
was, and yet the words left as little liable to exception or cavil as might be.

About two years ago I was advertised (but in a friendly manner) by a
Parliament man of note in these parts, that at a public Meeting at Grantham,
great complaint was made by some Ministers of the Presbyterian Gang, as I
afterward found, of my refractoriness to obey the Parliaments Order in that
behalf. The Gentleman told me withal, That although they knew what my judgment
and practice was, yet they were not forward to take notice of it before
complaint made, which being now done in so public a manner, if they should not
take notice of it, the blame would lie upon them. He therefore advised me to
consider well what I had to do, for I must resolve either to adventure the loss
of my Living, or to lay aside Common Prayer; which if I should continue after
complaint and admonition, it would not be in his power, nor in the power of any
Friend I had to preserve me. The effect of my then Answer was, That if the case
were so, the deliberation was not hard: I having long ago considered of the
case, and resolved what I might do with a good Conscience, and what was fittest
for me in prudence to do, if I should ever be put to it (viz.) to forbear the
use of the Common Prayer Book so far as might satisfy the letter of the
Ordinance, rather than forsake my Station.

My next business then was to bethink my self of such a course to be
thenceforth held in the public work in my own Parish, as might be believed
neither to bring danger to my self by the use, nor to give scandal to my
Brethren by the disuse of the established Liturgy. And the course was this, to
which I have held me ever since.

I begin the Service with a Preface, and an Exhortation inferred to make
Confession of Sins; which Exhortation I have framed out of the Exhortation and
Absolution in the Book, contracted and put together, and expressed for the most
part in the same words and phrases, but purposely here and there transplac'd,
that it might appear not to be, and yet to be the very same.

Then follows the Confession it self in the same Order; it was enlarged only
with the addition of some words, whereby it is rather explained than altered.
The whole frame whereof, both for the fuller satisfaction in that particular,
and that you may conjecture what manner of addition and change I have made
proportionably hereunto (yet none so large) in other parts of the holy Office,
I have here underwritten.

O Almighty God and merciful Father, we thy unworthy Servants do with shame and
sorrow confess, that we have all our life long gone astray out of thy ways like
lost sheep; and that by following too much the vain devices and desires of our
own hearts, we have grievously offended against thy holy laws both in thought,
word, and deed. We have many times left undone those good duties which we might
and ought to have done, and we have many times done those evils, when we might
have avoided them, which we ought not to have done. We confess, O Lord, that
there is no health at all, nor help in any Creature to relieve us; but all our
hope is in thy mercy, whose justice we have by our sins so far provoked. Have
mercy upon us therefore, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable Offenders: Spare
us good Lord who confess our faults, that we perish not, but according to thy
gracious promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, restore us
upon our true Repentance into thy grace and favor. And grant, O most merciful
Father, for his sake, that we henceforth study to serve and please thee by
leading a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name, and
the eternal comfort of our own Souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After the Confession the Lord's Prayer with the Versicles, and Gloria Patri,
and then Psalms for the Day, and the first Lesson: After which in the Forenoon,
sometimes Te Deum, (but then only when I think the Auditory will bear it) and
sometimes an Hymn of mine own, gathered out of the Psalms and Church Collects,
as a general Form of Thanksgiving (which I did the rather, because I have noted
the want of such a Form as the only thing wherein the Liturgy seemed to be
defective). And in the Afternoon, after the first Lesson the 98th. Psalm, or
the 67th. then the second Lesson, with Benedictus or Iubilate; after it in the
Forenoon and Afternoon a singing Psalm. Then follows the Creed, with Dominus
Vobiscum; and sometimes the Versicles in the end of our Letany [From our
Enemies defend us] if I liked my Auditory, otherwise I omit the Versicles.
After the Creed, and instead of the Letany and the other Prayers appointed in
the Book, I have taken the substance of the Prayer I was wont to make before
Sermon, and disposed it into several Collects or Prayers, some longer and some
shorter, but new modeled into the language of the Common Prayer Book much more
than it was before. And in the Pulpit, before Sermon I use only a short Prayer
in reference to the hearing of the Word, and no more. So that upon the matter,
in these Prayers I do but the same thing I did before, save only that what
before I spoke without Book, and in a continued Form in the Pulpit, I now read
out of a written Book broken into parcels, and in the reading Desk or Pue.
Between which Prayers and the singing Psalms before the Sermon, I do also daily
use one other Collect, of which sort I have for the purpose composed sundry,
made up also (as the former) for the most part out of the Church Collects, with
some little enlargement or variation; as namely, the Collects Adventual,
Quadragesimal, Paschal, or Pentecostal, for their proper seasons; and at other
times Collects of a more general nature, as for Pardon, Repentance, Grace, etc.
And after one or more of them in the Forenoon, I usually repeat the Ten
Commandments, with a short Collect after them for Grace to enable us to keep
them.

This has been my practice, and is like still to be, unless some happy Change
of Affairs restore us the liberty of using the old way again, or it be made
appear to my Understanding by some able charitable Friend, That I therein have
done otherwise then I ought to have done: For I may say, that I have not yet
met with any thing in Discourse, either with my own Reason or others, of
sufficient strength to convince me that I have done any thing, but what may
stand with the Principles as well of Christian Simplicity as Prudence.

There are but three things, that I know of, that are of any consideration
opposed, viz. 1. The Obligation of the Laws. 2. The Scandal of the Example. 3.
The unseemly symbolizing at least with Schismatics, if not partaking with them
in the Schism.


1. Law. Object.
The first and strongest Objection (which I shall therefore propose to the most
advantage of the Objector) is that which is grounded upon the Laws, and their
Obligation: For it may be Objected, That every humane Law rightly established,
so long as it continues a Law, obliges the Subject (and that for Conscience
sake) to the observation thereof in such manner and form as in the same Law is
prescribed, and according to the true meaning and intention of the Lawgiver
therein. That a Law is then understood to be rightly established, when it
contains nothing but what is honest and lawful, and is enacted by such person
or persons as have full and sufficient authority to make Laws. That a Law so
established continues a Law, and is so in force, till it be either Repealed by
as good and lawful Authority, as that by which it was made, or else antiquated
by a long continued uninforc'd disuse with the tacit or presumed consent of the
Lawgiver. That the Act printed before the Common Prayer Book, and entitled
(An Act for the Uniformity) was such a Law, being it was established in a full
and free Parliament in peaceable times, and ratified by the Royal Assent, That
it still continues in force, and being not yet Repealed, but by such persons as
(at least in the Opinion of those that maintain the Dispute) for want of the
Royal Assent, have not a sufficient right or authority to do such an Act, nor
disused but of late times, and that by enforcement, and as is presumed, much
against the mind of the Lawgiver. That therefore it still retains the power of
obliging in part of Conscience; that power being so essential and intrinsecal
to every Law, quatenus a Law, that it can in no wise be severed from it.

And that therefore no Minister publicly officiating in the Church, can with a
good Conscience either omit any part of that which is commanded by the
aforesaid Law, or use any other Form than what is contained in the foresaid
Book, but must either use the Form prescribed in the Book, or else forbear to
officiate.



The Answer to this Objection (granting all in the Premises besides) depends
upon the right understanding of that which is affirmed concering the Obligation
of the Laws according to the intention of the Lawgiver; Answ.
which if it should be understood precisely of that particular, actual, and
immediate intention which the Lawgiver had declared by the words of the Law
(in which sense only the Objection proceeds) will not hold true in all cases.
But there is supposed besides that, in Lawgiver, a more general, habitual, and
ultimate intention of a more excellent and transcendent nature than the former,
which is to have an influence into, and overruling power over all particular
Laws (viz.) an intention by the Laws to procure and promote the public good.
The former intention binds, when it is subservient to the latter, or consistent
with it, and consequently binds in ordinary cases, and in orderly times, or
else the Law is not a wholesome Law. But when the observation of the Law, by
reason of the conjuncture of circumstances, or the iniquity of the times
(contingencies which no Lawgiver could either certainly foresee, or if
foreseen, sufficiently provide against) would rather be prejudicial than
advantageous to the Public; or is manifestly attended with such
inconveniences and sad consequents to the Observers, as all the imaginable
good that can redound to the Public thereby, cannot in any reasonable measure
countervail: In such case the Law obliges not, but according to the latter and
more general intention only; even as in the operations of nature, particular
Agents do ordinarily move according to their proper and particular
inclinations; yet upon some occasions, and to serve the ends and intentions of
universal nature (for the avoiding of some things which nature abhors) they are
sometimes carried with motions quite contrary to their particular natures; as
the Air to descend, and the Water to ascend for the avoiding of vacuity, etc.
The common received Maxim (which has been sufficiently misapplied, and that
sometimes to very ill purposes since the beginning of these unhappy divisions)
in the true meaning of it looks this way, Salus populi suprema Lex: the
equity of which Maxim, as it leaves in the Lawgiver a power of dispensing
with the Law (which is a suspending the Obligation thereof for the time in
respect of the proper and particular intention) so he shall see it expedient in
order to the public good; so it leaves in the Subject a liberty upon just
occasions (as in cases of great exigency, and for the preventing of such
hazards and inconveniences as might prove of noisome consequence to the
Public) to do otherwise than the Law requires. And neither is the exercise of
that power in the Lawgiver to be thought an unreasonable Prerogative, nor the
use of this liberty in the Subject an unreasonable presumption; inasmuch as the
power of dispensing with particular Laws is such a Prerogative, as without
which no Commonwealth can be well governed, but Justice would be turned into
Gall and Wormwood: Nor can the Supreme Governor, without forfeiture of that
faithfulness which he owes to the Public Weal, divest himself thereof.

And he that presumes of the Lawgivers consent to dispense with him for the
Observation of the Law in such needful cases (where he has not the opportunity
to consult his pleasure therein) presumes no more than he has reason to do.
For it may well be presumed that the Lawgiver, who is bound in all his Laws to
intend the safety of the Public, and of every member thereof in his due
proportion, has no intention by the strict observation of any particular Law,
to oblige any person, who is a Member of the Public, to his destruction or
ruin, when the common good is not answerably promoted thereby: Upon which
ground it is generally resolved by Casuists* That no Constitution (merely
humane) can lay such Obligation upon the Conscience of the Subject, but that we
may (according to the exigency of circumstances) do otherwise than the
Constitution requires, provided it be done extra casum scandali and
contemptus, i. e. without either bewraying in himself any contempt of the
Authority of the Lawgiver by his carriage, or giving any just occasion of
scandal to others by his example in so doing.

I have been somewhat the longer in explaining this point, not only for the
better clearing of the present doubt, but also in respect of the usefulness of
this consideration for the preventing and removing of many scruples that may
happen to conscientious men in such times as these, wherein so many things are
(and are like to be) commanded and forbidden contrary to the established Laws,
and those (as they are persuaded) yet standing in force. The best rule that I
know to guide men in their deliberations and actions in such emergent cases
(according to what has been already delivered) is advisedly and impartially to
weigh the benefit and inconveniences, as well on the one side, as on the
other, as they stand in relation unto the Public Good: and if after such
examination and comparison made, it shall then evidently (or but in the
judgment of probability) appear, that the Observation of the Law, according to
the proper intention of the Lawgiver therein, though with hazard of Estate,
Liberty, or even life it self, has a greater tendency to the Public Good, and
the preservation of Church or Commonwealth in safety, peace, and order, than
the preventing of the foresaid hazards, or other evil consequents, by doing
otherwise than the Law requires, can have; or (which comes to one) if the
violating of the Law shall then appear to be more prejudicial to the Public
Good, than the preservation of the Subject's Estate, Liberty, or Life can be
beneficial hereunto: In such case the Subject is bound to hazard all he has,
and undergo whatsoever inconveniences and calamities can ensue thereupon,
rather than violate the Law with contempt of that Authority to which he owes
subjection.

But if it shall (after such comparison made) evidently (or but more probably
than the contrary) appear, That that preservation of such a persons Life,
Liberty, Estate, would more benefit the Church or Commonwealth, than the
punctual observation of the Law at that time, and with those circumstances,
would do; it were an unseasonable, unreasonable, and pernicious scrupulosity
for such a person to think himself in such a case obliged for the observing of
the Law (perhaps but once or twice) with little or no benefit to the Public,
to ruin himself, whereby to render himself unuseful and unserviceable to the
Public for ever hereafter.

To bring this Discourse home, and to apply it to the business now under
dispute. Suppose we ten, twenty, or One hundred godly Ministers, well affected
to the established Liturgy, and actually possessed of Benefices, with the
Charge of Souls thereto belonging, should, thinking themselves in Conscience
obliged to the use of the whole Form of the Book, as is by the Act appointed,
without any addition, omission, or alteration whatsoever (notwithstanding the
present conjuncture of Affairs) resolve to use the same accordingly, it would
be well considered what the effects and consequents thereof would be.

Besides other evils, these three are visible, which must all unavoidably
follow one upon another, if any body shall be found (as doubtless within short
time there will be found one or other) to inform and prosecute against them.

1. The utter undoing of so many worthy persons, fit to do God and his Church
good service, together with all those persons that depend upon them for their
livelihood, by putting the fruits of their Benefices, wherewith they should buy
themselves bread, under Sequestration.

2. The depriving of those persons of the opportunity of discharging the duties
that belong unto them in their Ministerial Calling, in not permitting them,
after such Sequestration, to teach or instruct the people belonging to their
Charge, or to exercise any thing of their Function publicly in the Church.

3. The delivering over the Sheep of Christ, that lately were under the hands
of the faithful Shepherds, into the Custody of ravenous Wolves, when such
Guides shall be set over the several Congregations, as will be sure to
mis-teach them one way or other (viz.) either by instilling into them
Puritanical and Superstitious Principles, that they may the more securely
exercise their Presbyterian Tyranny over their Judgments, Consciences, Persons,
and Estates, or else by setting up new Lights before them, to lead them into a
maze of Anabaptistical confusion and frenzy.

These consequents are so heavy to the Sufferers, so certain to ensue upon the
use of Common Prayer, and so much without the power of the Lawgivers (in this
state of Affairs) either to prevent or remedy, that it is beyond the wit of man
what benefit to the Public can accrue by the strict observation of the Act,
that may in any proportion countervail these mischiefs. In which case, that man
must needs suppose a strange austerity in the Lawgiver, that dares not presume
of his consent to disoblige him (for the time) from observing the same. It
would be also well considered, Whether he that by his own over-nice
scrupulosity runs all these hazards, be not (in some measure) guilty of his own
undoing, of deserting his station, and of betraying his flock, and do not
thereby lose much of that comfort which a Christian Confessor may take in his
sufferings, when they are laid upon him by the Hand of God, and not pulled upon
himself by his own hands. And more I shall not need to say as to that first
Objection.

Object. 2. Scandal.
The next thing objected is, The danger of the Scandal that others might be
ready to take at the Example, who seeing the Law so little regarded by such men
(men that have Cure of Souls, and perhaps also of some eminency and esteem in
the Church, and whose Example will be much looked upon) will be easily
encouraged by this Example to set light by all Authority, and to take the
liberty to obey and disobey the Laws of their Sovereign at their pleasure.



But this Objection, after we are once satisfied concerning the former, need
not much trouble us. For,

1. It seems an unreasonable thing in cases of great Exigence (such as we now
suppose) that the fear of scandalizing our weak Brethren (which is but Debitum
charitatis only) should lay upon us a peremptory necessity of observing the Law
punctually, whatsoever inconveniences and mischiefs may ensue thereupon: when
the duty of Obedience to our known Governors (which is Debitum justitiae also,
and therefore more Obligatory than the other) does not impose that necessity
upon us; as has been already shown.

2. Besides, Arguments drawn from Scandal in things neither unlawful nor
(setting the reason of Scandal aside) inexpedient, as they are subject to
sundry frailties otherwise, so they are manifestly of no weight at all, when
they are counterpois'd with the apparent danger of evil consequents on the
other side. For in such cases there is commonly equal danger (if not rather
something more) of Scandal to be taken from the Example the quite contrary way.
We may see it in debating the point now in hand: It is alleged on the one
side, That by laying aside the use of the Common Prayer, men that are over
scrupulous will be encouraged to take a greater liberty in dispensing with the
Laws (to the despising both of Laws and Governors) than they ought. And why
may it not, by the same reason, be as well alleged on the other side, That by
holding up a necessity of using the Common Prayer, men that have tender
Consciences may be induced to entertain scruples (to their utter undoing, and
to the destruction of their people) when they need not?

3. But that in the third place, which comes up home to the business, and
takes off the Objection clearly, is this, That in judging Cases of Scandal, we
are not so much to look to the event, what it is, or may be, as to the cause,
whence it comes. For sometimes there is given just cause of Scandal; and yet
no Scandal follows, because it is not taken: Sometimes scandal is taken, and
yet no just cause given: and sometimes there is both cause of Scandal given,
and Scandal taken thereat. But no man is concerned at any Scandal that
happens to another by occasion of any thing done by him, neither is
chargeable with it farther than he is guilty of having given it. If then we
give Scandal to others, and they take it not, the whole guilt is ours, and they
are faultless. If we give it, and they take it, we are to bear a share in the
blame as they, and that a deep share; (Vae homini, Woe to the man by whom the
offense comes, Matthew. 18. 7.) But if they take offense when we give none, it
is a thing we cannot help, and therefore the whole blame must lie upon them.

Wherefore, if at any time any doubt shall arise in that Case of Scandal, How
far forth the danger thereof may oblige us to the doing or not doing of any
thing proposed; The Resolution will come on much the easier, if we shall but
rightly understand what it is to give Scandal, or how many ways a man may
become guilty of scandalizing another by his Example.

The ways (as I conceive) are but these four.

1. When a man does something before another, which is in it self evil,
unlawful, and sinful. In which case, neither the intention of him that does it,
nor the event as to him that sees it done, is of any consideration: For it
matters not whether the doer has an intention to draw the other into sin, or
not; the very matter and substance of the action being evil, and done before
others, is sufficient to render the doer guilty of having given Scandal, though
neither he had intention himself so to do, nor was any other person actually
scandalized thereby: because whatsoever is in its own nature evil, is of it
self, and in its own nature scandalous, and of ill Example.

Thus did Hophni and Phineas* the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 17. 22.
give Scandal by their wretched profaneness and greediness about the
Sacrifices of the Lord, and their shameless abusing the Women. And so did David
also give great Scandal in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 12. 14. Here the Rule
is, Do nothing that is evil, for fear of giving Scandal.

2. The second way is, when a man does something before another with a direct
intention and formal purpose of drawing him thereby to commit sin. In which
case neither the matter of the action, nor the event is of any consideration:
For it makes no difference as to the sin of giving Scandal, whether any man be
effectually enticed to commit sin or not thereby; neither does it make any
difference, whether the thing done were in it self unlawful, or not, so as it
had an appearance of evil, and from thence an aptitude to draw another by the
doing of that (by imitation) which should be really and intrinsecally evil. The
wicked intention alone (whatsoever the effect should be, or what means soever
should be used to promote it) suffices to induce the guilt of giving Scandal
upon the doer. This was Ierohoam's sin, in setting up the Calves, with a formal
purpose and intention thereby (for his own secular and ambitious ends) to
corrupt the purity of Religion, and to draw the people unto Idolatrous Worship.
For which cause he is so often stigmatized with it, as a note of Infamy, to
stick by him whilst the World lasts, being scarce ever mentioned in the
Scripture, but with this addition, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel
to sin. Here the Rule is, Do nothing, good or evil, with an intention to give
Scandal.

3. The third way is when a man does something before another, which in it self
is not evil, but indifferent, and so according to the Rule of Christian
Liberty, lawful for him to do, or not to do, as he shall see cause (yea, and
perhaps otherwise commodious and convenient for him to do) yet whereas he
probably foreseeth that others will take Scandal, and be occasioned thereby to
do evil. In such a case, if the thing to be done be not in some degree
prudentially necessary for him to do, but that he might, without very great
inconvenience or prejudice to himself or any third person, leave it undone: He
is bound in Charity to his Brother's Soul (for whom Christ died) and for the
avoiding of Scandal, to abridge himself in the exercise of his Christian
Liberty for that time, so far as rather to suffer some inconvenience himself by
the not doing of it, than by the doing of it to cause his Brother to offend.
The very Case which is so often, so largely, and so earnestly insisted upon by
St. Paul. See Romans 14. 13, 21. Romans 15. 1, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 7, 13. 1 Cor. 9. 12,
15, 19, 22. 1 Cor. 10. 23. 33. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that may be
reasonably forborne, whereat Scandal will be taken.

4. The last way is, when a man does something before another, which is not only
lawful, but (according to the exigencies of present Circumstances) pro hic and
nunc very behoofful, and even prudentially necessary for him to do, but
foreseeth that the other will be like to make an ill use of it, and take
encouragement thereby to commit sin, if he be not withal careful, as much as
possibly in him lies, to prevent the Scandal that may be taken thereat: For,
Qui non prohibet peccare, cum potest, jubet. In such case the bare neglect of
his Brother, and not using his utmost endeavor to prevent the evil that might
ensue, makes him guilty. Upon which consideration stands the Equity of the
Judicial Law given to the Jews, which ordered, Exodus 21. 33, 34.
That in case a man dig a Pit for the use of his Family, and looking no farther
than his own convenience, put no cover upon it, and leave it open, whereby it
happens his Neighbors Beast to fall thereinto and perish, the owner of the Pit
is to make it good, inasmuch as he was the occasioner of that loss to his
Neighbor, which he might and ought to have prevented. Here the Rule is Order
the doing of that, which may not be well left undone, in such sort that no
Scandal (so far as you can help it) may be taken thereat.

To apply this. The thing under debate, viz. the Action proposed to present
enquiry is, The laying aside the Common Prayer, being enjoined by Law, and
using instead thereof some other Form of Church Service of our own devising.
And the Enquiry concerning it is, Whether it may be done with a good Conscience
in regard of the Scandal that is given, or at least may be taken thereat, Yea
or No?

Now forasmuch as in this Enquiry we take it for granted, That the thing to be
done is not in its own nature simply evil, but rather in this state of affairs
prudentially necessary; and that they who make scruple at it upon the point of
Scandal, have not the least intention of drawing other of the Laws into
contempt, or their Brethren into sin by their Example. It is manifest that
three of the now mentioned Cases, with the Rules to each of them appending, are
not pertinent to the present Enquiry. But since the last of the four only
proves to be our Case, we have therefore no more to do for the settling of our
Judgments, and quieting of our Consciences, and the regulating of our Practice
in this Affair, than to consider well what the Rule in this Case given obliges
us unto; which is not to leave the Action undone for the danger of Scandal,
which (besides the Inconveniences formerly mentioned) would but start new
Questions, and those beget more to the multiplying unnecessary Scruples in
infinitum: But to order the doing of it so, that (if it were possible) no
Scandal at all might ensue thereupon, or at least wise not by our default,
through our careless or undiscreet managery thereof. Even as the Jew that stood
in need to sink a Pit for the service of his House or Ground, was not (for fear
his Neighbors Beast should fall into it, and be drowned) bound by the Law to
forbear the making of it, but only to provide a sufficient cover for it, where
he had made it. The thing then in this Case is not to be left undone, when it
so much behooves us to do it; but the Action to be carried on (for the manner
of doing, and in all respects and circumstances thereunto belonging) with so
much chariness and tenderness, moderation and wisdom (to our best
understanding) that the necessity of our so doing, with the true cause thereof,
may appear to the World, to the satisfaction of those that are willing to take
notice of it; and that such persons as would be willing to make use of our
Ensample to do the same thing, where there is not the same necessity, may do it
upon their own score, and not be able to vouch our practice for their excuse;
which how it may be best done for particular directions, every charitable and
conscientious man must ask his own discretion. Some general helps thereunto I
shall lay down in answering the next Objection, where they would fall in again
not improperly, and so stop two Gaps with one Bush.

Object. 3. Schism.
The last Objection is that of Shism. The Objectors hold all such persons as
have opposed either Liturgy or Church Government, as they were by Law
established within this Realm, for no better than Schismatics; and truly I
shall not much gainsay it. But then they argue, That for them to do the same
thing in the public worship of God that Schismatics do (and for doing whereof
especially it is that they avow them Schismatics) would (as they conceive)
involve them in the Schism also, as partakers thereof in some degree with the
other: And their Consciences also would, from Romans 14. 22. condemn them either
of hypocrisy, in allowing that in themselves, and in their own practice, which
they condemn in others; or of uncharitableness, in judging others as
Schismatics for doing but the same thing which they can allow themselves to
practice. For all that such persons, as they call Schismatics, do in this
matter of the Church Service, is but to leave out the Churches Prayers, and to
put in their own. Or say, this should not make them really guilty of the Schism
they so much detest, yet would such their symbolizing with them seem at least a
kind of unworthy compliance with them, more than could well become the
simplicity of a Christian, much less of a Minister of the Gospel, whose duty it
is to shun even the least appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Besides, that by so doing they should but confirm such men in their
Schismatical Principles and Practice.



This Objection has 3 Branches. To the first whereof I oppose the old saying,
Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem; which, although spoken quite to another
purpose, yet is very capable of such a sense which will very well fit our
present purpose also.

I Answer therefore in short. To do the same thing that Schismatics do
(especially in times of Confusion, and till things can be reduced unto better
Order, and when men are necessitated thereunto to prevent greater mischiefs)
does not necessarily infer a partaking with them in Schism, no, nor so much as
probably, unless it may appear upon probable presumption otherwise, that it is
done out of the same Schismatical Spirit, and upon such Schismatical Principles
as theirs are.

The other two Branches (viz. That of seeming compliance with Schismatics, and
That of the ill use they make of it to confirm them in their Schism) do upon
the matter fall in upon the aforesaid point of Scandal, and are in effect but
the same Objection, only put into a new dress, and so have received their
Answer already. And the only remedy against both these Fears (as well that of
Scandal, as this of Schism) is the same which was there prescribed, Even to
give assurance to all men, by our carriage and behavior therein, that we do
not lay aside Common Prayer of our own accord, or out of any dislike thereof,
neither in contempt of our rightful Governors, or of the Laws, nor out of any
base compliance with the Times, or unworthy Secular own ends, nor out of any
Schismatical principles, seditious designs, or innovating humor; but merely
enforced thereunto by such a necessity, as we cannot otherwise avoid in order
to the Glory of God, and the Public Good, for the preservation of our
Families, our Flocks, and our Functions: And that with the good leave and
allowance (as we have great reason to believe) of such as have power to
dispense with us and the Laws in that behalf.

This if we shall do bona fide, and with our utmost endeavors, in singleness
of heart, and with godly discretion, perhaps it will not be enough to prevail
with either the censure of inconsiderate and inconsiderable persons, or the ill
use that may be made of our Example, through the ignorance or negligence of
some (scandalum pusillorum) or through the perverseness and malice of others
(scandalum pharisaeorum) as the Schools term them: But assuredly it will be
sufficient in the sight of God, and the witness of our own hearts, and to the
Consciences of charitable and considering men, to acquit us clear of all guilt,
either of Scandal or Schism in the least d^gree. Which we may probably do by
observing these ensuing, or such other like general Directions (The liberty of
using such meet accommodations, as the circumstances in particular Cases shall
require, evermore allowed and reserved). viz.

1. If we shall decline the company and society of known Schismatics, not
conversing frequently or familiarly with them, or more than the necessary
affairs of life, and the rules of Neighborhood and common civility will
require; especially not to give countenance unto their Church Assemblies, by
our presence among them, if we can avoid it.

2. If we shall retain, as well in common discourse, as in our Sermons and holy
Offices of the Church, the old Theological and Ecclesiastical terms and forms
of Speech, which have been generally received and used in the Churches of
Christ, which the people are well acquainted with, and are wholesome and
significant, and not follow our new Masters in that uncouth affected garb of
Speech, or Canting Language rather (if I may so call it) which they have of
late taken up, as the signal distinction and characteristical note of that,
which in that their new Language they call The Godly Party, or Communion of
Saints.

3. If in officiating we repeat not only the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, the ten
Commandments, and such other passages in the Common Prayer Book, as (being the
very words of Scripture) no man can except against; but so much of the old
Liturgy besides, in the very words and syllables of the Book, as we think the
Ministers of State in those parts wherein we live will suffer, and the
Auditory, before whom we officiate, will bear; since the Officers in all parts
of the Land are not alike strict, nor the people in all Parishes alike
disaffected in this respect.

4. If, where we must of necessity vary from the words, we yet follow the Order
of the Book in the main parts of the holy Offices, retaining the substance of
the Prayers, and embellishing those of our own making, which we substitute into
the place of those we leave out, with phrases and passages taken out of the
Book in other places.

5. If, where we cannot safely mention the Particulars mentioned in the Book
(as namely in praying for the King, the Queen, the Royal Progeny, and the
Bishops) we shall yet use in our Prayers some such general terms, and other
intimations devised for that purpose, as may sufficiently convey to the
understanding of the people what our intentions are therein, and yet not be
sufficient to fetch us within the compass of the Ordinance.

6. If we shall in our Sermons take occasion now and then, where it may be
pertinent, either to discover the weakness of the Puritan Principles and Tenets
to the people; or to show out of some passages and expressions in the Common
Prayer, the consonancy of those Observations we have raised from the Text, with
the Judgment of the Church of England: or to justify such particular passages
in the Letany, Collects, and other parts of our Liturgy as have been unjustly
quarell'd at by Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, or other (by what
Name or Title soever they are called) Puritan Sectaries.

Thus have I freely acquainted you both with my practice and judgment in the
Point proposed in your Friend's Letter. How I shall be able to satisfy his or
your judgment in what I have written, I know not; however, I have satisfied
both your desire and his in writing, and shall rest Your Brother and Servant in
the Lord, Rob. Sanderson.


