Fourteen SERMONS Heretofore Preached. IIII. AD CLERVM. III. AD MAGISTRATVM.
VII. AD POPVLVM.
By ROBERT SANDERSON D.D. Sometimes Fellow of LINCOLN College in OXFORD and
Rector of Botheby Paynel Linc.

The Fourth Impression.

Qui amici poterant esse veritatis sine labor, ut peccent laborant.

Gregor. de cura pastorali. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for HENRY SEILE over
against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. Anno Dom. 1657.

THE PREFACE To the Reader.
HOW these Sermons will be looked upon (if at all looked upon) by the Men of
the Times, is no very hard matter to conjecture. I confess they are not
Alamode, nor fitted to the Palate of those men, who are resolved beforehand
(without tasting or trial) to nauseate, as unsavory and unwholesome,
whatsoever shall be tendered unto them from the hand of an Episcopal Divine.
And therefore the republishing of them in this state of Church Affairs, now the
things so much contended for in some of them, are worn out of date, and thrown
aside, will be deemed at least a very unseasonable undertaking: to as much
purpose (perhaps it will be said,) as if a man would this year reprint an
Almanac for the last. For the latter part of the Objection: at the peril be it
of those, that had the hardiness to adventure upon a new Edition. Mihi istic
nec seritur, nec metitur All I had to do in the business, was but the drudgery
of reviewing the old Copy, to correct the Errata of the former Impressions; and
of looking over the sheets as they were wrought off from the Press, and sent me
down, to note the oversights escaped in the printing, and to make the Index of
the Scripture-quotations. As to the other part of the Crime, such as it is, to
wit the unseasonableness of this after-publication; there need not much be
said. If the Sermons, thought not unseasonable in some former times, be now
become (...), as things brought forth into the world again, out of due time:
that cannot I help. They are the same they were, when they were first preached;
and the same they were, when they were last printed: and so am (...). Greg. Naz.
I. If either they or I, find worse entertainment now, then we did then; and
any blame be due for that: let not us bear it, who are guiltless; but the
Times. For it is They are changed: not We. Howsoever, (...): now they are
abroad, they must take their lot, as it falls out. Which be it better, be it
worse; this yet we shall gain thereby: that if any shall charge these Papers
with unseasonableness, (no very huge crime,) he shall ipso facto, by that very
act, and the verdict of his own conscience, fully discharge, and for ever
acquit them of the guilt of Time-serving; a crime, I trow, of a vaster
magnitude, and wherewith Discourses of this nature were wont to be so
frequently, (that I say not, unjustly) aspersed, whilst the Times looked more
favorably upon them.

. II. But of this enough. I expect to meet with far heavier Censures then
these, from the ungoverned spirits and tongues of the more zealous (that is to
say, if rightly interpreted, the more clamorous, and less knowing) among them.
Who knows not, that as empty vessels give the loudest sound, and shallow
brooks run with a fiercer current, and make a greater noise, then deeper Rivers
do: So they that are the least able to judge, are ever the most forward to pass
sentence; and when they so do, the most rigid and peremptory therein. But the
heaviest doom, I suppose, will proceed from those men, who being themselves of
late years fallen out, grievously fallen out (for what cause I know not) with
the Ancient Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies of the Church; are angry with
all those, that retain any good opinion of them. Whereunto yet themselves, when
time was, seemed to be, and if they dissembled not (which we are unwilling to
believe) were indeed, reasonably well affected. For they submitted to the
Government, used the Liturgy, and observed the Ceremonies appointed: according
to Law and Order; and their own professed approbation of the same, as well by
express words from their mouths, as by subscription under their hands, yet
remaining upon record What has wrought this change in them, (Evidence of
Reason, or worldly Interest,) and how far it has wrought upon them, (in
reality, or but in compliance;) and in what order too, (by immediate assault
upon their judgment, or by dealing underhand first with the affections:)
themselves do, or should best know. It highly concerns them, even as much as
the peace of their consciences is worth (and much more then so) to be well
assured that their hearts are upright in this affair. And in order thereunto,
not to content themselves with a slight and overly examination; (There is more
wickedness and deceitfulness in the hearts of all men, then most men are aware
of:) but to make the most diligent, district, and unpartial search possible,
into the true causes and motives of this change. And, for so much as Fears and
Hopes have been ever found the fittest and the readiest Engines to work such
feats;) to enquire particularly, what influence or operation, either the Fear
of losing what they had, or the Hope of getting more, might have in this work,
toward the producing of such an effect. It will best become others, to judge
as charitably, as they may: but doubtless it would be safest for them, to be
very jealous over themselves, lest so great a change could not have been
wrought in so short a space, without a strong infusion, either of the one, or
the other, or both, into the medicine that wrought it. Especially, since the
conjuncture of the time wherein this change happened, may very probably raise
some suspicion, that the Fear of the Sword might have; and the visible
advantage some have found thereby since, as probably, that the Hope of gain
had, some cooperation at least, with whatsoever was the principal Cause of this
so sudden a Metamorphosis. If nor so, nor so; but that they find themselves
clearly convinced in their judgments of their former Error, and that they are
fully persuaded they are now in a better way then that wherein they formerly
walked: it is happy for them, and I doubt not but they will find matter of
rejoicing in it, if they be not mistaken (a thing not impossible) in the trial
of their own hearts. Of the sincerity whereof, the likelyest way to give
satisfaction to the world, and to add some strengthening withal to their own
assurance, is; by showing compassion to those their Brethren, that cannot yet
tell how to recover themselves out of the snare of the same common Error, from
which they are so happily escaped. At leastwise so far, as not to despise them;
nor to pass their censures upon them, with so much freedom and severity as
some have done. If it be a fault, sure it is a very pardonable one; for a man
in the change of times, to remain unchanged in his mind and opinion, and to
hold to his former and (as he thinks) well-grounded Principles: so long as he
can neither apprehend any Reason of sufficient strength to convince his
understandings that he is in the wrong, or to manifest unto him the necessity
of making such a change; nor is able with the best wit he has, to discern any
thing so lovely in the effects and consequents of such change since it was
made, as might win over his affections to any tolerable liking thereof upon the
Post-fact.

. III. To return where I was going, and from whence I have not much digressed;
if any shall now ask me, what those heavy Censures are which I said we should
be like to meet withal, I confess I am not able to give him any certain
account thereof: not knowing before hand what reasons or expressions the
spirits of particular men will suggest to their tongues or pens. Only by what
has been usually said by one sort of men upon such like occasions heretofore,
(more sparingly and in the ear in former times, but of late more frequently,
freely and on the house tops:) it may be probably guessed what kind of Censures
are to be expected from those of the same party now. Yet for that I am not
conscious to my self to have said any thing in the Papers now, or at any time
heretofore (with my allowance) published, that may give just offense to, or
merit the hard censure of, any sober dispassionate man; and that, if yet I must
fall under some miscensures, it is not my case alone, but of many others also
wrapped with me in the same common guilt: I shall therefore reduce my discourse
herein ab hypothesi ad thesin: and propose the Objections, with my Answers
thereunto (though with some reflection upon my self in most of the particulars,
yet) as laid against the generality of those men's Sermons, writings, and other
discourses, who (according to the new style of late years taken up among us) go
under the name of the Prelatical party, or Episcopal Divines.

. IIII. The Objections are. 1. That in their ordinary they take any small
occasion; but when they preach at the Visitations, where most of the Clergy of
the voisinage are convened, set themselves purposely in their whole discourse
to let fly at their Godly Brethren, who out of tenderness of Conscience dare
not submit to some things endeavored to be imposed upon them by the Prelates.
The poor Puritan is sure to be paid home: he must be brought under the lash,
and exposed to contempt and scorn at every public meeting: the Papists,
professed Enemies of our Church and Religion, escaping in the mean while
Scot-free, seldom or never meddled Sermons. II. Or if sometimes some little
matter be done that way by some of them; it is so little, that it is to as
little purpose: rather for fashions sake, ad faciendum Populum and to avoid
suspicion, then for any ill will they bear them. Perhaps give them a light
touch by the way; a gentle rub as they pass along, that shall do them no harm:
but their Brethren, that profess the same Protestant Religion with them, they
handle with a rougher hand. With Elder-guns and Paper-pellets they shoot at
those: but against these they play with Canon-bullet. III. And all this anger
but for Ceremonies: Trifles even in their own esteem, who plead hardest for
them. If they be indeed such indifferent things, as they confess them to be,
and would have the world believe they make no other account of them: Why do
they dote on them so extremely themselves? Why do they press them upon others
with so much importunity? Why do they quarrel with their brethren eternally
about them? IIII. The truth is, both We and They judge Indifferent things. They
think them necessary, what ever they pretend: or else they would not lay so
much weight upon them. And we hold them Popish, Antichristian, and
Superstitious: or else we would not so stiffly refuse them. V. It is not
therefore without cause, that we suspect the Authors of such Sermons and
Treatises, as have come abroad in the defense of such trash, to be
Popishly-affected: or at least to have been set on by some Popish Bishops or
Chancellors, (though perhaps without any such intention in themselves:) on
purpose to promote the Papal interest here, and to bring back the people of
this nation by degrees, if not into the heart and within the walls of Babylon,
yet at leastwise into the confines, and within the view of it. VI. Which, as it
appears otherwise, to wit, by their great willingness to allow such
qualifications to sundry Doctrines taught in the Church of Rome, and such
interpretations to sundry taught in our Church, as may bring them to the
nearest agreement; and their great endeavors to find out such Expedients, as
might best bring on a perfect reconciliation between the two Churches. VII. So
particularly, in pressing with so much vehemence the observance of these Popish
and Superstitious for which we cannot find, nor do they offer to produce, any
either Command or Example in holy Scripture, to warrant to our Consciences the
use thereof. VIII. Which, what is it else the sufficiency of the Scripture, to
be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners? Which being one of the main bulwarks of
the Protestant Religion, as it is differenced from the Roman, is by these men
and by this means undermined and betrayed.

. V. This is the sum and substance of the usual Censures and Objections of
our Anti-Ceremonian Brethren, so far as I have observed from their own speeches
and writings: which I have therefore set down as near, as in so few words I
could, to their sense, and, for the most part, in their own expressions. Much
of which having (as I conceive) received its answer beforehand in some passage
or other of the ensuing Sermons, might supersede me the labor of adding any
more now. Yet for so much as these answers lie dispersedly, and not in one
view: I held it convenient, as I have produced the Objections all together; so
to offer to the Readers an Answer to them all together, and that in the same
order, as I have given them in Begging at his hands but this one (very
reasonable) favor, that he would do both himself and me so much right, as not
to pass his censure too hastily and too severely upon any part of what is now
presented to his view, (whether he like it, or dislike it;) till he has had
the patience to read over the whole, and allowed himself the freedom rightly
and without prejudice to consider of it.

. VI. That which is said in the first place of their Godliness and Tenderness
of Conscience, is not much to First, besides that all parties pretend to
Godliness; Papists, Anabaptists, and who not (even the late-sprung-up
generation of Levellers, whose Principles are so destructive of all that Order
and Justice by which public societies are supported, do yet style themselves,
as by a kind of peculiarity, The Godly;) And that secondly, it is the easyest
thing in the world, and nothing more common then, for men to pretend
Conscience, when they are not minded to obey: I do not believe thirdly, (though
I am well persuaded of the godliness the refusal of indifferent Ceremonies
enjoined by Lawful Authority, is any part of their Godliness; or any good
fruit, evidence, or sign thereof. But certain it is fourthly, that the
godliest men are men, and know but in part; and by the power of godliness in
their hearts, are no more secured from the possibility of falling into Error
through Ignorance, then from the possibility of falling into Sin through
Infirmity. And as for Tenderness of Conscience fifthly, a most gracious blessed
fruit of the holy Spirit of God, where it is really, and not in pretense only,
nor mistaken, (for sure it is ^o very tender Conscience, though sometimes
called so, that straineth at a Gnat, and swalloweth a Camel:) it is with it, as
with other tender things; very subject to receive harm, and soon put out of
order. Through the cunning of Satan, it dangerously exposes men to temptations
on the right hand: and through its own aptitude to entertain and to cherish
unnecessary scruples, it strongly disposes them to listen thereunto so long,
till at the last they are overcome thereof. Needful it is therefore, that in
the public teaching the Errors should be sometimes refuted, and the
Temptations discovered. And this ever to be done; seasonably, soberly,
discreetly, and convincingly; and when we are to deal with men whose
Consciences are (so far as we can discern) truly tender, with the spirit of
Meekness and Compassion. For tender things must be tenderly dealt withal: or
they are lost. I know it is not always so done: nor can we expect it should.
All Preachers are neither so charitable, nor so prudent, nor so conscientious,
as they should be: And they that are such in a good measure, are men still; and
may be (...). Arist. 1. Elench. 15.
transported now and then through passion, and infirmity, beyond the just
bounds of moderation. But then, the fault is not so much in the choice of the
argument they treat of, as in the ill-managing thereof: which ought not to cast
any prejudice upon others, who deal in the same argument, but after another
manner.

. VII. But that which pincheth most in this first particular, is (as I suppose,
this: That upon all public occasions, especially in Visitation-Sermons, they
who agree with us in the substance of the same reformed Religion, are for the
most part the only mark shot at; whilst the common enemy, the Papist, has
little or nothing said against him. For answer hereunto. First, so far as
concerns the Sermons here published, the Objection is void* for therein the
Papist has the Text gave occasion, or the file of my discourse led me
thereunto: as by the papers themselves (whereunto reference to be had) will
evidently appear. Secondly, admitting all true that is alleged: either we are
excusable, in what they blame us for; or they that blame us inexcusable, who do
the very same things. Do not they usually in their Sermons fall bitterly upon
the Papists and Arminians? but seldom meddle with the Socinians? scarce ever
name the Turks? I have been often told, of their declamations against the
observing of Christmas, that great superstitious thing: but I remember not to
have heard of much spoken against Perjury and Sacrilege, and some other sins,
wherewith our times abound. Nay, does not their zeal even against Popery it
self ( Popery I mean, truly so called) of late years, and since most of the
Pulpits are in their possession, seem to abate; at leastwise in comparison of
the zeal they show against Episcopacy, and against the Liturgy, Festivals and
Ceremonies lately in use among us? These they cry down with all the noise they
can, and with all the strength they have; having first branded them with the
name of Popery: and this must now pass for preaching against Popery. I demand
then. Is there not the like reason of reproving Sins, and refuting Errors? If
so: are not Perjury and Sacrilege as great sins (at least) as keeping
Christmas holy day? Howsoever, are not the Errors of the Turks, that deny the
whole structure of the Christian Religion, (foundation and all,) far worse then
the Errors of the Papists, who by their additional superstructures have only
altered the fabric, but keep the foundation still? And are not the Errors of
the Socinians, who deny the Trinity, Gods Omniscience, the Eternity of the Son,
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, Original sin, the calling of Ministers, and far
worse then those the Arminians are charged withal, of Free Will, Universal
Redemption, Falling from Grace, etc. And are not the old rotten points of
Popery ( the Popes Ecumenical* Pastorship and Infallibility, the Scriptures
unsufficiency, Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation,
Half-Communion, etc.) Errors of as great a magnitude, as those other points of
Popery (lately and falsely dubbed such) of Episcopacy, Liturgy, Festivals, and
Ceremonies? If they be: why do our Brethren preach oftener, and inveigh more,
against these later and lesser in comparison, then against those former and
greater sins and Errors? I doubt not, but they have some Reasons wherewith to
satisfy themselves for their so doing: else they were much to blame. Be those
Reasons what they will: if they will serve to excuse them, they will serve as
well to justify us.

. VIII. It will be said perhaps; First, That the Turks have no Communion with
us: They are out of; and our chiefest care should be for those within, leaving
those without for God to judge. Or indeed Secondly, To what purpose would it be
to address our speeches to them some thousands of miles voices were as loud as
Stentors, or that of Mars in Homer, the sound would not reach them. Besides
that Thirdly, There is little danger in our people of receiving hurt or
infection from agents here to tamper with the people in that behalf, no such
artifices and plausible pretensions whereby to work them over to their side, no
such advantages as the agreement in some Common Principles might afford for
bringing on the rest; as the Papists have. Who being within the pale of the
visible Catholic Church, and living in the midst of us, have their instruments
ready at hand in every corner to gain Proselytes for Rome; the specious
pretenses of Antiquity, Universality, Consent of Councels and Fathers, etc.
Wherewith to dazzle the eyes of weak and credulous persons; and some ground also
to work upon in the agreement that is between them and us in the principal
Articles of the Christian Faith.

. IX. These Reasons I confess are satisfactory, as to the Comparison between
Turks and Papists: and may be applied to the other Instance also in their
proportion, so far as the Application will hold truth. And all this is
agreeable, both to the Apostles discourse Cor. 5.9 -- 13; and to the advises of
prudent Statists, who forbear to advance against a potent Enemy abroad, till
they have composed smaller quarrels and mutinies at home; and To the Example
also of

. 10. This is the most, I think, they have to say for themselves: and, upon
supposal that all the particulars in the aforementioned Instances were indeed
such Sins and Errors, as they either take or mistake them for; it must be
admitted a very reasonable and sufficient plea. Only we require (which is but
equal,) that they mete unto us back again with the same measure; and allow us
the benefit of the same plea (mutatis mutandis,) so far as our Case is the same
with theirs. Let them but this do: and the Objection will vanish. First, we
nothing doubt but that the Papists (by being baptized into the Faith of
Christ;) are in a far better condition otherwise; as we are sure they stand in
a nearer relation to us thereby, then Turks and Pagans do. Yet, as to external
Communion in the public Worship; by refusing to assemble with us, (which is
not our fault,) they are as very strangers to us, as the very Turks are: and in
that respect to be looked upon as (...), those that are without. And therefore
we deemed it more expedient, and a more brotherly act, to endeavor the
reducing of our Brethren that held communion with us to their just obedience,
by discovering to their faces (being personally present) those their Errors,
that obstructed it; then to beat the air to little purpose, in declaiming
against those that did not hear us, and we were sure would little regard us.
For Secondly, were it not for the confirming of Protestant hearers in their
present belief of the Truth, against such as will attempt to draw them from us:
it would be a very impertinent thing to insist much upon the discovery of
Popish Errors in our Churches; whither they that should reap most benefit by
such discovery never come. They live among us indeed, which the Turks do not:
but since they come not where they may hear us; it is all one to us, in respect
of our Sermons, as if they lived as far from us as the Turks do. But at such
times as the Clergy are met together (which is chiefly done at the Visitations)
when most of them who are most concerned, both for their own sakes and the
peoples that depend upon them, to have a right judgment concerning the Nature
and Use of Indifferent things, are present: it seems to be very proper, and
(by the blessing of God) may conduce very much to the edification of his people
in Truth, Peace, and Godliness; that the just power of those that have
authority in the Church for making Ecclesiastical Constitutions should be
asserted, and the necessity of yielding obedience thereunto when they are made,
by all under such authority should be pressed. This is the very truth of the
whole business. And what is there in all this, to deserve such outcryes? What
is there, if men would but soberly consider it, that is not every way agreeable
to the dictates both of Christian Prudence and Charity? Thirdly, the
Objection,) we think it more needful, seasonable, and expedient, upon such
opportunities, to clear these points in difference betwixt us and our Brethren
at home, then to handle any of the controversies in debate betwixt us and those
of Rome. Both because the people are in more danger of being mis^led by these,
then of being seduced by Papists; and because the Papists make a great
advantage (indeed the greatest, and in a manner the whole advantage they have
against us) of these home-differences. For although the Emissaries of Rome have
long used all the art and diligence possible, to advance the Roman Interest
among us: yet the people of England are so generally pre-possessed with a
detestation of that Religion (as the people of Spain, France, and Italy are of
ours;) that were it not for the advantage they make of the excesses of some
troublesome spirits among our selves; they could not have expected to have
reaped so plentiful a harvest here, as of late years they have done. But our
Brethren, having by their much preaching and inveighing against the Papists,
wrought our common people to such a prejudice against her doctrines, that many
of them know no other Rule whereby to judge of the soundness of men's Religion,
then by the greater or lesser distance it has from Popery; have thereby
withal gained that high esteem of their soundness in Religion above others in
the hearts of many of our people (led, as most are, by opinion more then true
judgment;) that it is a very easy matter for them to draw multitudes after
them into a dislike of any thing, wherein they shall think good to fasten the
imputation of being Popish. For preventing whereof, if we do our best endeavor
upon all good occasions to undeceive, them first, and by them the people; by
letting them see, (if they will but open their eyes,) how unsound the
principles are they go upon, and how unsafe the practices those principles lead
unto: Who can justly blame us for so doing?

. XI. To the substance of the Second Objection, (if I may with their leave and
without their offense, pass by that quaint minute piece of wit, of
Paper-pellets and Canon-bullets;) I shall need make no farther answer, then
what has already been given to the First. Only I shall ex abundanti add two
things: the one, concerning my self; the other, to the Objectors. For my self;
if I be not much mistaken, I have been so offending in the kind objected, that
I may seem rather to have offended too much on the other hand. The substance of
the matter both against Papists and others, is I hope all along justifiable.
And then, if some sharper expressions both against them and others have here
and there slipped from my tongue or pen, (such as heat and indignation in our
greener years are apt to suggest;) they that are ingenuous, considering how
long it is since those Sermons were preached, may be pleased to pardon it, upon
the old plea Dandum aliquid aetati. As for them; that they preach against
Popery, I not at all mislike: Only I could wish, that these two Cautions were
better observed, then (as far as I can make conjecture of the rest, by the
proportion of what has come to my knowledge) I fear they usually are, by the
more zealous of that party. viz. 1. That they do not through ignorance,
prejudice, or precipitancy call that Popery, which is not; and then under that
name and notion preach against it. 2. That they would do it with the less
noise, and more weight. It is not a business merely of the Lungs but requires
Sinews too. Or (to use their own metaphor) let them not think that casting of
squibs will do the deed, or charging with powder alone: that will give a crack
indeed, and raise a smoke; but unless they have bullet as well as powder, it
will do little execution.

. XII. To the Third Objection. I say first; That Ceremonies, then as of
indifferent things: yet we do not count them Trifles; otherwise then as in
comparison with necessary duties. But let Ceremonies (secondly) be as very
Trifles, as any man can imagine them to be; yet Obedience sure is no Trifle.
They mis-state the Question, when they talk of pressing Ceremonies. It is
Obedience (formally) that is required: Ceremonies not otherwise pressed, then
as the matter wherein that Obedience is to be exercised. If a Master appoint
his servant to do some small matter that he thinks fit to have done, though
in it self of no great moment; yet he will expect to be obeyed: and it is
great reason he should. If in such case the servant should refuse to do the
thing appointed, because he has no mind thereunto, and should receive a check
or correction for such refusal: could he either sufficiently excuse his own
fault, or reasonably complain of his Master for dealing hardly with him, by
saying the thing was but a Trifle? Is it not evident, that the thing which made
the Master angry, and the Servant an offender in that Case, was not ( precisely
and formally) the leaving of the thing undone, (which had it not been
commanded, might have been left undone without any fault or blame at all;) but
the refusing to do it, when he that had a right to his service commanded him?
Wherefore Thirdly, that which is said of some men's doting so extremely
Ceremonies, might have been well enough spared. I know no true son of the
Church of England, that doteth upon any Ceremony, whatsoever opinion he may
have of the decency or expediency of some of them. If any do; le^ him answer
for himself. Among wise men, he will hardly pass for a wise man, that doteth
upon any. Nor will he, I doubt, prove a much wiser man, that runns into the
contrary extreme, and abhors all. It is true Fourthly, that there have been
long and unkind quarrels about these the pity! but where is the fault? To whom
is the beginning, and to whom the continuance of a quarrel rather imputable? to
him, that demands his right? or to him that withholds it from him? For
this is the plain Case in short: The Bishops (under the King) require obedience
to the Laws Ecclesiastical; these men refuse to give it. So began the quarrel
at first: and upon the same terms it continued. If the Obedience challenged
were indeed due to those Laws; then did our Brethren both begin the quarrel,
and hold it on: if it were not, then must the whole blame lie upon those that
claimed it unjustly, and not upon them. So that in the winding up of the
business, the whole Controversy will devolve upon this point; Whether to the
laws Ecclesiastical obedience be due or not? For the right determining
whereof, (for so much as it is confessed on all ^ands, that Obedience is due to
Lawful authority commanding lawful things) two other points are to be resolved
the one, concerning the authority by which the Constitutions were made; the
other, concerning the lawfulness of the things therein required; The
Presbyterians of the Kirk flatly and directly deny both: Ours, less forward to
declare their opinion in the former point, have chosen rather to stand upon the
later only. And so the point in issue is briefly this; Whether the things
commanded (and particularly the Ceremonies) be lawful, yea, or no. Which
brings us to the consideration of

. XIII. The Fourth Objection. Wherein (besides some ill-language, which I love
not to stir into,) they declare, First, what they conceive to be our Opinion,
and next what is indeed their Own concerning the Ceremonies etc. in question.
In the former; we desire that candor which in all reason and charity they ought
to afford us: that they would fix nothing upon us as our opinion, which our
selves (who should best know what our own opinion is) protest against, as not
our opinion They have been told a thousand times over, in the Sermons and
writings of private men, which is also attested and affirmed by the public
declaration of our Church (the most authentic assurance a question of this
nature is capable of:) That we Necessity at all in these things but hold them
to be merely indifferent. That, when for decency, or uniformity's sake, any
Constitutions are made concerning them; there is the same necessity of obeying
such Constitutions, as there is of obeying other Laws made for the good of the
Commonwealth concerning any other indifferent things. That such Necessity, the
authority of the immediate Lawgiver. but from the Ordinance of God, who has
commanded us to obey the ordinances of men for his sake. That such necessity of
Obedience notwithstanding, the remain in the same indifferency, as before.
Every way in respect of their Nature; and quoad Rem, (it being not in the power
of accidental relations to change the natures of things:) and even in respect
of their Use, and quoad nos thus far, that there is a liberty left for men,
upon extraordinary and other just occasions* sometimes to do otherwise then the
Constitution requires, extra casum Scandali and Contemptus. A liberty, which
we dare not either take our selves, or allow to others, in things properly and
absolutely necessary. [Upon which very account (I mean the consideration of the
indifferency of the things in themselves) and upon which account alone it is,
that many of the Episcopal (that is to say, the true English Protestant)
Divines; who sadly resent the voting down of the Liturgy, Festivals, and
Ceremonies of the Church by so many former Laws established; heartily desired
heretofore the continuance, and as heartily still wish the restitution, and are
(by Gods help) ready with their Tongues, Pens and Sufferings to maintain and
justify the Lawful use of the same: do yet so far yield to the sway of the
times, and are persuaded they may with a good Conscience so do, as to forbear
the use thereof in the public worship; till it shall seem good to those that
are in place of authority either to restore them to their former state (as it
is well hoped, when they shall have duly considered the evil consequents of
that Vote, they will,) or at leastwise and in the mean time to leave them
arbitrary, for men, according to their several different judgments, to use or
not to use, which seems but reasonable, the like favor and liberty in other
kinds having been long allowed to almost all other sorts of men, though of
never so distant persuasions one from another:] Lastly, That all Laws made
concerning Ceremonies or other indifferent things, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, are mutable: and as they were at first made by humane
authority, so may they from time to time be by humane authority abrogated and
repealed. And then and thenceforth they lose their obligation: whereby the
necessity of yielding obedience thereunto wholly cease and determines; and
the things thereby commanded or prohibited return to their primitive and
natural indifferency, even in their Use also, and in respect of us. This is
clearly our Opinion: and men may easily so understand us, if they will.

. XIIII. But their Opinion is, that the things enjoined are Popish and
Superstitious; and consequently unlawful to be used: And this they render as
the reason of their nonconformity. And the Reason were certainly good, if the
Opinion were true. For the Popishness first: unless we should sue out a writ
definibus regundis, Omnia periclitabuntur aliter accipi quam sunt, si aliter
quam sunt cognominantur. Tert. de carn. Christi. cap. 13.
it will be hard to find out a way how to bring this Controversy to an issue,
much less to an end: the term has been so strangely extended, and the limits
thereof (if yet it have any,) so uncertain. If they would be entreated to set
bounds to what they mean by Popish and Popery, by giving us a certain
definition of it: we should the sooner either come to some agreement; or at
least understand our selves, and one another the better, wherein and how far we
disagreed. In the mean time, it is to me a wonder, that if reason would not
heretofore, yet the sad experience of the ill consequents so visible of late
time should not have taught them all this while to consider, what infinite
advantage they give to the Romish party to work upon weak and wavering souls;
by damning so many things under the name of Popery, which may to their
understandings be sufficiently evidenced; Some, to have been used by the
ancient Christians long before Popery was hatched, or but in the egg; and All
to have nothing of Superstition or Popery in them, unless every thing that is
used in the Church of Rome become thereby Popish and Superstitious. Nor what
great advantage they give to our newer Sectaries, to extend the name yet
farther. Who, by the help of their New-Lights can discern Popery, not only in
the Ceremonies formerly under debate: but even in the Churches and Pulpits
wherein they used to preach against Popery, and the Bells wherewith they used
to call the people together to hear them. These are by some of them cried down
as Popish; with other things very many, which their Presbyterian brethren do
yet both allow, and practice: though how long they will so do, is uncertain,
if they go on with the work of Reformation they have begun, with as quick
dispatch, and at the rate they have done these last two seven years. The
having of Godfathers at baptism, Churching of women, Prayers at the burial of
the dead, children asking their Parents blessing, etc. which whilome were held
innocent; are now by very many thrown aside, as rags of Popery. Nay, are not
some gone so far already, as to cast into the same heap, not only the ancient
hymn Gloria Patri (for the repeating whereof alone some have been deprived of
all their livelyhoods) and the Apostles Creed: but even the use of the Lords
Prayer it self? -- And what will ye do in the end thereof? And what would you
have us do in the mean time, when you call hard upon us to leave Popery, and
yet would never do us the favor to let us know what it is? It were good
therefore, both for your own sakes, that you may not rove in infinitum; and in
compassion to us: that you would give us a perfect boundary of what is Popery
now; with some prognostication or Ephemerides annexed, (if you please,) whereby
to calculate what will be Popery seven years hence.

. XV. But to be serious, and not to indulge my self too much merriment in so
sad a business: I believe, all those men will be found much mistaken, who
either measure the Protestant Religion by an opposition to Popery; or account
all Popery, that is taught or practiced in the Church of Rome. Our godly
Forefathers, to whom (under God) we owe the purity of our Religion, and some
of which laid down their lives for the defense of the same, were sure of
another mind: if we may, from what they did, judge what they thought. They had
no purpose (nor had they any warrant) to set up a new Religion, but to reform
the Old: by purging it from those Innovations, which in tract of time (some
sooner, some later,) had mingled with it, and corrupted it, both in the
Doctrine and Worship. According to this purpose they produced, without
constraint or precipitancy, freely and advisedly, as in peaceable times; and
brought their intentions to a happy end: as by the result thereof, contained in
the Articles and Liturgy of our Church, and the Prefaces thereunto, does fully
appear. From hence chiefly, as I conceive, we are to take our best scantling,
whereby to judge what is, and what is not, to be esteemed Popery. All those
Doctrines then, held by the modern Church of Rome, which are either contrary to
the written word of God; or but super-added thereunto, as necessary points of
Faith to be of all Christians believed under pain of damnation: and all those
Superstitions used in the worship of God, which either are unlawful, as being
contrary to the Word; or being not contrary and therefore abritrary and
indifferent, are made Essentials, and imposed as necessary parts of Worship:
these are, as I take it, the things whereunto the name of Popery does properly
and peculiarly belong. But as for the Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome;
which the Church of England at the Reformation thought fit to retain; not as
Essential or necessary parts of Gods service, but only as accidental and
mutable circumstances attending the same for order, comeliness, and
edifications sake: how these should deserve the name of Popish I so little
understand, that I profess I do not yet see any reason why, if the Church had
then thought fit to have retained some other of those which were then laid
aside, she might not have lawfully so done; or why the things so retained
should have been accounted Popish. The plain truth is this; The Church of
England meant to make use of her liberty, and the lawful power she had (as all
the Churches of Christ have, or ought to have) of ordering Ecclesiastical
affairs here: yet to do it with so much prudence and moderation, that the world
might see, by what was laid aside that she acknowledged no subjection to the Sea of Rome; and by that was retained, that she did not recede from the Church
of Rome, out of any spirit of contradiction, but as necessitated thereunto for
the maintenance of her just liberty. The number of Ceremonies was also then
very great, and they thereby burdensome; and so the number thought fit to be
lessened. But for the Choice, which should be kept, and which not: that was
wholly in her power and at her discretion. Whereof, though she were not bound
so to do, yet has she given a clear and satisfactory account, in one of the
Prefaces usually prefixed before the Book of Common Prayer.

. XVI. Besides this of Popish, they have bestowed also upon the Ceremonies the
Epithet of Superstitious. Which is a word likewise (as the former,) of late
very much extended; and stands in need of a boundary too and a definition, as
well as it. But howsoever they do with the words, I must set bounds to my
discourse, lest I weary the Reader. The point of Superstition I have had
occasion to touch upon (more then once, as I remember) in some of these
Sermons; and proved that the Superstition lies indeed at their door, not ours.
They forbid the things commanded by the Church, under the Obligation of sin,
and that Ob^igation arising not from their forbidding them, but from the things
themselves, which they judge to be unlawful, and thence impose upon all men a
necessity of not using them: which is Superstition. Whereas the Church required
obedience indeed to her commands, and that also under the obligation of sin:
but that obligation arising not at all from the nature of the things themselves
(always held and declared Indifferent;) but immediately from the authority of
the Superior commanding the thing, and originally from the ordinance of God
commanding Obedience to Superiors, as already has been said: and this is not
Superstition. For further satisfaction therefore in this matter, referring the
Reader to the Sermons themselves; I shall only by way of addition represent to
the Objectors S. Paul's demeanor at Athens. Where finding the City (...). Act.
17.16.
full of Idols, (or wholly given to Idolatry) he does not yet fall foul upon
them, nor exclaim against them in any reproachful manner, no nor so much as
call them Idolaters; though they were such, and that in a very high degree: but
tempering his speeches with all lenity and condescension, he tells them only
of their Superstition; and that in the calmest manner too, -- 22.
(...) (the comparative degree in such kind of speaking being usually taken for
a diminnent term.) How distant are they from his Example, with whom every
thing they mislike is presently an Idol! Christmas day an Idol, the Surplice an
Idol, the Cross after Baptism a great Idol, the Common Prayer Book an
abominable Idol! When yet, if the worst that can be said against them were
granted, the most it could amount to is but Superstition* and till that be
granted, which must not be till it be well proved, it is more childish then
manly to cry out Superstition, Superstition!

. XVII. Their next is, a Suspicion (rather then Objection,) and that upon no
very good ground. But charity is easily suspicious; nor without cause. Wherein
I have somewhat to say, in behalf of my self and other my Brethren; and
somewhat by way of return to them. For my self, I had a desire, I may truly say
almost from my very childhood, to understand (as much as was possible for me)
the bottom of our Religion, and particularly as it stood in relation both to
the Papists, and (as they were then styled) Puritanes; to inform my self
rightly, wherein consisted the true differences between them and the Church of
England, together with the grounds of those differences. For I could even then
observe, (which was no hard matter to do,) that the most of mankind took up
their Religion upon trust (as (...). Arist. 2. Ethic. 1.
Custom or Education had framed them) rather then choice. It pleased God in
his goodness to afford me some opportunities suitable to that my desire; by
means whereof, and by his good blessing, I attained to understand so much of
the Romish Religion, as not only to dislike it, but to be able to give some
rational account why I so do. And I doubt not but these very Sermons, were
there nothing else to do it, will sufficiently free me from the least suspicion
of driving on any design for Rome. As for those other regular sons of the
Church of England, that have appeared in this controversy on her behalf: how
improbable, and so far forth uncharitable, the suspicion is, that they should
be any way instrumental toward the promoting of the Papal interest, may appear
(amongst other) by these few considerations following. 1. That those very
persons, who were under God the instruments of the Roman yoke by casting Popery
out of the Church, and sundry of them martyred in the cause; those very persons
I say, were great favorers of these (now accounted Popish) Ceremonies, and the
chief authors or procurers of the Constitutions made in that behalf. -- Hae
manus Trojam erigent? II. That in all Archbishops and Bishops with their
Chaplains and others of the Prelatical party, (many of them such as have
written also in defense of the Church against the Puritanes,) were the
principal (I had almost said the only) Champions to maintain the Cause of
Religion against the Papists. III. That even in these times of so great
distraction, and consequently thereunto, advantage to the factors for Rome;
none have stepped into the gap more readily, nor appeared in the face of the
Enemy more openly, nor maintained the Fight with more stoutness and gallantry,
then the Episcopal Divines have done; as their late learned writings testify.
Yea, and some of them such, Bp. Bramhall, Dr. Cofins, etc.
as (beside their other sufferings) have layen as deep under the suspicion of
being Popishly-affected, as any other of their Brethren whosoever. IIII. That
by the endeavors Episcopal Divines, some that were bred Papists have been
gained to our Church, others that began to waver confirmed and settled in their
old Religion, and some that were fallen from us recovered and reduced,
notwithstanding all the disadvantages of these confused times: and of each of
these, I am able to produce some instance. But I profess sincerely, as in the
presence of God and before the world, that I have not known (at least I cannot
call to remembrance) to much as one single example of any of this done, by any
of our Anti^Ceremonian Brethren, whether Presbyterian or Independent.

. XVIII. But I have somewhat to return upon these our Brethren, who thus
causelessly suspect us. Possibly it will not please them: ((...).) But I must
speak it out, both for the truths sake, and theirs. To wit, that themselves are
in truth, though not purposely and intentionally, (whereof in my own thought I
freely acquit them,) yet really and eventually, the great promoters of the
Roman Interest among us: and that more ways then one. These three among the
rest, are evident. First, by putting to their helping hand Episcopacy. It is
very well known to many, what (...). Naz. Orat. 14.
rejoicing that Vote brought to the Romish party. How even in Rome it self they
sang their Io Paeans upon the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now the
day is ours; Now is the fatal blow given to the Protestant Religion in England.
They who by conversing much with that Nation, were well acquainted with the
fiery turbulent spirits of the Scottish Presbyterians, knew as well how to make
their advantage thereof* and handled the matter with so much cunning by
fomenting their discontents underhand, till they had framed them, and by their
means some of the same party here, to become the fittest instruments for the
carrying on of their great design. And this I verily believe was the very
Masterpiece of the whole plot. They could not but foresee (as the event has
also proved,) that if the old Government, a main pillar in the building, were
once dissolved, the whole fabric would be sore shaken, if not presently
shattered in pieces and ruined; things would presently run into confusion;
distractions and divisions would certainly follow: And when the waters should
be sufficiently troubled and mudded, then would be their opportunity to cast in
their nets for a draught. Some Baxter agrem. p. 46.
who have undertaken to discover to the world the great plot the Papists had of
late years for the introducing of Popery in the several parts of it, might have
done well to have taken some little notice of this also, (I wonder how they
could look beside it,) being so visible; and indeed the fundamental part of the
plot. Without which, neither could the sparks of Errors and Heresies have been
blown to that height, nor that Libertinisme (and some other things therewith
mentioned) have so soon overspread the whole face of the Land, as now we find
they have done. Secondly, they promote the interest of Rome, by opposing it
with violence, then reason. Which ought not to seem any strange thing to us:
since we see by daily experience the like to happen in other matters also. Many
a man, when he thought most to make it sure, has quite marred a good business,
by over-doing it. The most prudent, just, and (in all likelihood) effectual way
to win upon an adversary is, by yielding him as much, as with safety of truth
can be yielded: who, if he shall find himself contradicted in that which he is
sure is true, as well as in that which is indeed false, will (by a kind of
Antiperistasis) be hardened into more obstinacy then before, to defend all (
true and false) with equal fierceness. It has been observed by some (and I
know no reason to question the truth of the observation,) that in those
Counties (Lancashire for one) where there are the most and the most rigid
Presbyterians, there are also the most and the most zealous Roman Catholics.
Thirdly, they promote the interest of Rome, and betray the Protestant Cause:
partly by mistaking the Question (a very common fault among them;) but
especially through the necessity of some false principle or other; which having
once imbibed, they think themselves bound to maintain. Some of them, especially
such as betook themselves to preaching betimes, and had not the leisure and
opportunity to look much into Controversies, understand very little (as it is
impossible they should much) of the true state of the Question in many
controverted points: and yet to show their zeal against Popery (...) Naz. (
edit. Paris.) p. 338.
are for ward enough to be meddling therewithal in the Pulpit. But with so much
weakness and impertinency not seldom, that they leave the Question worse then
they found it; and the Hearer, if he brought any doubts with him, to go from
Sermon more dis-satisfied, then he came. The rest of them, (that have better
knowledge) are yet so bound up by some false Principle or other they have
received, that they cannot without deserting the same (and that they must not
do, whatsoever betideth them) treat to the satisfaction of a rational and
ingenuous adversary. Among those false Principles, it shall suffice for the
present to have named but this one, That the Church of Rome is no true Church.
The disadvantages of which assertion to our Cause in the dispute about the
visibility of the Church (besides the falseness and uncharitableness of it,)
their Zeal, or Prejudice rather, will not suffer them to consider. With what
outcries was Bp. Hall (good man, who little dreamed of any peace with Rome)
pursued by Burton and other Hot spurs, for yielding it a Church. Who had made
the same concession over and over again before he was Bishop (as Iunius,
Reynolds, and our best Controversy-Writers generally do) and no notice taken,
no noise made, of it. You may perceive by this one instance, where the shoe
wringeth.

. XIX. In their next, that they may not appear so uncharitable as to suspect
their Brethren without cause, they tell us upon what ground they so do: viz.
these two; the Endeavors of Reconciliation, in the Sixth; and the pressing of
Ceremonies, in the Seventh, Objection. As to the former; First, All endeavors
Peace (without loss of Truth,) are certainly commendable in the undertakers:
prove the event as it will. (...) Romans 12. is every man's warrant for that. If
any particular private man have made overtures of peace in this kind upon
other terms then he ought, let him answer it as he can* what is that to us?
Admit Secondly, (which I fear is too true,) that there is little hope, scarce a
possibility of reconcilement, preserve, as we are are in conscience bound, the
truth and purity of our religion: yet ought not that fear to hinder any man,
fitted with abilities and opportunities for it, from such Endeavors whereof,
whatsoever the success be otherwise, these a good effects will follow. 1. It
will be some comfort to him within his own bosom, that he has done, what was
his duty to do, to his utmost power: And it will appear to the world, where the
business stuck, and through whose default most the Endeavor proved ^ruitless.
Thirdly, though there be little hope (and since the Trent Council less then
before,) of bringing things to a * yet methinks it should be thought worth the
while ( Est quodum prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.) to bring both sides to
as near an agreement, Horat. 1. ep. 1.
and reduce the differences to as small a number, and as narrow a point, as may
be. That if we cannot grow to be of the same belief in every thing: we might at
least be brought to show more Charity either to other; their to damn one
another for every difference; and more Ingenuity, then to seek to render the
one the other more odious to the world then we ought, by representing each
others opinions worse then they are.

XX. The Seventh Objection contains the other ground of their said former
suspicion: to wit, the vehement the Ceremonies. Wherein First, they do not
well, in calling them Popish and Superstitious; but that having already fully
cleared, I shall not now insist upon. Secondly, by requiring to have some
Command or Example of Scripture produced, to warrant to their consciences the
use of the Ceremonies; They offer occasion to consider of that point, wherein
the very Mystery of Puritanisme consists: viz. That no man may with a safe
conscience do any thing, for which there may not be produced, either Command or
Example from the Scripture. Which erroneous Principle, being the main
foundation, upon which so many false conclusions are built; and the fountain,
from which so many acts of sinful disobedience issue, would well deserve a full
and through-Examination. But, this Preface being already swollen far beyond the
the proportion I first intended; and for that I have heretofore, both Sermon. 4.
ad Clerum.
in one of these Sermons and Pref. to 20. Sermon.
elsewhere, discovered in part the unsoundness thereof: I am the willinger both
for mine own ease and the Readers, to refer him over thither, and to spare mine
own farther labor here. Considering Thirdly, that Principle could do us,
should it be admitted as sound, as they would have it: For we have both
Commands and Examples in the Scriptures, to warrant both the prescribing and
the using of the Ceremonies. Though not as specified in their particulars: yet
as either comprehended in the General, or inferred by way of Proportion. Which
kind of Warranty from Scripture, themselves are by force of argument driven to
allow, as sufficient: or else they would be at a loss for a hundred things by
them daily done, upon no better or other warrant then that. For Commands then,
we have besides that grand Canon 1 Cor. 14.40. [ Let all things be done
decently, and according to order,] all those Texts, that either contain the
right and liberty we have to all the Creatures of God to use them for our
service without scruple [All things are lawful, nothing unclean of it self. To
the pure all things are pure, etc.] or require Subjection and Obedience to
Superiors [ Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Submit to every
ordinance of man, etc.] And as for Example, I think I could readily produce a
full Score, and not bate an Ace, of some Ceremonies and circumstantial actions,
ordered, used or done by holy men even in the old Testament, (who yet were more
strictly tied to prescript forms then Christians are under the Gospel:) for the
doing whereof it does not appear, that they either had any command from God, or
were guided by any former precedents, or expected any other warrant then the
use of their reason and of prudential discourse; What warrant else had David
for his purpose of building a Temple to God; which yet 2 Samuel 7.2, 3.
Nathan the Prophet of God approved, yea which 1 King. 8.8.
God himself approved of? Or what, Solomon for keeping 2 Chr. 7.8, 9.
a feast of seven days for the dedication of the Altar? Or what, Ezekiah for
-- 30.23.
continuing the feast of unleavened bread seven days longer then the time
appointed by the Law? Or what, Mordecai and Ester for making Ester. 9.20. etc.
an Ordinance for the yearly observation of the feast of Purim? Or what lastly,
Judas and the Maccabes for ordeining 1 Mac. 4.9.
the feast of the Dedication of the Altar to be kept from year to year at a set
season for eight days together: which solemnity continued even in the days of
Christ, and seems to have been by him approved Joh. 10.22.
in the Gospel. The building of Synagogues in their Town, the wearing of
sackcloth and ashes in token of humiliation, Zach. 8.19.
the four fasts mentioned Zach. 8. whereof one only was commanded, with sundry
other, I omit for brevities sake. Instances enough, and pregnant enough, to
manifest how very much our brethren deceive themselves, by resting upon so
unsound a Principle; and that upon a mere mistake: as will appear presently by

. XXI. Their Eighth and last Objection. Wherein they seem to lay an imputation
upon all those that stand for the Ceremonies as if they consequently denied the
sufficiency of the Scripture. For answer first, it is freely confessed, that
the acknowledging of the holy Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of Faith and
Manners, is the main Article of the Protestant Religion, as opposed to the
Romish. But that all that stand for the Ceremonies should deny the same, is so
manifestly untrue; or indeed that some of the Church of England should deny
that, which is so clearly contained in the Articles of the Church whereunto he
has subscribed, so improbable: that it might well pass for a perfect Calumny,
were not the original occasion of their mistake herein so apparent, if but even
from the manner of their discourse in the present business. The true Secondly,
is this. The things wherein the power of Christianity consists, are of two
sorts; Credenda, and Agenda: which we usually express by Faith and Manners. And
the Scripture we acknowledge to be a perfect Rule of Both: yet not as excluding
the use of Reason; but supposing it. When God gave us the light of his holy
Word; he left us, as he found us; reasonable creatures still: without any
purpose, by the gift of that greater and sublimer light, to put out the light
he had formerly given us (that of Reason) or to render it useless and
unserviceable. Of which light the proper use, and that which God intended it
for when he gave it us, is, that by the help thereof we might be the better
enabled to discern Truth from Falsehood, that we might embrace the one, and
reject the other; and Good from Evil, that we might do the one, and shun the
other. Our Reason therefore is doubtless a good Rule both for things to be
believed, and for things to be done; so far as it reaches: but no perfect Rule
at all, rather a very imperfect one; because it reaches not home. To supply
the defects whereof, ( dim as it is even in Natural and Moral things, but
dark as darkness it self in things Supernatural and Divine,) it was, that it
pleased the wisdom and goodness of our God to afford us another Light, (viz.
that of supernatural revelation in his holy word,) without which we could
never, by the light of Reason alone, have found out the right way that leads
to eternal happiness. So that God having first made us reasonable Creatures,
and then vouchsafed us his holy word, to instruct us what we are to believe and
to do, either as Men or as Christians: We are now furnished with as perfect,
absolute and sufficient a Rule both of Faith and Manners, as our condition in
this life is capable of. And it is our duty accordingly, to resign our selves
wholly to be guided by that Word, (yet making use of our Reason withal, in
subordination and with submission thereunto) as a perfect Rule both of Faith
and Life. This being clearly so, and the Scripture by consent of both parties
acknowledged to be the perfect Rule of what we are to believe, as well as of
what we are to do: I earnestly desire our Brethren to consider, what should
hinder a Christian man from doing any thing, that by the mere use of his Reason
alone he may rightly judge to be lawful and expedient, though it be not
commanded or exampled in the Scriptures, so as it be not contrary thereunto;
more then from believing any thing, that by the like use of his Reason alone he
may rightly judge to be true or credible, though the same be not revealed or
contained in the Scripture, nor is contrary thereunto. I do without scruple
believe a Mathematical or Philosophical truth or a probable historical
relation, when I read it or hear it; and I believe an honest man upon his word
in what he affirms or promises; though none of all these things be contained
in the Scripture: and thus to believe, was never yet by any man (that I know
of) thought derogatory to the sufficiency of Scripture, as it is a perfect Rule
of Faith. Why I may not in like manner wear such or such a garment, use such or
such a gesture, or do any other indifferent thing (not forbidden in Scripture)
as occasions shall require, without scruple; or why thus to do should be
thought derogatory to the sufficiency of scripture, as it is a perfect Rule of
Manners, I confess I have not the wit to understand. Since there seems to be
the like reason of both; let them either condemn both, or acquit both: or else
inform us better, by showing us a clear and satisfactory reason of difference
between the one and the other. (...). This is the main hinge, upon which the
whole dispute turns, and whereunto all other differences are but appendages.
The true belief, and right understanding of this great Article concerning the
Scriptures sufficiency, being (to my apprehension) the most proper
Characteristical note of the right English Protestant, as he stands in the
middle between, and distinguished from, the Papist on the one hand, and the
(sometimes styled) Puritan on the other. I know not, how he can be a Papist,
that truly believes it: or he a Puritan that rightly understands it.

. XXII. Having thus answered the several Objections aforesaid, wherewith it may
be some, that stand freer from prejudice then their fellows, will be satisfied:
if any shall yet ask me, why I plead still so hard for Ceremonies, now they
are laid down, and so no use either of them, or of any discourse concerning
First, I saw my self somewhat concerned to prevent (if I could) the
mis-censuring of these Sermons; in sundry of which the Questions that concern
Ceremonies are either purposely handled, or occasionally touched upon: which
could not be done, without vindicating the Ceremonies themselves, as the
subject matter thereof. Secondly, throwing them down, may be brought to take a
little more into their consideration, then possibly they have yet done, upon
what grounds they were thereunto moved, and how sound those grounds were: that
if it shall appear they were then in an Error (and they consider withal, what
disorder, confusion, and libertinisme has ensued upon that change) they may be
sensible of it, and amend. But Thirdly, whatsoever become of the Ceremonies,
which are mutable things: the two Doctrines the one, touching the Power that
Governors have to enjoin them; the other touching the Duty that lies upon
Inferiors to observe them when they are enjoined;) being Truths, are therefore
always the same, and change not. It is no absurdity, even at mid-winter, when
there is never a flower upon the bough, to say yet Rosa est flos. Lastly, a
time may come when either the same Ceremonies may be restored, or others
substituted in their reasons and answers, as have been pleaded in their
defense. For I doubt not but those that shall from time to time have the power
to order Ecclesiastical affairs, if disorders or inconveniences shall continue
to grow after the rate and proportion they have done for some years past, will
see a necessity of reducing things into some better degree of Decency, and
Uniformity, then now they are: Which it is not imaginable how it should be
done, without some Constitutions to be made concerning Indifferent things to be
used in the public worship; and some care had withal to see the Constitutions
obeyed. Otherwise the greatest part of the Nation will be exposed to the very
great danger (without the extraordinary mercy of God preventing) of quite
losing their Religion. Look but upon many of our Gentry, what they are already
grown to from what they were, within the compass of a few years: and then Ex
pede Herculem; by that, guess, what a few years more may do. Do we not see
some, and those not a few, that have strong natural parts, but little sense of
Religion, turned (little better then professed) Atheists? And othersome, nor
those a few, that have good affections, but weak and unsettled judgments, or
(which is still but the same weakness) an overweening opinion of their own
understandings, either quite turned, or upon the point of turning Papists?
These be sad things, God knows, and we all know: not visibly imputable to any
thing so much, as to those -- Semperne Getis discordia nostra Proderit?
Claudian. 2. in. Ruffin.
distractions, confusions, and uncertainties that in point of Religion have
broken in upon us, since the late changes that have happened among us in
Church Affairs. What it will grow to in the end, God only knows: I can but
guess.

. XXIII. The Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, and the learned Hooker, men of
great judgment, and famous in their times, did long since foresee, and
accordingly declared their fear, that if ever Puritanism should prevail among
us, it would soon draw in Anabaptism after it. At this Cartwright, and other
the advocates for the Disciplinarian interest in those days, seemed to take
great offense: as if those fears were rather pretended to derive an odium upon
them, then that there was otherwise any just cause for the same; protesting
ever their utter dislike of Anabaptism, and how free they were from the least
thought of introducing it. But this was only their own mistake; or rather
Jealousy. For those godly men were neither so unadvised, nor so uncharitable,
as to become Judges of other men's thoughts or intentions, beyond what their
actions spoke them. They only considered, as prudent men, that Anabaptisme had
its rise, from the same Principles the Puritans held; and its growth, from the
same courses they took: together with the natural tendency of those principles
and practices thitherward; especially of that one principle, as it was by them
mis-understood, that the Scripture was adaequata agendorum regula, so as no
thing might be lawfully done without express warrant either from some command,
or example therein contained. The clue whereof, if followed on as far as it
would lead, would certainly in time carry them as far as the Anabaptists were
then gone. But that it was no vain fear, the unhappy event has proved; and
justified them: since what they feared is now come to pass, and that in a very
high degree. Yet did not they see the thread drawn out to that length, as we
have seen it; (the name of Quakers, Seekers, etc. not then heard of in the
world:) but how much farther it will reach none can say; for no man yet ever
saw the bottom of the clue. Only I may not dissemble, what my own fears have
long been, and yet are: That if things shall still go on, according as they
have begun, and hitherto proceeded; the application that some have made of that
passage John 11.48. Venient Romani, and capient gentem nostram, will prove but
too true a Prophecy; and Popery will overrun all at the last. Whether there be
just cause so to fear, or no; I leave it to wiser men to judge: when (together
with what has been Sect. 18. supra.
already said concerning the great scandals and advantages given to the Papists
by our confusions,) they shall have duly considered the probability of what I
shall now farther say. It is a wonder to see, in how short a time our
Anti-Ceremonian Brethren are strangely both multiplied, and divided; multiplied
in their number, but divided by their opinions and subdivided into so many
several tribes and families: that their power is nothing so much increased by
that multiplication, as it is weakened by these divisions. In as much as many of
those Sects into which they have spread and diffused themselves, are not more
opposite to the Truth (the only property wherein they all agree,) then they are
one to another: in so far that the establishment of any one cannot be, but by
the destruction of all or most of the rest. This experience gives us to see,
how impossible a thing it is, they should long hold together in one entire body
for their own preservation. But whilst they are still crumbling into fractions
and factions, biting and ready to devour one another: a vigilant adversary,
that is intent upon all advantages and opportunities, may, when he spieth his
time, overmaster them with much ease and little resistance. Whereas the Papists
on the other side, are by the very nature (as I may say) of their Religion, and
the fundamental Principle thereof ( viz. to believe as the Church believes)
tied together in a fast unity amongst themselves, against all opposers of their
Church, or of any point of Faith defined by the Church. So that these holding
all together as an embodied Army, and those dispersed abroad in scattered
troops and many small parties: Who is like to become Master of the Field, is no
hard matter to judge. Neither will the supposed (and I fear, truly supposed)
greater number of Atheists, then either Papists or Sectaries, be any hinderance
to the Papists, for finally prevailing. Because it is not for the interest of
the Atheist and his Religion (pardon the boldness of the Catachresis) to engage
either for or against any side farther than a jeer. But to let them fight it
out, keep himself quiet till they have done, and then Ad rerum momenta cliens,
sese^ daturus Victori. Claud. de bell. Gild.
clap in with him that gets the day. He that is of no Religion, can make a
shift to be of any, rather then suffer. And the Atheist, though he be in truth
and in heart neither Protestant nor Papist, nor any thing else; yet can he be
in face and outward comportment either Protestant or Papist or any thing else,
( Jew or Turk if need be) as will best serve his present turn. That this is
their mind, some of them Pref. to Hob^ of Election.
in a bravery have given us to understand, plainly enough and in print.

. XXIIII. And is it not high time then, trow we, to look about us? Hannibal ad
portas. When the danger is so great, and so near withal, even at the door:
shall we be so reachlesly wilful, as neither to open our eyes to see it our
selves, nor endure with patience, that any body else should tell us of it? --
(...) -- What I have now said, how it will be taken, I know not: Prophets are
seldom welcome, that Prophecy unwelcome things. But truly, at the sad
apprehension of the dangerous condition we now stand in, and in zeal for the
safety and honor of my dear Mother the Church of England, which has nourished
me up to become a Christian and a Protestant (that is to say, a pure pute
Christian without any other addition or Epithete:) my heart waxed hot within
me, and the fire so kindled, that ((...)) I could not forbear but upon the
first opportunity offered, once more to give Vent thereunto, by laying open the
second time my inmost thoughts to the view of the world. Which I have done with
the greatest plainness and freedom, that (avoiding bitterness) was possible for
me to do. I was willing to sharpen my style, I confess, that it might enter. as
it was but needful, where the skin was callous. But with the only intention (as
the great searcher of all hearts knows) by putting the patient to a little
smart at the first piercing of the Sore, to give future ease to the part
affected: and not at all, by angring the Sore, to make it worse. With which
Protestation I hope the more sober among them will rest satisfied; I mean the
moderate Presbyterian especially. Of which sort I know many, whom I verily
believe to be godly and conscientious men, (though in error,) and whom I
therefore love and honor. These are the only adversaries in this controversy,
whose spirits are in a disposition and capacity to be wrought upon in a
rational way. As for the rest, (I mean the rigid, Scotised, through-paced
Presbyterian on the one side, and the giddy Enthusiast on the other,) such is
their either obstinacy or madness, that it is vain to think of doing any good
upon them by argument: till it shall please God to make them of more humble and
teachable spirits. I entreat the Reader, if he shall meet with any thing herein
written, that has any bitterness in it, or but sharpness, more then one that
would deal plainly cannot avoid that he would take it as meant against these
last only, and not at all against those of the former rank, whom I never meant
to exasperate. Hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Read without gall, or
prejudice. Let not Truth fare the worse for the Plainness. Catch not at
syllables and phrases. Study and seek the Churches peace. Judge not another
servant, who must stand and fall to his own Master. Keep Faith and a good
Conscience. Bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Consider what has been said, and pray to the Lord to give us all a right
understanding in all things. Amen. Amen.

Botheby Paynell
July 13. MDCLVII.
Placere singulis volam; sed ut prosim:
Nec displicere metuam; dummodo prosim.
Scazon.
THE SUMMARY, or CONTENTS of the several ensuing SERMONS.
Sermon I. Ad Clerum on ROMANS XIV.III.
Sect. 1. THe Occasion, of the TEXT. Sect. 2 THe Scope, of the TEXT. Sect. 3
THe Coherence, of the TEXT. and Sect. 4 THe Division of the TEXT. Sect. 5
POINT. I. Of not Despising others: Sect. 6 -- Be they never so weak, Sect. 7 --
and we never so strong. Sect. 8 -- Both for the Sins sake, in the Despisers:
Sect. 9 -- and for the Scandals sake, to the Despised. Sect. 10 -- 11. POINT.
II. Of not Judging others Sect. 12 -- with the true meaning thereof: And four
Reasons. Sect. 13 viz. 1. The want of Commission -- in Us. Sect. 14 -- 2. The
want of Skill -- in Us. Sect. 15 -- 3. The Uncharitableness, and of the thing
it self. Sect. 16 -- 4. The Scandalousness -- of the thing it self. Sect. 17
APPLICATION. To the Case in our Church: showing Sect. 18 1 Wherein it agrees
with that of the Romans in this Chapter; Sect. 19 -- 21. 2 And how it differs
from it. I. in the matter. Sect. 22 -- II. in respect of the Persons. Sect. 23
-- III. in the Practice of the Persons. Sect. 24 -- IIII. in their mutual
respective Carriage. And that Sect. 25 1. in the point of Despising. Where
Sect. 26 ( The several grievances of our Brethren are proposed; Sect. 27 -- 29.
-- and answered.) Sect. 30 -- 37. 2. in the point of Judging. Sect. 38. The
Conclusion.
Sermon II. Ad Clerum. on ROMANS III.VIII.
Sect. 1. THe Occasion, of the TEXT Sect. 2 -- Coherence, of the TEXT Sect. 3
-- Division, of the TEXT and Sect. 4 -- Sum -- of the TEXT Sect. 5 OBSERVE. I.
Divine Truths to be cleared from Cavil. Sect. 6 -- II. The slander of the
Ministers regular Doctrine more then an ordinary slander. Sect. 7 -- III. The
best Truths subject to slander. Sect. 8 -- with the Causes thereof; Sect. 9 --
and Inferences thence. Sect. 10-12 -- IIII. Every slander against the Truth,
damnable. Sect. 13-20 -- V. No Evil to be done, for any good that may come
thereof Sect. 14-15.19 -- Of the kinds and degrees of Evil; by way of
Explication. Sect. 16-17. -- Of things (Equally and Inequally) indifferent. by
way of Explication. Sect. 18 (An useful digression) Sect. 21-23 With some
Reasons of the Point; Sect. 24-26 -- and the Inferences thence. Sect. 27 The
general Application thereof: in two Instances Sect. 28 -- 30 -- The Former
Sect. 31 -- 33 -- The Later Sect. 34 A more particular Application; in defense
of the former Sermon. Sect. 35 The Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Clerum. on 1 COR. XII.VII.
Sect. 1. THe Occasion, of the TEXT. Sect. 2 -- Coherence, of the TEXT. and
Sect. 3 -- Division of the TEXT. Sect. 4 The Explication of the Words. What is
meant Sect. 5 -- 7 -- By the Spirit, and what Sect. 8 -- by Manifestation.
Sect. 9 -- 11 POINT. I. Spiritual Gifts, how to be understood, Sect. 12 -- 15
Four Inferences from the premises. Sect. 16 POINT. II. The conveyance of
spiritual graces to us, Sect. 17 -- By way of Gift: Sect. 18 -- Not from
Nature, or Desert. Sect. 19 Inferences thence. I. General; 1. Of Thankfulness:
Sect. 20 -- 2. of Prayer Sect. 21 -- 22 -- 3. joining our faithful Endeavors
thereunto. Sect. 23 -- 25 -- II. More especial. 1. To those of more eminent
gifts. Sect. 26 2. To those of meaner gifts. Sect. 27 POINT. III. The End of
Spiritual gifts: Not our own only; Sect. 28 -- But chiefly the Profit of
others. Sect. 29 Reasons hereof. I. in respect of the Giver. Sect. 30 -- II. in
respect of the thing given. Sect. 31 -- III. in respect of the Receiver. Sect.
32 -- 34 Three Inferences thence Sect. 35 The Conclusion.
Sermon IIII. Ad Clerum. on ROMANS XIIII.XXIII.
Sect. 1. THe Coherence; and Scope of the TEXT. Sect. 2 The Word FAITH diversely
interpreted. Sect. 3 INTERPRETATION. I. of a Justifying Faith Sect. 4-5 -- Not
Proper here; although (in it self) True. Sect. 6 INTERPRETATION. II. Of the
Doctrine of Faith Sect. 7 -- utterly rejected. 1. as False in it self; Sect.
8-9 -- both in the Rigor of it, Sect. 10 -- and in the Mitigation. Sect. 11 --
15 2. as Pernicious; in the Consequents. Sect. 16 3. as having no Affinity with
the present Text. Sect. 17 INTERPRETATION. III. Of Persuasion of Judgment,
asserted. Sect. 18 -- Thence sundry Questions resolved. viz. Sect. 19 I. What
is the Power of the Conscience, as concerning the Lawfulness or Unsawfulness of
humane Actions. Sect. 20 II. Whether in every thing we do, an actual
consideration of the Lawfulness thereof be necessarily requisite? Sect. 21 III.
What degree of Persuasion is required for the Warranting of our Actions? Sect.
22 IIII. Whether or no, and how forth, a man may warrantably act, with
reluctance of Conscience? Wherein is considered the Case Sect. 22 -- 24 -- 1.
Of a Resolved Conscience Sect. 25 -- 28 -- 2. Of a Doubting Conscience Sect. 29
-- 32 (And therein sundry Objections removed.) Sect. 33 3. Of a Scrupulous
Conscience. Sect. 34 The Conclusion.
Sermon I. Ad Magistratum. on JOB XXIX.14 -- 17.
Sect. 1. THe Occasion, of the TEXT. Sect. 2 -- Scope, of the TEXT. Sect. 3 --
Sum, of the TEXT. and Sect. 4 -- Division of the TEXT. Sect. 5-6 The
Magistrates I. DUTY; Zeal to Justice: Sect. 7 -- With some Examples, Sect. 8 --
and Four Reasons thereof. Sect. 9 DUTY II. Compassion to the Distressed: Sect.
10 -- with the Reasons, Sect. 11 -- and Extent thereof. Sect. 12-13 DUTY III.
Diligence in searching out the Truth: Sect. 14 -- with some Instances; Sect. 15
-- and Four Reasons thereof. Sect. 16 -- 17 DUTY IIII. Courage in Executing
Justice: Sect. 18 -- With the Reasons thereof; I. in respect of the Laws. Sect.
19 -- 2. of the Magistrate himself; Sect. 20 -- 3. of the Offenders. Sect. 21
Three main Inferences from the Premises. viz. Sect. 22 -- 24 I. of Direction
for the Choice of Magistrates. Sect. 25 II. of Reproof, for the neglect of the
aforesaid Duties. Sect. 26 III. of Exhortation, to the conscionable Performance
of the same.
Sermon II. Ad Magistratum. on EXODUS 23.1 -- 3.
Sect. 1-3. THe Necessity of treating on this Argument. Sect. 4 -- The fitness
of the Text for that purpose Sect. 5 The Division and thereof Sect. 6 -- Extent
thereof Sect. 7 POINT. I. The Accuser, not to raise a false report: Sect. 8 --
11 -- sundry ways, by which it may be done. Sect. 12 Three Reasons of the
point: viz. in respect of Sect. 13 -- 1. The Sin in the Doer; Sect. 14 -- 2.
The Wrong, to the Sufferer; Sect. 15 -- 3. The Mischiefs, to the Commonwealth.
Sect. 16 Inference. To avoid the fault: for which purpose Sect. 17 -- 21 -- 4.
especial Causes thereof are discovered. Sect. 22 POINT II. The Judge, not to
receive a false report. Sect. 23 A threefold Care requisite thereunto. I. in
receiving Informations. Sect. 24 -- 2. in examining Causes Sect. 25 -- 3. in
repressing Contentious Persons and Suits. Sect. 26 -- For which purpose the
likeliest Helps are Sect. 27 1. to reject Informations tendered without Oath;
Sect. 28 2. to temper the Rigor of Justice with Equity; Sect. 29 3. to punish
Partiality and Collusion in the Informer. Sect. 30 4. to allow the wronged
party full satisfaction; Sect. 31 5. to restrain abuses in their Servants and
Officers. Sect. 32 The Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Magistratum. on PSALM. CVI.XXX.
Sect. 1-2. THE Argument and Matter of the Psalm. Sect. 3 The Coherence, Scope,
Sect. 4 -- and Division of the TEXT. Sect. 5-6 The History of Balak and Balaams
Plot against Israel. Sect. 7-8 -- With the success thereof, both in the Sin and
Punishment. Sect. 9-10 -- Zimri's Provocation; and Execution. Sect. 11 The
Person of Phinehes considered. Sect. 12 OBSERVATION I. The Spiritual Power does
not include; Sect. 13 -- nor yet exclude the Temporal. Sect. 14 Phinehes his
Fact examined; Sect. 15 -- and justified. Sect. 16 -- 17 -- How far forth it
may be imitated. Sect. 18 OBSERVATION II. The Zeal of Phinehes Sect. 19 --
manifested by executing judgment Sect. 20 1. Personally. Sect. 21 2. Speedily.
Sect. 22 3. Resolutely. Sect. 23 -- 25 OBSERVATION III. The plague stayed by
executing judgment. Sect. 26 -- 28 -- With Application to England. Sect. 29 An
Exhortation, to execute Judgment: Sect. 30 -- With Particular Application
Sect. 31 1. To the Accuser; Sect. 32 2. To the Witness; Sect. 33 3. To the
Jurer; Sect. 34 4. To the Pleader; Sect. 35 5. To the Officer; Sect. 36 6. To
the Judge.
Sermon I. Ad Populum. on 1 KING. 21.29.
Sect. 1. THE Coherence of the TEXT Sect. 2 -- Argument, of the TEXT and Sect.
3 -- Division of the TEXT Sect. 4 -- 5 From Ahabs Person and Carriage. Sect. 6
-- 8 OBSERVATION I. How far an Hypocrite may go in the performance of holy
Duties. Sect. 9 Four Inferences thence. I. of Terror to the Profane. Sect. 10
-- II. Of Exhortation, to abound in the fruits of godliness. Sect. 11 -- III.
Of Admonition, to forbear Judging. Sect. 12 -- IIII. Of Direction, for the
trial of Sincerity; Sect. 13 -- by the marks, 1. of Integrity, and Sect. 14 --
2. of Constancy; Sect. 15 -- both joined together. Sect. 16 -- 17 OBSERVATION.
II. Concerning the Power of Gods word Sect. 18 -With the Causes thereof: in
respect 1. of the Instrument Sect. 19 -- 2. of the Object. Sect. 20 -- 3. of
the fit Application of the one to the other. Sect. 21 The Inferences thence;
against those that despise the Word. Sect. 22 -- 23 From the success of Ahabs
Humiliation. Sect. 24 OBSERVATION III. Concerning the Reward of Common Graces:
Sect. 25 -- with sundry Reasons thereof; Sect. 26 -- and Inferences thence.
Sect. 27 The main Inference. To comfort the Godly 1. against temptations from
the Prosperity of the wicked; Sect. 28 -- II. against Temporal Afflictions;
Sect. 29 -- III. against doubtings of their ete^nal Reward.
Sermon II. Ad Populum. on 1 King. 21.29.
Sect. 1. A Repetition of the Three Observations in the former Sermons. Sect. 2
-- 4 OBSERVATION IV. Concerning Gods forbearing of threatened Judgments: Sect. 5
-- Proved 1. from his proneness to Mercy; Sect. 6 -- 2. from the end of his
Threatenings. Sect. 7 -- 8 The Doubt, How this may stand with Gods Truth, Sect.
9 -- Resolved: by understanding in all his Threatenings Sect. 10 -- a Clause of
Exception; Sect. 11 -- 12 -- though not always expressed. Sect. 13 -- 14
Inferences 1. of Comfort to the distressed. Sect. 15 -- 2. of Terror, to the
Secure. Sect. 16 -- 3. of Instruction, to All. Sect. 17 Gods Promises, how to
be understood; Sect. 18 -- and entertained. Sect. 19 -- 20 OBSERVATION V. That,
though it be some grief, to foreknow the evils to come: Sect. 21 Yet is it some
happiness, not to live to see them. Sect. 22 -- with the Reason; Sect. 23 -- 25
-- and sundry Uses thereof Sect. 26 The Conclusion.
Sermon III. Ad Populum. on 1 Kings 21.29.
Sect. 1 -- 2 THE grand Doubt concerning Gods Justice proposed. Sect. 3
CERTAINTY I. All the ways of God are just. Sect. 4 -- 5 -- II. Temporal Evils
not the proper adequate punishments of sin. Sect. 6 -- 7 -- 3. All Evils of
Pain, howsoever considered, Sect. 8 -- are for sin: and that Sect. 9 -- for the
sin of the sufferer himself. Sect. 10 How the punishing of the Fathers sin upon
the Children, Sect. 11 -- can stand with the justice of God. Sect. 12 -- 16
CONSIDERATION I. That they are punished with temporal Punishments only, not
with Spiritual or Eternal. Sect. 13 -- 15 (An Objection answered. Sect. 17
CONSIDERATION II. That such Punishments befall them: Either Sect. 18 -- 21 1.
As continuing in their Fathers sin, Or Sect. 22 2. As possessing something from
their Fathers, with Gods curse cleaving thereunto. Sect. 23 -- 25 CONSIDERATION
III. A distinction of Impulsive Causes, Sect. 26 -- explained by a familiar
Example; Sect. 27 -- and applied to the present Argument. Sect. 28 Seeming
Contradictions of Scripture herein, Sect. 29 -- how to be reconciled* Sect. 30
-- with an Exemplary Instance thereof. Sect. 31 -- 32 The Resolution of the
main doubt. Sect. 33 Three Duties inferred from the Premises. 1. To live well
(as for our own, so even) for Posteritie's sake also. Sect. 34 II. To grieve
(as for our own, so) for our Forefathers sins also. Sect. 35 III. To endeavor
to hinder sin in others.
Sermon IV. Ad Populum. on 1 Cor. 7.24.
Sect. 1. THE Occasion and Scope of the TEXT. Sect. 2-3 The Pertinency, and
Importance of the matter to be handled; Sect. 4 -- 5 -- viz. of men's Particular
Callings, and what is meant thereby. Sect. 6 POINT I. The necessity of living
in a Calling. Sect. 7 Reasons hereof. I. in respect of the Ordinance; Sect. 8
-- and Gifts of God. Sect. 9 -- II. in respect of the Person himself. Sect. 10
-- 14 -- III. in respect of others. Sect. 15 Inference; for reproof of such as
live idly without a Calling. Sect. 16 -- 17 as viz. 1. Idle Monks and Friars.
Sect. 18 -- 20 ^ 2. Idle Gallants. Sect. 21 -- 22 -- 3. Idle Beggars. Sect. 23
-- 24 POINT. II. Concerning the Choice of a Calling. Sect. 25 That is our
proper Calling, whereunto God calls us; and Sect. 26 -- by what enquiries
that may be known. Sect. 27 ENQUIRY I. concerning the Employment it self: -- 1.
Whether it be honest and lawful, or no? Sect. 28 -- 2. Whether it be fit, to be
made a Calling, or no? Sect. 29 -- 3. Whether it tend to common Utility, or no?
Sect. 30 (The Usurers Calling examined by these Rules. Sect. 32 -- 33 II.
Concerning our fitness for that employment. Sect. 34 -- 1. in respect of our
Education. Sect. 35 -- 36 -- 2. in respect of our Abilities. Sect. 37 -- 39 --
3. in respect of our Inclinations. Sect. 40 III. Concerning the Providential
Opportunities we have thereunto: Sect. 41 -- 43 wherein is showed the great
importance of an outward Calling. Sect. 44 POINT III. Concerning the Abiding in
our Callings. Sect. 45 -- 46 -- 1. what is not, meant thereby. Sect. 47 -- 49
-- 2. and what is, meant thereby. Sect. 50 -- 52 -- 3. The abiding therein with
God, what. Sect. 53 The Conclusion.
Sermon V. Ad Populum on 1 Timothy 4.4.
Sect. 1. THE Coherence, of the TEXT. Sect. 2 -- Scope; of the TEXT. and Sect.
3 -- Division of the TEXT. Sect. 4 -- 6 OBSERVATION I. Concerning the Goodness
of the Creature. Sect. 7 Inferences thence. I. God not the Author of Evil.
Sect. 8 -- II. The goodness of God seen in the glass of the Creatures. Sect.
9-10 -- III. The Creatures not to be blamed. Sect. 11 -- 13 OBSERVATION II.
Concerning the Liberty and Right we have to the Creatures. Sect. 14 -- 1. By
Creation: Sect. 15 -- 2. By Redemption. Sect. 16 Much impleaded. 1. by
Judaisme; Sect. 17 -- 19 -- 2. by the Church of Rome. Sect. 20 -- 32 The Extent
of this Liberty in Eight Positions: Sect. 33 OBSERVATION III. The Creatures to
be received with Thanksgiving. Sect. 34 -- 37 The Duty of Thanksgiving,
Explained; and Sect. 38 -- Enforced: 1. as an Act of Justice Sect. 39 -- 42 --
2. as an Act of Religion. Sect. 43 -- 44 INFERENCES I. For Conviction of our
unthankfulness to God: Sect. 45 -- 46 1. for want of Recognition, with 2
degrees of each. Sect. 47 -- 48 2. for want of Estimation, with 2 degrees of
each. Sect. 49 -- 51 3. for want of Retribution, with 2 degrees of each. Sect.
52 -- II. Six Motives to Thankfulness: taken from Sect. 53 -- 1. The Excellency
of the Duty. Sect. 54 -- 2. The Continual Effluence of Gods benefits. Sect. 55
-- 3. Our Future Necessities. Sect. 5^ -- 4. Our Misery in Wanting. Sect. 57 --
5. Our Importunity in Asking. Sect. 58 -- 6. The Freedom of the gift. Sect. 59
III. To avoid those things that hinder our Thankfulness: which are chiefly
Sect. 60 1. Pride. Sect. 61 2. Envy. Sect. 62 3. Ryotous living. Sect. 63 4.
Wordly Cares. Sect. 64 5. Procrastination. Sect. 65 IIII. To be thankful for
Spiritual blessings.
Sermon VI. Ad Populum. on Genesis 20.6.
Sect. Sect. 1. THE Occasion, of the TEXT. Sect. 2 -- Scope, of the TEXT. and
Sect. 3 -- Division, of the TEXT. Sect. 4 Of the Nature and Use of Dreams.
Sect. 5 -- 6 The Former Part of the TEXT explained. Sect. 7 OBSERVATION I. The
grievousness of the sin of Adultery; Sect. 8 -- 10 -- and of Fornication,
Compared. Sect. 11 -- 12 OBSERVATION II. How far Ignorance does, or does not
excuse from sin. Sect. 13 -- 16 -- instanced in this fact of Abimelech. Sect.
17 Inferences thence. I. Concerning the Salvation of our Forefathers. Sect. 18
-- 19 (Two Doubts removed. Sect. 20 -- II. Not to flatter our selves in our
Ignorance. Sect. 21 -- III. Of sins done with Knowledge. Sect. 22 -- 24
OBSERVATION III. Moral Integrity may be in the heart of an unbeliever Sect. 25
-- with the Reason thereof. Sect. 26 Inferences thence. I. A shame for
Christians to fall short of Heathens in their Morals. Sect. 27 -- II.
Particular Actions no certain (...) of Sincerity. Sect. 28 -- III. The acquital
of Conscience no sufficient justification. Sect. 29 The Later Part of the TEXT
opened. Sect. 30 OBSERVATION IV. Boncerning Gods Restraint of sin in men. Sect.
31 -- with the different measure and means thereof. Sect. 32 1. That there is
such a Restraint. Sect. 33 -- 34 2. That it is from God. Sect. 35 3. That it is
from the Mercy of God; and therefore called Grace. Sect. 36 Inferences from the
consideration of Gods Restraint: Sect. 37 I. As it lies upon others. 1. to
bless God for our Preservation; Sect. 38 -- 2. not to trust wicked men too
far. Sect. 39 -- 3. -- nor to fear them too much. Sect. 40 -- 4. to endeavor
to restrain others from sinning. Sect. 41 II. as it lies upon our selves. 1.
To be humble under it. Sect. 42 -- 2. to entertain the means of such restraint
with Thankfulness. Sect. 43 -- 3. to pray, that God would restrain our
Corruptions. Sect. 44 -- 4. -- but especially to pray and labor for
sanctifying grace.
Sermon VII. Ad Populum. on 1 Pet. 2.16.
Sect. 1-2 THE Occasion, Scope, of the TEXT. Sect. 3 -- 5 -- Coherence, of the
TEXT. and Sect. 6 -- Division -- of the TEXT. Sect. 7 -- 8 OBSERVATION I.
Christian Liberty to be maintained. Sect. 9 -- 12 -- with the Explication,
Sect. 13 -- 17 -- and Five Reasons thereof. Sect. 18 -- 20 Inferences I. Not to
usurp upon the Liberty of others: Sect. 21 -- 24 -- II. -- Nor to betray our
own. Sect. 25 OBSERVATION II. Christian Liberty not to be abused. Sect. 26 --
28 -- The words explained: and thence Sect. 29 -- 31 -- Three Reasons of the
point. Sect. 32 -- 34 Four abuses of Christian Liberty. viz. I. by casting off
the obligation of the moral Law. Sect. 35 -- 36 - II. by exceeding the bounds
of Sobriety. Sect. 37 -- III. by giving Scandal to others. Sect. 38 -- IIII. by
disobeying Lawful Superiors. Sect. 39 -- 40 The grounds and Objections of the
Anti-Ceremonians Sect. 41 -- 46 -- propounded and particularly answered. Sect.
47 -- 50 How men's Laws bind the Conscience. Sect. 51 -- 2 OBSERVATION III. We
being the servants of God: Which is of all other Sect. 53 -- 4 1. the most
Just, Service; Sect. 55 2. the most Necessary, Service; Sect. 56 -- 57 3. the
most Easy, Service; Sect. 58 4. the most Honorable, Service; Sect. 59 5. and
the most Profitable, Service; Sect. 60 Ought to carry our selves, as his
servants: with all Sect. 61 -- 63 I. Reverence to his Person; in 3 branches.
Sect. 62 -- 64 II. Obedience to his Will: both in Doing, and Suffering. Sect.
65 -- 68 III. Faithfulness in his Business; in 3 branches. Sect. 69 The
Conclusion.
AD Boston, Lincoln, 17. Apr. 1619.
ROMANS 14.3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not
him that eats not, judge him that eats.


ITt cannot be avoided, so long as there is or Weakness Malice in hell, but
that scandals will arise, and differences will grow in the Church of God. What
through want of judgment in some, of Ingenuity in others, Charity in almost
all: occasions (GOD knows) of offense are too soon both given and taken:
whilst men are apt to quarrel at trifles, and to maintain differences even
about indifferent things. The Primitive Roman Church was not a little afflicted
with Paul spends this whole Chapter. The occasion this: In Rome there lived
in the Apostles times many Jews; of whom, as well of the Gentiles, diverse were
converted Acts 28.24.
to the Christian Faith, by the preaching of the Gospel. Now of these new
Converts, some better instructed then others, as touching the cessation of
legal Ceremonies, made no difference of Meats, or of Days, but used their
lawful Christian liberty in them both, as things in their own nature merely
indifferent: Whereas others, not so thoroughly De novo conversus; and de lege
Catholica minus sufficienter instructus. Lyra.
catechized as they, still made difference for Conscience sake, both of Meats,
accounting them Clean or Unclean; and of Days, accounting them Holy or Servile,
according as they stood under the Levitical Law. These latter S. Paul calls
Verse 1.
(...), Weak in the faith: those former then must by the Law of Opposition be
(...). Romans 15.1.
Strong in the Faith.

the one sort, and the other, (notwithstanding they differed in their private
judgments, yet) to have preserved the common peace of the Church* and labored
the 2 Cor. 10.8.
edification, not the ruin one of another: the strong by affording faithful
instruction to the consciences of the weak; and the weak, by allowing
favorable construction to the actions of the strong. But whilst either
measured other by themselves; neither one nor other did Gal. 2.14.
(...), as our Apostle elsewhere speaks, Walk uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel. Faults and offenses there were on all hands. The Strong
faulty, in Contemning the Weak; the Weak faulty in condemning the Strong. The
Strong proudly scorned the Weak, as silly and superstitious; for making scruple
at some such things, as themselves believed were lawful: The Weak rashly
censured the Strong, as profane and irreligious; for adventuring on some such
things, as themselves deeply suspected were unlawful. The blessed Apostle,
desirous all things should be done in the Church in love and 1 Cor. 14.26.
unto edification, Cajetan in locum. Bulling. in loc.
aequa lance, and i eodem Charitatis moderamine, as Interpreters speak, takes
upon him to arbitrate, and to mediate in the business: and like a just umpire
Job 9.33.
lays his hand upon both parties; unpartially shows them their several
oversights, and begins to draw them to a fair and an honorable composition:
as thus, The strong, he shall remit somewhat of his superciliousness, in
disesteeming, despising the Weak: and the Weak he shall abate somewhat of his
edge and acrimony, in judging and condemning the Strong. If the parties will
stand to this order, it will prove a blessed agreement: for so shall brotherly
Love be maintained, Scandalls shall be removed, the Christian Church shall be
edified, and Gods Name shall be glorified. This is the scope of my Text, and of
the whole Chapter.

In the three first Verses whereof, there is (...), and (...). the Proposal of
a general Doctrine, as touching the usage of weak ones: with whom the Church
is so to deal, as that it neither give offense to, nor take offense Him that is
weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.] Next, there
is (...), in the second ver. a declaration of the former general proposal, by
instancing in a particular case, touching the difference of Meats. There is one
man strong in the Faith; he is infallibly resolved, there is no meat Ver. 14.
unclean or (if received with thankfulness and sobriety) 1 Cor. 10.23.
unlawful: and because he knows he stands upon a sure ground, Verse 2.
(...), he is confident he may eat any thing, and he uses his liberty
accordingly, eating indifferently 1 Cor. 10.27.
of all that is set before him, making no question for conscience sake, [ One
man believes he may eat all things.] There is another man Weak in the Faith;
he stands yet unresolved and doubtful, whether some kinds of Meats, as
namely, those forbidden in the Law, be clean; or he is rather carried with a
strong suspicion that they are unclean; out of which timorousness of judgment,
he chooses to forbear those meats, and contenteth himself with the fruits of
the earth; [ Another who is ] This is Species Facti; this the Case. Now the
question is, in this Case what is to be done, for the avoidance of scandal,
Christian Charity? And this question my Text resolves in this third Verse:
wherein is contained (...), S. Paul's judgment, or his counsel rather, and
advice upon the Case, Let not him that eats, despise, etc. The remainder of
the Verse, and of the Chapter, being spent in giving reasons of the judgment,
in this and another like case, concerning the difference and observation of
Days.

I have made choice to entreat at this time of Saint Paul's advice; advice, as
the Parties and the faults are, is also twofold. The Parties two: He that
eats, that is the Strong: and he that eats not, that is the Weak. The
Faults likewise two: The Strong man's fault; that is Literally setting at
naught; so it is translated, Luke 23.11. and the Latin Translation in
Tertullian reads here fitly to the Greek, Qui manducat, ne null^ ficet n^i
manducantem. Ter. de je jun. adversus Psych. c. 15.
(...), despising of his brothers infirmity; and the Weak man's fault, that is
(...), judging of his brothers liberty. Proportionably, the parts of the
advice, accommodated to the Parties and their Faults, are two. The one, for the
Strong; that he despise not, Let not him that eats, despise him that eats
not. The other for the Weak; that he judge not, Let not him that eats not,
judge Of which when I shall have spoken somewhat in their general use, I shall
by Gods assistance proceed by way of application to enquire how far the
differences in our Church, for conforming, and not conforming, agree with the
present case of eating, and not eating: and consequently how far forth Saint
Paul's advice in this case of eating and not eating, ought to rule us in the
cases of conforming and not conforming in point of Ceremony. And first of the
former rule or branch of the advice, Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not.

The terms, whereby the Parties are charactered, He that eats, He that eats
not, have in the opening of the Case been already him that eats, must be
understood the strong in Faith, and by him that eats not, the weak. And so
reducing the words ab Hypothesi ad Thesin, this part of the advice [ Let not
him that eats, despise him that eats not] bears sense as if the Apostle
had Let not the strong in faith despise the weak.] Weak ones are easily
despised: Strong ones are prone to despise: and yet despising is both a
grievous sin in the despiser, and a dangerous scandal to the despised. In all
which respects, it was but needful the Holy Ghost should lesson us, not to
despise one another weakness. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not.

Weakness and Smalness, be it in what kind soever, is the fittest object to
provoke contempt. As we travel by the way, if a fierce Mastiff set upon us, we
think it time to look about, and to bestir our selves for defense: but we take
no notice of the little Curres that despise them. When Goliath saw little David
make toward him, 1 Samuel 17. the Text says, 1 Samuel 17.42
He disdained him, for he was but a youth. And S. Paul charging Timothy so to
behave himself in the Church of God, as that none should 1 Timothy 4.12.
despise his youth, implies, that youth is obvious to contempt, and like
enough to be despised. And though Eccl. 9.16.
Wisdom be better then strength, yet Solomon tells us, the poor man's wisdom
is despised, and his words are not heard, Eccles. 9. Ps. 119.141.
I am small and of no reputution, says David, Psalm. 119. And our Saviors
Caveat in the Gospel is especially concerning little ones, as most open to
contempt: Mat* 18.10.
Take heed that ye despise not any of these little But of all other, that
weakness is most contemptible, which is seen in the faculties of the
understanding Soul: when men are indeed weak in apprehension, weak in
judgment, weak in discretion; or at leastwise are thought so. Far from any
real weakness this way or any other, was our blessed LORD and Savior Jesus
Christ, Col* 2.3.
In whom were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; yet because upon
conference with him, he seemed such unto Herod, not answering any of his
questions, nor that expectation which the same of his miracles had raised of
him in Herod, Herod took him for some silly simple fellow, and accordingly used
him: for he Luke* 23.11. (...).
set him at naught, and mocked him, and put him in (...). Ib.
a white coat, as he had been some fool, and sent him back as he came, Lu. 23.
And of this nature is the weakness my Text has to do withal: a weakness in
judgment; or as it is ver. 1. a weakness in Faith. Where, by Faith, we are
not to understand that justifying Faith, whereby the heart of a true believer
lays fast hold on the gracious promises of God, and the precious merits of
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins: nor by weakness in Faith, that (...),
wherewith the Apostles are Mat. 8.26.14.31. and 16.8.
sometimes charged; when the Faith of a true believer is sore shaken with
temptations of incredulity and distrust. But by Faith we are to understand an
Fides h^c signifieat persuasionem de usa rerum indifferentium: per Synccdochen
generis. Piscat. Schol. in Romans 14.1.
historical Faith only, which is nothing else but a firm and secure assent of
the judgment unto doctrinall truths in matter of Faith or Life: and by
weakness in such faith, a doubtfulnesse and irresolution of judgment
concerning some divine truths appertaining to the doctrine of Faith or Life;
and Christian liberty, and the indifferent or not indifferent nature or use of
some things. Which weakness of judgment in Faith, bewraying it self outwardly
in a nice, and scrupulous, and timorous forbearance of some things, for fear
they should be unlawful; which yet in truth are not so, but indifferent: does
thereby expose the person in whom such weakness is, to the contempt and
despisings of such as are of more confirmed and resolved judgments, and are
stronger in the Faith.

Weakness then is in it self contemptible: yet not more than Strength is
contemptuous. Passive contempt is the unhappiness of the weak; but Active the
fault of the strong. They that find truly, or but overweeningly conceit in
themselves abilities, either of a higher nature, or in a greater measure, than
in other men, be it any kind whatsoever; it is strange to see, with what
scornful state they can trample upon their weaker and inferior brethren, and
look upon them (if yet they will at all vouchsafe a look) from aloft, as upon
things below them: which is properly and literally to despise. For so much the
very words (...) among the Greeks, and among the Latins Despicere do import.
The Pharisee, it is like, cast such a disdainful look upon the poor Publican,
when in contempt he called Luc. 18.9, 11.
Iste Publicanus! sure I am, that Parable was spoken of purpose concerning such
as trusted in their own righteousness, and (...). Luke 18.9.
despised others. Luke 18. And they are ever the likeliest thus ^o despise
others, that conceit something in themselves more than others. Wealth, honor,
strength, beauty, birth, friends, alliance, authority, power, wit, learning,
eloquence, reputation, any trifle; can leaven our thoughts, (partial as they
are toward our selves) and swell us, and heave us up above our brethren: and
because we think we do overtop them, we think we may overlook them too, and
despise them as vulgar and contemptible. Agar could despise Sarah; the
bond-servant, Genesis 16.4, 5.
She saw that she had conceived, and her Mistress was barren, Genesis 16. All
strength and eminency then, we see, be it in any little sorry thing, is apt to
breed in men a despising of their weaker and meaner brethren: but none more
than this strength of knowledge and of Faith, wherewith we now deal. It should
be quite otherwise: our knowledge should praeferre facem, hold the light before
us, and help us for the better discovery of our ignorance; and so dispose us to
humility, not pride. But pride and self-love is congenitum malum; it is a
close, and a wit, quickness of conceit, faithfulness of memory, facility of
discourse, propriety of elocution, concinuity of gesture, depth of judgment,
variety of knowledge in Arts and Languages, and whatever else of like kind; are
wind to fill the sails of our pride, and to make us swell above our brethren,
in whom the like gifts are not, or not in like eminency. Scientia inflat, our
Apostle might well say, 1 Cor. 8.1. Qu^ lidicisse nisi (...) f^rmentum, etc.
Pers. Satyr 1. Vide Casaub. Ibid.
Knowledge puffs up: and that it does so readily and unmeasurably, that
unless there be the greater measure both of humility to prevent, and of
charity to vent it, it will in short time breed a dangerous spiritual tympany
in the soul; A disease, from which the strongest constitutions that have been,
have not been altogether so free, but that they have had, if not a spice of it,
yet at least wise an inclination unto it. Even this our blessed Apostle who had
so humility, as to account himself 1 Cor. 15.9.
of Apostles the least, but 1 Timothy 1.15.
of sinners the chiefest; was in so great danger 2 Cor. 12.7. (...).
to be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations; that it was
needful he should have a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12. No marvel then, if
these new converts, but lately called by God out of the darkness of their
ignorance, 1 Pet. 29.
into his marvelous great light; and not having their understandings well
informed, and their judgments thoroughly settled in the doctrine and Use, in the
nature and extent of that Evangelicall liberty whereunto they were called: no
marvel, I say, swelling above their brethren; even as far as to despise them.
So hard is it, even for the most exercised Christian, not to take knowledge of
his own knowledge: or doing so, not to despise and neglect the infirmities of
his lesse-knowing brother. It was not then without good need, that S. Paul
should become a remembrancer to the strong in Faith, not to despise the weak.
And there is as good need the very strongest of us all should remember it, and
take heed of despising even the very weakest. This despising being hurtful
both to the strong, and weak: to the strong as a grievous sin; and to the weak,
as a grievous scandal.

Despising, first is a sin in the strong. Admit thy weak brother were of so
shallow understanding and judgment, that he might say in strictness of truth,
what Agur said but in modesty, and that with an Hyperbole too, Prove. 30. that
Prove. 30.1.
surely he were more brutish than any man, and that he had not in him the
understanding of a man: yet the community of nature, and the common condition
of humanity, should be sufficient to free him from thy contempt. His body was
formed out of the same dust, his soul breathed into him by the same God, as
thine were, and he is thy neighbor. Let his weakness then be what
neighborhood, as he is a man, it is sin in thee to despise him, Prove. 14.21.
[ He that despises his Neighbor, sins, Prove. 14.] But that is not all: He
is not only thy Neighbor as a man; but he is thy Brother too, as a Christian
man. He has embraced the Gospel, he believes in the Son of God, he is within
the pale the Church, as well as thou: though he be not so exquisitely seen in
some higher mysteries, nor so thoroughly satisfied in some other points, as thou
art. If it have pleased God to endow thee with a larger portion of knowledge;
thou ought to consider, first, that thou the more thankful to him that gave
it; and secondly, that it is expected, thou should do so much the more good
with it; and thirdly again, that thou stand charged with so much the deeper
account for it. If the same God have dealt these abilities with a more sparing
hand to thy brother; in despising his weakness, what other thing do thou,
then even despise the good Spirit John 3.8.
that blows where he lists, and 1 Cor. 12.11
gives to every one as For though there be 1 Cor. 12.4.
diversities of gifts, (both for substance and degree;) yet it is the same
spirit, 1 Cor. 12. And the contempt that is cast upon the meanest Christian,
reboundeth upwards again, and in the last resolution reflecteth even upon GOD
himself, and upon his Christ. [ 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
He that despises, despises not man but GOD; who has given unto us his holy
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4. And 1 Cor. 8.12.
when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye
sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.]

Thus you see Despising is hurtful to the despiser* as a Sin: it is Scandal,
to the despised. And therefore our Savior in Matthew. 18. discoursing of Mat.
18.6, etc
not offending little ones; anon varieth the word, and speaks of Ibid. 10.
not despising them: as if despising were an espciall and principal kind of
offending, or scandalizing. And verily so it is, especially to the Weak.
Nothing is more grievous to Nature, scarce Death it self, then for a man to
see himself despised. Plaut. in Cist^ll. Act. 4. Scen. 1.
Ego illam anum irridere me ut sinam? Satius est mihi quovis exitio interire,
could he say in the Comedy. It is a thing that pierces far, and sinketh deep,
and strikes cold, and lies heavy upon the heart: Habet enim quendam aculcum
contumelia; q^^em pati prudentes ac boni viri difficillime possunt. Cic. Ver. 5.
flesh and blood will digest any thing with better patience. The Arist. lib. 2.
Rhet. 2. cap. 2. where he thus ^^^neth Anger, (...).
Philosopher, for this reason makes Contempt the ground of all Discontent; and
sufficiently proves it in the second of his Rhetoriques: there being never any
thing taken offensively, but sub ratione contemptus; nothing provoking to
Anger, but what is either truly a contempt, or at leastwise so apprehended. We
all know how tenderly every one of us would take it, but to be neglected by
others; to have no reckoning at all made of us; to be so reputed as if we were
not, or not worth the looking after, Vide opus Adag. Megarenses neque tertij,
neque qu^ti.
(...), as the Oracle said to the Megarenses. And yet this is but the least
degree of Contempt; a (...). Arist. ubi supra.
privative contempt only. How tenderly then may we think a weak Christian
would take it, when to privative he should find added a (...). Ibid.
Positive contempt also? when he should see his person, and his weakness, not
only not compassionated, but even (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Genesis
taunted, and stouted, and derided, and made a laughing stock, and a jesting
theme? when he should see them strive to speak and do such things in his sight
and hearing, as they know will be offensive unto him, of very purpose to vex,
and afflict, and grieve his weak Christian newly converted to the Faith, to be
thus despised; it were enough, without Gods singular Have mercy upon us, O
Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt. Our soul
is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the
contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123.3, 4.
mercy and support, to make him repent his late conversion, and revolt from the
Faith, by fearful and desperate Apostasy. And he that by such despising
should thus offend, though but Mat. 18.6, etc.
one of the least and weakest of those that believe in Christ, a thousand times
better had it been for him, that he had never been born; yea, ten thousand
times better that a Millstone had been hung about his neck, and he cast into
the bottom of the Sea, ere he had done it. Despising is a grievous sin, in the
despiser, in the Strong: and despising is a grievous scandal despised, to the
Weak. Let not therefore the strong despise the Weak; Let not him that eats,
despise him that eats not. And thus much for the former branch of Saint Paul's
advice: The other follows, Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats.

Faults seldom go single; but by couples at the least. Sinful provocations,
as ball-players with the Ball. When the Ball is once up, they labor to keep it
up: right so when an offense or provocation is once given, it is (...). Et mox.
(...); Max. Tyrius. (...)
tossed to and fro, the receiver ever returning it pat upon the giver, and that
most times with advantage; and so betwixt them they make a shift to preserve
perpetuity of sinning, and of scandalizing one another. It is hard to say who
begins oftener, the Strong, or the Weak: but whether ever begins, he may
be sure the other will follow. If this judge, that will despise; if that
despise, this will judge: either does his endeavor to cry quittance with
other; and thinks himself not to be at all in fault, because the other was
first or more. This Apostle willing to redress faults in both, begins first
with the strong: and for very good reason. Not that his fault simply considered
in it self is greater; (for I take it a certain truth, that to judge one that
is in the right, is a far greater fault, considered absolutely despise one that
is in the wrong:) But because the strong through the ability of his judgment,
ought to yield so much to the infirmity of his weak brother, who through the
weakness of his judgment, is not so well able to discern what is fit for him
to do. What in most other contentions is expected; should be done in this: not
he that is most in fault, but he that has most wit, should give over first.
Indeed in reason, the more faulty is rather bound to yield: but if he will be
unreasonable, (as most times it falls out,) and not do it; then in
discretion, the more able should do it. As Genesis 13.9, 11.
Abraham in yielded the choice to his Nephew Lot upon the contention of their
Heardsmen, which in reason Lot should rather have yielded unto him. But where
both are faulty, as it is not good to stand debating who began first; so it is
not safe to strain courtesy who shall end, and mend first. In the case of my
Text, both were faulty: and therefore our Apostle would have both mend. He has
schooled the Strong, and taught him his lesson, not to despise another
infirmity; Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. Now the Weak
must take out his lesson too, not to judge another liberty; Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats.

I will not trouble you with other significations of the word; to Judge, as it
is here taken, is as much to Ne condemnato. Beza.
condemn: and so the Tropically, by a Piscator in Schol. ad hunc locum.
Synecdoche generis, say Scholiasts: and they say true. But it is a Trope, for
which both in this, and in evil manners have been the spoiling of many good
words; as (...), Tycannus, Sophista, Latro, (...), Ven^num, Magus; and in our
Engglish tongue, Knave, Villain, Churl, etc. See Minsheu, Verstegan, etc.
diverse other good Arts, as to bad manners. Things that are good, or
indifferent, we commonly turn to ill, by using them the worst way: whence it
grows, that words of good or indifferent signification, in time degenerate so
far, as to be commonly taken in the worst sense. But this by the way. The
fault of these weak ones in the case in hand, was, that measuring other men's
actions and consciences, by the model of their own understandings, in their
private censures they rashly passed their judgments upon, and pronounced
peremptory sentence against such, as used their liberty in some things;
concerning the lawfulness whereof loose Christians, carnal professors, nomine
tenus Christiani, men that would not stick to do any thing, and such as made
either none at all, or else very little conscience of their actions. This
practice my Text disalloweth, and forbids: and the rule hence for us is
plain and short, We must not judge others. The Scriptures are express, Matthew.
7.1.
Judge not, that ye be not judged, Matthew. 7. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, etc. 1 Corinthians. 4. Romans 2.1.
Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, Romans 2. And Jam.
4.11.
If thou judge, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a Judge, James 4.

civil judgment, or to pass sentence upon persons orderly and legally
convicted, for such as have calling and authority thereunto in Church or
Commonwealth: for this public politic judgment is commanded Exodus 22.9. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Romans 13.4. and elsewhere.
in the Word of God; and Reason shows it to be of absolute necessity States
and Commonwealths. Not that it is unlawful secondly, to pass even our private
censures upon the outward actions of men; when the Law of God is directly
transgressed, and the transgression apparent from the evidence either of the
fact it self, or of some strong signs and presumptions of it. stupidity, and
not charity, to be credulous against sense. Charity is 1 Cor. 13.5. (...).
ingenuous, and will Ibid. vers^ 7. (...).
believe any thing, though more then Reason: but Charity must not be As Walter
Mapes sometimes Archdeacon^ of Oxenford, relating the gross Simony of the Pope
for confirming the election of Reginald, bastard son to Ioceline, Bishop of
Sarum, into the Sea of Bathe; concludes the narration thus; Sit tamen domina
materque nostra Roma baculus in aqua fractus; and absit credere quae videmus.
Mahap. de nugis Curialium, distinct. 1. cap. 22.
servile, to believe any thing against reason: Shall any charity bind me to
think the Crow the Black-more beautiful? Nor yet thirdly, that all sinister
suspicions are utterly unlawful, even there where there wants evidence
either of fact, or of great signs: if our suspicions proceed not from any
corrupt affections, but only from a Cum debemus aliquibus malis adhibere
remedium, sive nostris, sive alienis, expedit ad hoc ut securius remedium
apponatur, quod supponatur id quod est deterius: quia remedium quod est efficax
contra majus malum, multo magis est efficax contra minus malum. Aquin. 2.2. qu.
60. art. 4. ad. 3.
charitable jealousy of those over whom we have special charge, or in whom we
have special interest, in such sort as that it may concern us to admonish,
reprove, or correct them when they do amiss; so was Job Job 1.5.
suspicious of his sons, for sinning and cursing God in their hearts. But the
judgment here, and elsewhere condemned, is either first, when in our private
thoughts or speeches, upon slender rashly pronounce men as guilty of committing
such or such sins, without sufficient evidence either of fact, or pregnant
signs that they have committed them. Or secondly, when upon some actions
Aperta non ita reprehendamus, ut de sanitate desperemus. Gloss. Ordin. in Romans
14.13.

Non quicquid reprebendendum, etiam dam^andum est. Sen. l. 6. de benef. ca. 39.


undoubtedly sinful, as blasphemy, adultery, perjury, etc. We too severely
censure the persons either for the future, as Reprobates and Castawayes, and
such as shall be certainly damned; or at leastwise for the present, as
hypocrites, and unsanctified and profane, and such as are in the state of
damnation: not considering into what fearful sins it may please God to
suffer, not only his As Paul, Mary Magdalen, etc.
chosen ones before Calling, but even his As David, Peter, etc.
holy ones too after thirdly, when for want either of charity or knowledge, (as
in the present case of this Chapter) we interpret things for the worst to our
brethren: and condemn them of sin for such actions, as are not directly, and in
themselves necessarily sinful; but may (with due circumstances) be performed
with a good conscience, and without sin. Now all judging and condemning of
our brethren in any of these kinds is sinful and damnable; and that in very
many respects, especially these four; which may serve as so many weighty
reasons, why we ought not to judge one usurpation, the rashness, the
uncharitableness, and the scandal of it.

First, it is an Usurpation. He that is of right to judge, must have calling
and commission for it. Exodus 2.14.
Quis constituit te? sharply replied upon Moses, Exodus 2. Who made thee a
Judge? and Luke 12.14.
Quis constituit me? reasonably alleged by our Savior, Luke 12. Who made me a
Judge? Thou take too much upon thee then thou son of man, whosoever thou art
that judge: thus saucily to thrust thy self into Gods seat, and to (...);
etc. Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 42.
invade his Throne. Remember thy self well, and learn to know thine own rank.
Quis tu? Who art thou that 4. or Who art thou that judge another servant? in
the next following verse to my Text. As if the Apostle had said; What art thou?
or what have thou to do to judge him that Romans 14*4.
stands or falls to his own Master? Jam. 4.12.
Thou art his fellow servants, not his LORD. He has another Lord, that can and
will judge him; thy Lord too, and can and will judge thee: for so he argues
anon at verse 10. Why do thou judge thy brother? We shall all stand before
the judgement-seate of CHRIST. GOD has reserved Mali operis vindictam, Boni
gloriam, utriusque Judicium.
three Prerogatives royal to himself, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
Vengeance, Isai. 42.8. Romans 12.19.
Glory, and Romans 14.4. -- 10. Jam. 4.11, 12.
judgment. As it is not safe for us then to encroach upon Tres hominum species
maximam Deo faciunt injuriam: Superbi, qui auferunt ei Gloriam; Iracundi, qui
Vindictam; Rigidi, qui Judicium.
GODS Royalties in either of the other two; Glory, or Vengeance: so neither in
this of Judgment; Dominus judicabit, Heb. 10.30.
The Lord himself will judge his people, Heb. 10. It is flat Usurpation in us
to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Secondly, it is rashness in us. A Judge must Et nunc Reges, intelligite:
erudimini, qui judicatis terram. Psa. 2.10. si judicas, cognosce. Sen. in Med.
Act. 2. (...). Phocylid.
understand the truth, both for matter of Et normam, and Causam: Normam,
secundum quam; and causam, de qua statuendum. Ad Factum haec pertinet; illa ad
ju^: ad illam, Peritia opus est; ad hanc Prudentia
fact, and for point of Law; and he must be sure rash judgment. How then dare
any of us undertake to sit as Judges upon other men's Consciences, wherewith we
are so little acquainted, that we are indeed but too much unacquainted with our
own? We are not able to search the depth of our own Jer. 17.9. I know nothing
by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is the LORD,
1 Corinthians 4 4. If our heart condemn us, GOD is greater than our heart, and
knows all things, 1 John 3.21. Latet m^ facultas mea, quae in me est; ut
animus meus de viribus suis ipse se interrog tus, non facile sibi credendum
existimet, quia and quod inest ple^umque occultum est. Aug. lib. 10. Confess.
c. 32.
wicked and deceitful hearts; and to ransack thoroughly the many secret
windings and turnings therein: how much less then are we able to fadome the
bottomes of other men's hearts, with any certainty to pronounce of them either
good or evil? We must then leave the judgments of spirits, and hearts, and
reins, to him that is Heb. 12.9.
the Father and alone Psalm. 79. and 26.2. Jer. 11.20. and 17.10, and 20.12.
Rev. 2.23.
searches the hearts and reins: before whose eyes all things are Heb. 4.13.
(...), as the word is most Emphaticall, Hebrews 4. Wherefore our Apostles
precept elsewhere is good to this purpose, 1 Cor. 4. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the LORD come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts. Unless we be able to bring these hidden things to light, and to
make manifest these counsels; it is Temeritas est, d^m^^^e quod nescias. Sen.
Epist. 91. Sunt quaedam facta media, quae ignoramus quo animo fiant, quia and
bono and malo fi^ri possunt, de quibus temerarium est judicare. August. lib. 2.
de Sermon. Dom. in monte. cap. 18.
rashnessi in us to judge: and therefore we must not judge.

Thirdly, this judging is uncharitable. Charity is not easily suspicious; but
upon just cause: much less then censorious and peremptory. In rerum judicio
debet aliquis n^ti ad hoc, ut interpretetur unumquodque secundum quod est: in
judicio autem personarum, ut interpretetur in melius, Aquin. 2.2. qu. 60. art.
4. ad 3. and he gives a substantial reason for it, ib. in resp. ad. 2.
Things, it is wisdom to judge secundum quod sunt, as near as we can, to judge
of them just as they are, without any sway or partial inclination either to
the right hand, or to the left. But when we are to judge of Men, and their
Actions: it is not altogether so: there the rule of Charity Glossa Ord. in hunc
loc. and Theologi passim. Semper quicquid dubium ^st, humanitas inclinat in
melius. Sen. ep. 81.
Dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda. Unless we see manifest cause to
the contrary, we ought ever to interpret what is done by others, with as much
favor as may be. To err thus is better than to hit right the other way;
because this course is Error charitatis, salutaris error.
safe, and secureth us, as from Melius est quod aliquis frequenter fallatur,
habens bonam opinione^ de malo homine, quam quoth rarius fallatur habens m^lam
opinionem de bono homine: quia ex h^c sit injuria alicui; non autem ex primo.
Aqu. 2.2ae qu. 60. art. 4. ad r.
injuring others, so from endangering our selves: whereas in judging ill,
though right, we are still Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit. Sen. in
Med. Act. 2.
unjust (...), the event only, and not our choice freeing us from wrong
judgment. True Charity is ingenious; it 1 Cor. 13.5.
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. How far then are they from Charity, that are ever
suspicious, and think nothing well? For us, let it be Charity; and to avoid, as
far as humane frailty will give leave, even sinister suspicions of our
brethrens actions: or if through frailty we cannot that, yet let us not from
light suspicions fall into uncharitable censures: let us at leastwise suspend
our Si suspiciones vit^re n^n possumus, quia homines sumus: judicia tamen, id
est, definitivas firmasque sententias continere debemus. Gloss* Ordin. in 1
Cor. 4.
definitive judgment, and not determine too peremptorily against such as do
not in every respect just as we do, or as we would have them do, or as we think
they should do. It is uncharitable for us to judge, and therefore we must not
judge.

Scandal in judging. Possibly he that is judged, may have that strength of
Faith and Charity, that though rash and uncharitable censures lie thick in his
way, he can lightly skip over all those stumbling blocks, and escape a fall.
Saint Paul had such a measure of strength; 1 Cor. 4.5.
With me it is a very small thing, says he, that I should be judged of you, or
of humane judgment, 1 Cor. 4. If our judging light upon such an object, it is
indeed no scandal to him: but that is no thanks to us. We are to esteem things
by their natures, not events: and therefore we give a scandal, if we judge;
take it not as a scandal. For, that judging is in it self a scandal, is clear
from ver. 13. of this Chapter; Let us not therefore, says S. Paul, judge one
another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or
an occasion to fall in his brothers way. And thus we see four main Reasons
against this judging of our brethren. 1. We have no right to judge; and so our
judging is usurpation. 2. We may err in our judgments; and so our judging is
rashness. 3. We take things the worst way when we judge; and so our judging is
uncharitable. 4. We offer occasion of offense by our judging; and so our
judging is scandalous. Let not him

despising, and of judging our brethren laid open; and the ugliness of both
discovered. I now descend to make such Application, as I promised, both of the
case and rules, unto some differences, and to some offenses, given and taken in
our Church in point of Ceremony. The Case ruled in my Text was of eating, and
not eating: the Differences which some maintain in our Church, are many in the
particular; (as of kneeling, and not kneeling; wearing, and not wearing;
crossing, and not crossing, etc.) But all these, and most of the rest of them,
may be comprehended in gross under the terms of conforming, and not
conforming. Let us first compare the Cases; that having found wherein they
agree, or disagree, we may thereby judge how far S. Paul's advice in my Text
ought to rule us, for not despising, for not judging one another. four special
things, wherein if we compare this our Case with the Apostles; in every of the
four we shall find some agreement, and some disparity also: 1. The nature of
the matter: 2. The abilities of the persons: 3. Their several practice about
the things: and 4. Their mutual carriage one toward another. And first, let
us consider how the two Cases agree in each of these.

First, the matter whereabout the eater and the not-eater differed in the
Romans, was in the nature of it indifferent: so it is the conformer and not
conformer in our Case. As there fish, and flesh, and herbs were merely
indifferent; such as might be eaten, Cap and Surplis, Cross and Ring, and the
rest, are things merely indifferent; such as (in regard of their own nature)
may be used or not used without sin; as being neither expressly commanded, nor
expressly forbidden in the Word of God.

Secondly, the Persons agree. For as there, so here also; some strong in faith,
some weak. There are many, whose judgments are upon certain and infallible
grounds assured and resolved, and that certitudine Fidei, that Cap, and
Surplis, and Cross, and the rest, are things lawful, and such as may be used
with a good Conscience. ignorance, or custom, or prejudice, or otherwise
weakened in their judgments; cannot (or will not) be persuaded, that these
things are altogether free from Superstition and Idolatry: nor consequently the
use of them from sin.

Thirdly, the practice of the persons are much alike. As there, the strong did
use his liberty according to the assurance of his knowledge ((...)) and did eat
freely without scruple; and the weak did forbear to eat, because of his
doubting and irresolution: So here, most of us in assured confidence that we
may wear, and cross, and kneel, and use the other Ceremonies and Customs of
our Church, do willingly, and ex animo conform our selves thereunto. Yet some
there are, who out of I know not what niceness and scrupulosity, make dainty
of them, and either utterly refuse conformity, or at leastwise desire respite,
till they can better inform themselves.

Lastly, there is some correspondence also in the faulty carriage of the Eater
despised the Not-eater; and the Not-eater judged the Eater: so here, it cannot
be denied, but that some Conformers (although I hope far the lesser, I am sure
far the worser sort,) do despise and scandalize the Non-Conformers more than
they have reason to do, or any discreet honest man will allow. But is it not
most certain also, that the Non-conformers (but too generally, yea, and the
better sort of them too, but too often and much) do pass their censures with
mavelous great freedom; and spend their judgments liberally upon, and
against the Conformers? Hitherto the Cases seem to agree. One would mutatis
mutandis, the Apostles rule would as well fit our Church and Case, as the
Roman and should as well free the Non-Conformers from our Contempt, as us from
their Censures. Let not him that conformeth, despise him that conformeth not:
and let not him that conformeth not, judge him that conformeth.

But if you will please to take a second surview of the four several the Cases
seemed to agree; you shall find the two Cases in each of the four respects. In
the case of my Text, the matter of difference among them, was not only
indifferent in the nature of it; but it was use: the Church ( perhaps) not
having determined any thing positively therein; at least no public authority
having either enjoined, or forbidden, the use of such or such meats. But in
the Case of our Church it is far otherwise. Capp, Surplis, Cross, Ring and
other Ceremonies, which are the Matter of our differences, though they be
things indifferent for their nature, and in themselves: yet are not so for
their use, and unto us. If the Church had been silent, if Authority had
prescribed nothing herein; these Ceremonies had then remained for their use, as
they are for their nature, indifferent: Lawful, and such as might be used
without sin; Arbitrary, and such as might be also forborne without sin. But men
must grant (though they be unwilling, if yet they will be reasonable) that
every particular Church Article 20. agreeably to the confessions of other
Protestant Churches.
has power, for (...). 1 Cor. 14.20.
decency and orders sake, to ordain and constitute Ceremonies. Which being once
ordained, and by public authority enjoined, cease to be indifferent for their
use, though they remain still so for their nature: and of indifferent become so
necessary, that neither may a man without sin Constit. and Canon. 30.
refuse them, where Authority requires; nor use them, where Authority
restrains the use.

Neither is this accession of Necessity any impeachment to Christian or Ex. 1
Cor. 7.35.
insnaring of men's conscience: as Lincolnsh. Abridg. pa^ 34
some have objected. humane Constitutions, when we thrust them upon men as if
they were divine; and bind men's consciences to them immediately, as if they
were immediate parts of Gods worship, or of absolute necessity unto salvation.
Tyranny and Usurpation over men's Consciences, the Mar. 7, 8. etc.
Pharisees of old did, and the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and we
justly hate in her: In Spiritum Sanctum blasphemant, qui sacros Canones
violant. 25. qu. 1. Vio arore.
equalling, if not preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of GOD. But our
Church (GOD be thanked) is far from any such impious presumption: and has
sufficiently Constit. etc. can. 74. art. 20* Act for uniformity; and Treat. of
Ceremonies prefixed to the book of Common Prayer.
d^clared her self by solemn protestation, enough to satisfy any ingenuous
impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these ceremonial
Constitutions, she has no other purpose, then to reduce all Without prejudice
to the liberty of other Churches. See Pref. to Communion Book.
her children to an orderly uniformity in the outward worship of God; so far is
she from seeking to draw any opinion, either of The Church ought not to enforce
any thing besides the holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of salvation.
Artic. 20.
divine necessity upon Constitution, or of effectual holiness upon the
Ceremony. And as for the prejudice which seems to be hereby given to
Christian liberty: it is so slender a conceit, that it seems to bewray in the
objecters a desire, not so much of satisfaction, as cavil. For first, the
liberty of a Christian to all indifferent things, is in the Mind and
Conscience: and is then infringed, when the Conscience is bound and straightened,
by imposing upon it an opinion of doctrinall Necessity. But it is no wrong to
the Liberty of a Christian man's conscience, to bind him to outward observance
for Orders sake; and to impose upon him a necessity of Obedience. Which one
distinction of Doctrinall and Obedientiall well weighed, and rightly applied,
is of it self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point. For, to make all
restraint of the outward man in matters indifferent an impeachment of Christian
liberty; what were it else, but even to bring flat See Conference at Hamp^o^
Court, pa. 70.71.
Anabaptisme and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond of
subjection and obedience to lawful authority? I beseech you consider, wherein
can the immediate power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers
over their inferiors consist; or the due obedience of inferiors be shown
toward them: if not in these I^ rebus medits lex posita est obedi^ntiae Bern.
Epist. 7.
Indifferent and Arbitrary things? For, things De hujusmodi quippe nec
praeceptor expectandus, nec prohibitos, au scultandus est. Bern. de praec. and
dispensat. See Agell. 2. Noct. Attic. 7. and Bernard. Epist. 7.
absolutely Necessary, as commanded by to do; whether humane Authority require
them, or no: and things absolutely Unlawful, as prohibited by God; we are
bound not to do; whether humane Authority forbid them, or no. There are none
other things left then; wherein to express properly the Obedience due to
superior Authority, then these Indifferent things. And if a See Sam. Collins
Sermon in 1 Timothy 6.3. page 44. etc.
Father or Master have power to prescribe to his Child or Servant in
indifferent things; and such restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian
liberty in them: Why should any man, either deny the like power to
Church Governors, to make Ecclesiasticall-constitutions concerning indifferent
things? or interpret that power to the prejudice of Christian Liberty? And
again Secondly, Ceremonies and Constitutions to be things merely indifferent: I
mean in the general. For howsoever every particular Ceremony be indifferent;
and every particular Constitution Artic. 34
arbitrary and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies, it is
necessary, Necessitate absoluta, in as much as no outward work can be performed
without Ceremonial Constitutions concerning them, it is also necessary (though
not simply and absolutely, as the former; yet ex hypothesi, and) See Calvin
lib. 4. Instit. c. 10. sect. 27.
necessitate convenientiae. Otherwise, since some Ceremonies must needs be
used; every Parish, nay every Quot capita tot Schismata. Hieronym.
Man would have his own fashion by himself, as his humor led him: whereof what
other could be the issue, but infinite distraction, and unorderly confusion in
the Church? And again thirdly, to return their weapon upon themselves; If every
restraint indifferent things be injurious to Christian liberty: then themselves
are injurious no less by their negative restraint from Like that Col. 2.21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not.
Wear not, Cross not, Kneel not, etc. then they would have the world believe
our Church is by her positive restraint unto these Ceremonies of wearing, and
crossing, and kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let themselves that
are parties judge, whether is more injurious to Christian Liberty; public
Authority by mature advice commanding, what might be forborne, or private
spirits through humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be used: the whole
Church imposing the use, or a few Brethren requiring the forbearance of such
things, as are otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, or for
forbearance.

our Church makes greater matters of Ceremonies than thus; and prefers them
even before the most necessary duties of preaching and administering the
Sacraments: in as much as they are imposed upon Ministers under pain of
Suspension and Deprivation from their Ministerial Functions and Charges. First,
for actual Our Church, it is well known, has not always used that rigor she
might have done. Where she has been forced to proceed as far as deprivation;
she has ordinarily by her fair, and slow, and compassionate proceedings
therein, sufficiently manifested Secondly, those that are suspended or
deprived; suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt. For howsoever
they would bear the world in hand, that they are the only persecuted ones, and
that they suffer for their Consciences: yet in truth, they do but abuse the
credulity of the simple therein; and herein (as in many other things) jump with
the Papists, whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent from. For as
Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out, they are martyred for their Pro
inficiatione pontificatus foeminei. Aquipont. in resp. ad Sohn. de Antichristo,
These. 15. speaking of the Priests executed in the reign of Qu. Elizabeth.
Religion; See Donnes Pseudo-Martyr per totum; especially c. 5, etc.
justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and felonious or treacherous
practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the brethren pretend they are
persecuted for their consciences; when they are indeed but justly censured for
their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of lawful authority. For it is not
the refusal of these Ceremonies they are deprived for, otherwise the matter
wherein they show their contempt: it is the The practice of our Church
sufficiently confirms this: which censureth no man for the bare omission of
some kind of Rites and Ceremonies now and then; where it may be presumed by the
parties cheerful and general conformity otherwise, that such omission
proceeds not either from an opinative dislike of the Ceremony imposed, or
from a timorous and obsequious humouring of such as do dislike it. Whosoever
willingly and purposely does openly break, etc. Artic. 34.
Contempt it self, which formerly and properly subjecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of
authority, though in the In minimi^ quoque mandatis culpam facit non minimam;
and convertit in crimen gravis rebellionis naevum satis levem simplicis
transgressionis. Bern. de prec. and dispens.
smallest matter, deserves no small punishment: all authority having been ever
sollicitous (as it has good reason) above all things to vindicate and preserve
it self from contempt; by inflicting sharp punishments upon contemptuous
persons in the smallest matters, above all other sorts of offenders in any
degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared the first and main
difference betwixt the case of my Text, and the case of our the Matter: the
things whereabout they differed, being every way indifferent; ours not so.

And as in the Matter; so there is secondly much odds in the condition the
Persons. The refusers in the Case of my Text, being truly weak in the Faith; as
being but lately converted to the Christian Faith, and not sufficiently
instructed by the Church in the doctrine use of Christian liberty in things
indifferent: Whereas with our refusers it is much otherwise. First, they are
not new Proselytes; but men born, and bred, and brought up in the bosom of the
Church: yea many, and the chiefest of them, such as have taken upon them the
calling of the Ministry, and the charge of Souls, and the office of teaching
and instructing others. And such men should not be weaklings. Secondly, ours
are such as take themselves the ignorance and simplicity the vulgar, and to
lament (which is, God knows, lamentable enough; though not comparable to what
it was within not many years since:) the want of knowledge, and the
unsufficiency of some of the Clergy in the Land. And with what reason should
these men expect the privilege of weak ones? Thirdly, our Church has the
innocence of her p^rpose and meaning in enjoying the Ceremonies: nor so only;
but has been content to hear, and receive, and admit the Objections and
reasons of the refusers; and has taken pains to answer and satisfy to the
full all that ever yet could be said in that behalf. And therefore it is vanity
weakness; where all good means have been plentifully used for full information
in the points in doubt. Lastly, upon the the weakness of our brethren,
pretended by those that are willing to speak favorably of them, proceeds for
the most part not so much out of simple ignorance, arising understanding or
means; as out of an ignorance at the best in some degree of wilfulness and
affectation, in not seeking, or not admitting such ingenuous satisfaction, as
they might have by reason: if not out of the poison of corrupt and carnal
affections (as they give us sometimes but too much cause to suspect) of pride,
of singularity, of envy, of contention, of factious admiring some men's persons.
By which, and other like partial affections, men's judgments become oftentimes
so blinded, that of unwilling at the first, they become at length unable to
discern things with that freedom and ingenuity they should. And so the Cases
differ the Persons.

thirdly in the practice of the Persons. There the strong did eat, because he
was well assured he might do it, (...), in the verse before my Text: and the
weak did no more but forbear eating; as indeed he might do, no authority
interposing to the contrary. But here, we conform, not only because we know we
may lawfully do it; but for that we know we must of (...). Romans 13.5.
necessity do it, as bound thereunto in obedience to lawful authority, and in
the Not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ibid.
conscience we ought to make of such obedience. And the refusers do not only
de facto, not conform; to the contempt of authority, and the scandal of
Petitions, and Supplications, and Admonitions, and other publications of the
reasons and grounds of their such refusal. And verily, this Country and
County has been not the least busy in these factions and tumultuous courses:
both in troubling our most gracious, judicious, and religious Sovereign with
their Meditations on the Lords Prayer, page 12. in the Margent.
petitions; and also in publishing their reasons, in a Book called The
Abridgement, printed 1605. to their own shame, and the shame of their Country.
He who (as I have been informed) was thought to have had a chief hand in the
collecting of those Conformity justly deprived from his Benefice in this
Diocese, and thereupon relinquished his Ministry for a time, betaking himself
to another Calling: so depriving the Church and people of God of the fruit and
benefit of those excellent gifts which were in him. But since that time he
has, upon better and more advised judgment, subscribed and conformed: and the
Church like an indulgent Mother has not only received him into her bosom
again, but has restored him too, though not to the same, yet to a Benefice
elsewhere of far better value.

the faulty carriage of the persons: and that on both parts; especially on
ours. For though our Nonconforming Brethren condemn us with much liberty of
speech and spirit, having yet less reason for it than the weak Romans had (for
the strong among them might have forborne some things for the Weaks sake;
scandal so to have done; which we cannot do without greater scandal in the
open contempt of lawful authority:) yet we do not despise them, (I mean with
allowance from the Church: if particular men do more than they should, it is
their private fault, and ought not to be imputed to us, or to our Church) but
use all good means we can to draw them to moderate courses and just obedience;
although they better deserve to be despised than the weak Romans did: they
being truly Weak, ours Obstinate; they Timorous, ours also Contemptuous.

Paul's advice here given to the Romans in their case of eating, and not-eating,
ought to rule us in our case of conforming, and not-conforming in point of
Ceremony. And first, of not despising: then of not judging. The ground of the
Apostles precept for not despising him that ate not, was his weakness. So far
then as this ground holds in our case, this precept is to be extended, and no
further. And we are hereby bound not to despise our Nonconforming Brethren, so
far forth as it may probably appear weak and not wilful. But so far forth,
as by their courses and proceedings it may be reasonably thought their refusal
proceeds from corrupt or partial affections, or is apparently maintained
with obstinacy and contempt: I take it we may, notwithstanding the Apostles
admonition in my Text, in some sort even despise them.

But because they think they are not so well and sairly dealt withal
grievances, wherein they take themselves despised; and examine how just they
are. They say, first, they are despised in being scoffed and flouted,
Puritanes, and Brethren, and Precisians, and in having many jests and fooleries
fastened upon them, whereof they are not guilty. They are secondly despised,
All benefit of Law being denied them, and they debarred of other means by
conference or writing for heir. defense. Def^ of Ministers reasons part 1.
pref. to Reader, We do accuse the Reverend Bishops in the sight of God and Man,
for their hard and extreme dealing toward us. Removal of imputations. p. 40.
they say, in that when they are convented before the Bishops and others in
Authority, they cannot have the favor of an indifferent hearing: but are
proceeded against as far as Suspension, and sometimes Deprivation, without
taking their answers to what is objected, or giving answers to what they
object. Thirdly, in that many honest and religious men, of excellent and
useful gifts, cannot be permitted the liberty of their Consciences, Ministry;
only for standing out in these things, which our selves cannot but confess to
be indifferent.

To their first Grievance we answer, that we have nothing to do with those that
are Popishly affected. If they wrong them, as it is themselves. But by the way,
let our Brethren consider, whether Ceremonies we retain, may not be one
principal means to confirm, but so much the more in their darkness and
superstition those that are wavering, and might possibly by more ingenuous and
seasonable insinuations be won over to embrace the truth which we profess. And
as for loose persons and profane ones, that make it their sport upon their
Ale-benches to rail and scoff at Puritanes; As if it were warrant enough for
them to drink drunk, talk bawdy, swear and stare, or do any thing without
control, because forsooth they are no Puritanes; As we could wish our
Brethren, and Lay-followers, by their uncouth and sometimes ridiculous
behavior, had not given profane persons too much advantage to play upon them,
and through their sides to wound even Religion it self: so we could wish also
that some men by unreasonable and unjust, other some by unseasonable and
indiscreet scoffing at them, had not given them advantage to triumph in their
own innocence, and persist in their affected obstinacy. It cannot but be some
confirmation to men in error, to see men of dissolute and loose behavior,
with much eagerness, and petulancy and virulence to speak against them. We all
know how much scandal and prejudice it is to a good cause; to be either
followed by persons open to just exception, or maintained with slender and
unsufficient reasons, or prosecuted with unseasonable and undiscreet violence.
And I am verily persuaded, that Many by their factious behavior were driven to
be Papists. The Kings Maj. in Confer. at Hamp. page 98.
as the increase of Papists in some parts of the Land, has occasionally sprung
(by a kind of Antiperistasis) from the intemperate courses of their neighbor-
Puritanes; so the increase of Puritanes, in many parts of the Land, owes not
so much to any sufficiency themselves conceive in their own grounds, as to the
disadvantage of some profane, or scandalous, or idle, or ignorant, or
indiscreet opposers. But setting these aside, I see not but that otherwise
Puritan, and the rest, are justly given them. For appropriating to themselves
the names of Brethren, Professors, Goodmen, and other like; as differences
betwixt them and those they call Formalists: would they not have it thought,
that they have a Brotherhood and profession of their own, freer and purer from
Superstition and Idolatry, than others have, that are not of the same stamp?
and doing so, why may they not be called Puritanes? The name, I know, is
sometimes fastened upon those that deserve it not; Rascal people will call any
man that bears but the face of honesty, a Puritan: but why should that
hinder others from placing

second Grievance I answer: Public means by Conferences, Disputations, and
otherwise, have been often used: and private men not seldom afforded the
favor of respite and liberty to bring in their allegations. And I think it can
be hardly, or Deprivation has been used, but where fatherly Admonitions have
first been used, and time given to the Delinquents to consider of it, and
inform themselves better. This course usually has been taken: though every
private particular man has no reason to expect it. The Reverend Fathers of our
Church, we may well think, amid so much other employment, cannot be so
unthrifty of their good hours, as to lavish them out in hearing contentious
persons eandem cuntilenam, sing the same note a hundred times over, and require
farther satisfaction, after so many public and unanswerable satisfactions
already given. Yet have the Witness the learned Books of diverse reverend
Prelates; John Whitgift, John Buck^ridge, Thomas Mor^on, etc.
Bishops and other Church-Governernours out of their religious zeal for the
peace of Gods Church, been so far from despising our Brethren herein: that they
have dispensed sometimes with their other weighty occasions, and taken pains
to answer their reasons, and confute their exceptions, satisfy all their
doubts, and discover the weakness of all their grounds in the points
questioned.

And as to their third Grievance. First, for my own part, I make sincere hearts
to Godward, and are unfainedly zealous of Gods Truth and for Religion. the
comfort of it in their own souls: and we see the fruits of it in their
conversation, and rejoice at it. But yet I cannot be so ignorant on the other
side, as not to know, that the most sanctified and zealous men are men, and
subject to carnal and corrupt affections; and may be so far swayed by them in
their judgments, as not to be able to discern without prejudice and
partiality, truth from error. Good men, and Gods dear children may continue
in some Sancti stante charitate poss^^ errare etiam contra Catholicam
veritatem. Occham Dial. part. 1. l. 2 c. 4.
error in Judgment, and consequently in a sinful practice arising thence; So
Pelagius, from whose root Popery (in that branch) sprouted, was a man as str^ct
for life as most Catholics: yet a most dangerous and pestilent Heretic.

Pelagii, viri, ut audio, sancti, and non parvo pro^^ctu Christiani. Aug. 3. de
peccat* merit. and rem. 1. Istum sicut eum qui noverunt loquuntur, bo^u^ ac
praedicandum virum. Ibid. cap. 3.


and live and dye in it (as some of these men have done in disobedience to
lawful Authority) unknown sins. It is not Honesty, nor Sincerity, that can
privilege men from either erring or sinning. Neither ought the unreproved
conversation of men countenance out their opinions, or their practices, against
light of Divine Scripture, and right Reason: As we read Cyprians error in old
time; and we see in our days not only the suspected Tenets of Arminius, but
even the bold heresies of Faustus Socinus have spread much the more for the
reverend opinion men had of their personal endowments and sanctity. Secondly,
though Comparisons be ever harsh, and most times odious; yet since honesty and
piety is alleged, (without disparagements be it spoken Popish persecution, how
many godly Bishops, and conformable Ministers laid down their lives for the
testimony of Gods Truth, and for the maintenance of his Gospel? And if it
should please God in his just judgment (as Schisms and distractions most
worthily deserved,) to put us once again to a fiery trial (which the same God
for his goodness and mercy defend:) I make no question but many thousands of
Conformers would (by the grace of GOD) resist unto blood, embrace the Faggot,
and burn at a Stake, in detestation of all Popish, Antichristian Idolatry; as
readily, and chearefully, and constantly, as the hottest, and precisest, and
most Non-Conformer. But Thirdly, let men's honesty, and piety, and gifts be what
they can: must not men of honesty, and piety, and gifts, live under Laws? And
what reason these, or any other Non enim in cu^usquam persona praetermittendum
est, quod institutis generalibus continetur. Leo, did. 61. Miramur.
exempt any man from the just censure of the Church, in case he will not obey
her Laws, and conform to her Ceremonies? especially, since such men's impunity
would but encourage others to presume upon the like favor: and experience
teaches us, that no men's errors are so exemplary and pernicious as theirs,
who for their eminency of gifts, or sanctity of life, are most followed with
popular applause, and personal admiration.

Grievances against us, how unjust they are, in the matter of Despising. I
would they did no more despise the Churches Authority, than we do their
infirmities! But in the matter of judging; grievance against them. As might be
declared at large in many instances, out of their printed Books, and private
Letters, and common discourses. I will but give you a I refer the Reader for
more particular satisfaction to Fr. Masons Sermon on 1 Cor. 14.40. page 30.
Sam. Collins Sermon on 1 Timothy 6.3. pa. 21.22. and others; but especially to
their own writings.
taste, because I know I grow tedious, and I long to be at an end.

First, they judge our Church as half Popish and Antichristian, for retaining
some Ceremonies used in Popery: though we have purged them from their
Superstitions, and restored them to their Primitive use. Their great admired
Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
opener of the Revelation, makes our Church the Linsey-Wolsey Laodicean
Church; neither hot nor cold. Elizabeth of most blessed memory, to a This
Simile was first used by a very Reverend, grave and worthy Deane, (who has
many ways deserved well of our whole Church) Alexander Noel Deane of Paul's, in
a Sermon before Queen Elizabeth: and modestly and moderately urged, not at all
against the Ceremonies (which by his practice he did allow) but for the further
restraint of Popish Priests and Jesuits, who lay thick in Ireland, and the
western coasts of England and Wales, as heaps of dust and dirt behind the
doors. Yet I here ascribed it to the Puritanes, who (though they father it
upon that good man) must own it as their own brat, because by mis-applying it
to the Ceremonies, they have made it their own. -- Male dum recitas, incipit
esse tuum.
sluttish houseWife; that having swept the house, yet left the dust and dirt
behind the doors; meaning thereby the Ceremonies. If our Church were but half
so ill, as these men would make it, I think every honest religious man should
hold himself bound to separate from it, at his most excellent Majesty
Meditations on the Lords Prayer, pa. 11. etc. primae edit. 1619. See Hookers
Preface. Sect. 8.
has observed the Brownists have done upon their very grounds: accounting them
as lukewarm for not quite separating, as they do us for no further reforming.

Secondly, they judge our Bishops, and other Church Governors, as Antichrist,
Locusts of the bottomless pit; domineering Lords over Gods heritage; usurpers
of temporal jurisdiction; Spiritual Tyrants over men's Consciences, etc.
Seeking by all means to make the name of Lord-Bishop odious to the Gentry and
Commons. Witness their Mar-prelate; and other infamous and scandalous Libels
in that kind. Having power in their hands, if the Bishops should use more
rigorous courses toward them, then they have done: could ye blame them?

Thirdly, they judge those that subscribe and conform, Machiavilian
time-servers; formal Gospellers; State- Divines; men that know Law; nor
Religion, but the Kings: and such as would be as forward for the Mass, as the
Communion, if the State should alter.

Fourthly, all such Ministers as are not endowed with gifts for the Pulpit,
they damn, as hirelings, and not sheepherds: calling them idol-Sheepherds;
betrayers of Christ's flock; intruders into the Ministry without a Calling;
dumb Dogs, and I know not how many names besides. Yea, although they be such
as are diligent, according to their measure of gifts, to perform such duties as
the Church requires: to present the prayers of the people to God; to declare
(by reading the holy Bible, and good Homilies for that purpose appointed) the
will of God to the people; to instruct the younger sort in the points of
Catechism; to visit and comfort the sick and afflicted; and to administer
reverently and orderly the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Fifthly, they judge all such as interpose for the Churches peace, oppose their
novelties, as enemies to all goodness, men of profane minds; haters of
Religion; despisers of the Word; persecutors of the Brethren; impes of Satan;
instruments of Hell; and such as utterly abhor all godly and Christian
courses.

Sixthly, and lastly (for I irke to rake longer in this sink) they bewray
themselves to be manifest Judges of all that are not of their Brethren, and
Good-men, and Professors: as if none had Brotherhood in Christ, none had
interest in goodness, none made Profession of the Gospel, but themselves.
Whereas others have received the sign of their Profession in their foreheads
after Baptism, which perhaps they did not: whereas others daily stand up in
the Congregation to make Profession of their Christian belief, which it may be
they do not: or, (if those things be profession with their blood, as any of
them can be.

But they will say, these peremptory Censures are but the faults temperate in
their speeches, and Moderate in their courses; and desire only they may be
spared for their own particular: but they

I answer first: it were lamentable, if this were not so; If all were of that
hot temper, or distemper rather, that many are; they would quickly tire out
themselves without spurring. F^r be it from us to judge men's hearts; or to
condemn men for that we know not by them. Yet of some that carry themselves
with tolerable moderation outwardly; we have some cause to suspect, that they
do inwardly and in their hearts judge as deeply, as the hottest spirited
railers. And we gather it from their forwardness at every Church, and the
discipline and the Ceremonies thereof, as far as they well dare. And if such
men meddle no further, we may reasonably think, Eadem velle eos cognosces: da
posse, quantu^ volunt. Senec. Epist. 42.
it is not for want of good will to do it, but because they dare not.

Secondly, though they preach not against these things in the public
Congregations; yet in their private conventicles it is not unknown some do.
Though their Pulpits do not ring with it; yet their Houses do: though their
ordinary Sermons ad populum be more modest; yet their set conferences are
sometimes but too free, especially when Mat. 10.27.
in the ear; Lay-Disciples openly preach on the housetop.

Thirdly, although both their Pulpits and Tables should be silent: yet their
Practice sufficiently preaches their dislike. And who knows not that a Real
and Exemplary seducement makes the Author guilty, as well as a Verbal and
Oratory? Saint Peter did not preach Iudaisme; but only for offending the Jews,
forbear to eat with the Gentiles: yet Saint Paul reproves him for it to his
face, and interprets that fact of his, as an effectual and almost compulsive
Cogis Iudaizare, Gal. 2. Gal. 2.14. Utique conversationis fuit vitium, non
praedicationis. Tertull. de praescript. cap. 23. Non imperio, sed facto. Lyra.
Non docentis imperio, sed conversationis exemplo. Gloss. Ord. ibid.
Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Iudaize?

Lastly, it is to be considered, whether it may be enough for a Pastor, not to
meddle with these things: and whether he be not in conscience bound, especially
in case he live among a people distracted in opinions, to declare himself
expressly either for them, or against them. If they be utterly unlawful, and he
know it so; how is he not bound in conscience to reprove those that use them,
or require them? otherwise he betrayeth the Otherwise what else do we, but deny
and betray the truth? Defense of Min. reasons part. 1. Pref. to the Reader.
truth of God by his silence, and suffers men to go on in their superstition
without rebuke. But lawfulness; how is he not bound in Conscience to reprove
those that refuse them, or oppose them? otherwise he betrayeth the peace of the
Church by his silence, and suffers men to go on in their disobedience without
rebuke. Nay more, every Minister that has received pastoral charge, has
twice thrice (if not oftener) witnessed his allowance of all and singular the
39. Articles of the Church of England. Once at his Ordination before the
Bishop; then at his Institution into his Benefice, before his Ordinary; and
both these by Subscription under his hand: and then after upon his Induction
before his own Flock; and that by verbal Approbation. By which Subscription
and Approbation, he has not only acknowledged Artic. 20.
in the Church the power of ordaining Rites and Ceremonies, Artic. 20. but he
has after a sort also bound himself Artic. 34.
openly to rebuke such as willingly and purposely break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, as offenders against the 34. He then that for any
respect whatsoever, is mealy-mouthed in these things, wherein he is bound both
in Conscience, and by virtue of his own voluntary Act to speak freely: neither
is constant to his own hand and tongue; nor is Heb. 3.2.
faithful in Gods house, as was Moses, in discharging a good Conscience, and
revealing unto his people Acts 20.27.
the whole Counsel of God.

Thus have I endeavored, having the opportunity of this place, Conscience, and
in regard of my Subscription bound) to deliver my opinion freely, so far as my
Text gave occasion, the Ceremonial Constitutions of our Church: and therein
labored to free, not only the conformer from all unjust censures; but even
the non-conformer also, so far as he has reason to expect it, from all
scandalous despisings. I beseech you pardon my length, if I have been
troublesome; I had much to say, and the matter was weighty; and I desired to
give some satisfaction in it to those that are contrary-minded; and I have no
purpose (for any thing I know) at all to trouble this place any more hereafter.
Let us all now humbly beseech Almighty God to grant a blessing to what has
been presently taught and heard: that it may work in the charitable affections
one toward another, due obedience to lawful authority, and a conscionable
care to walk in our several callings, faithfully, painfully, and peaceably; to
the comfort of our own souls, the edification of Gods Church, and the glory of
the ever-blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and
one God. To whom be ascribed by us and the whole Church, as is most due, the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

AD CLERUM. Boston, Lincoln, 24. Apr. 1621.
ROMANS 3.8. And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm
that we say) Let us do evil that good may come: whose damnation is just.


A Little before, at the fourth verse, S. Paul had delivered a Conclusion sound
and comfortable: and strengthened David's both experience, and testimony in That
thou might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged. Psalm. 51.4.
Ps. 51. A place pregnant, and full of sinews, to enforce it. The Conclusion in
effect was, that Nothing in man can anull the Covenant of God. Neither the
original unworthiness of Gods Children, through the universal corruption of
nature; nor their actual unfaithfulness bewrayed (through the free love of
God from them, or cut them off from the Covenant of Grace: but that still God
will be glorified in the truth and faithfulness of his promises,
notwithstanding any unrighteousness or unfaithfulness in man.

But never yet was any Truth so happily innocent, as to maintain it self free
from Calumny and Abuse. Malice on the one hand, Fleshlinesse on the other;
though with different aims, yet do the same work. They both pervert the
Truth, by drawing pestilent Corollaries from sound Conclusions: as the Spider
sucketh poison from medicinable herbs. But with this difference; Malice
slandereth the Truth, to discountenance it; but Fleshlinesse abuses the Truth,
to countenance it self by it. The cavilling Sophister, he would feign bring
the Apostles gracious Doctrine into discredit: The carnal Libertine, he would
as feign bring his own ungracious behavior into credit. Both, by making false
(yet colorable) Inferences from the former Conclusion. There are Triplex
inconveniens. Lyranus hic.
three of those Inferences: but never a good. The first; If so, then cannot God
in reason and justice take vengeance of our unrighteousness. The Color: for
why should he punish us for that, which so much magnifieth and commends his
Verse 5.
But if our righteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we
say? Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance?] The second Inference: If so;
then it is injust either The Color: for why should that action be censured of
sin, which so abundantly redoundeth to the glory of God? [ Verse 7.
For and last, and worst Inference: If so, then it is a good and wise
resolution, Let The Color: for why should we fear to do that, from which so
much good may come? in this verse of my Text, [ And not rather let us do evil
that good may come.]

This last cavilling Inference, the Apostle in this Verse both brings in as
an objection; and casts out by his answer. An answer which at once cutteth
off both it, and the former Inferences. And the Answer is double: Ad That
concerns the force and matter of the objection: this the state, and danger of
the objectors. Ad rem, in the former part of the Verse; [And not rather (as we
be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say) let us do evil that
good may come.] Ad hominem in the latter end; [ Whose damnation is just.] In
the former part there is an Objection; and the Rejection of it. The Objection,
And not rather, Let us do evil that good may come. The Rejection thereof with a
Non sequitur; implying not only the bare inconsequence of it upon the Apostles
conclusion, but withal, and especially the falsenesse and unsoundnesse of it
taken by As we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us
do evil, etc.

My aim at this present is to insist especially upon a Principle of practick
Divinity: which by joint consent of Writers old and new; Orthodox and Popish;
resulteth from the very body of this verse, and is of right good use to direct
us in sundry difficulties, which daily arise in vita communi, in point of
Conscience. The Principle is this; We must not do any evil, that any good may
come of it. Yet there are besides this, in the Text diverse other inferior
observations not to be neglected. With which I think it will not be amiss the
sooner, and stay the longer upon that which I mainly intend.

Observe first the Apostles Method, and substantial manner of proceeding: how
he clears all as he goes; Observe. I.
how diligent he is and careful, betimes to remove such cavils, (though he
Propter hos arguendos fecit Paul 9. hic, quasi digres^ionem tractando haec.
Cajetan. hic.
step a little out of his way for it) as might bring scandal to the Truth he
positive truths: but we should take good care also, as near as we can, to leave
them clear; and by prevention to stop the mouths of such as love to pick
quarrels at the Truth, and to bark against the light. It were good we would
(so far as our leisure and gifts will permit) wisely forecast, and prevent all
offense that might be taken at any part of Gods truth: and be careful, as not
to broach any thing that is false, through rashness, error, or intemperance;
so not to betray any truth by ignorant handling, or by superficial, slight,
and unsatisfying answers. But then especially ignorance, or weakness, or
custom, or education, or prejudice, or partial affections, or otherwise
contrary-minded unto, or at leastwise not well persuaded of those Truths we are
to teach. If the ways be rough and knotty, and the passengers feeble-joynted
and dark-sighted, it is but needful the guides should remove as many blocks
and stones out of the way, as may be. When we have gone as warily as we can to
work, Cavillers (if they list) will take exceptions: it is our part to see we
give them no advantage; lest we help the principals, by making our selves
Accessories. Those men are ill-advised, how ever zealous for the Truth, that
stir in controversed points, and leave them worse than they found them. Aut
animo d mas, aut viribus addas. D^ct^m Archidam^ ad filium. apud Plutarch. in
Laconicis.
Stomach will not bear out a matter without strength: and to encounter an
adversary are required As Zuinglius said of Carolostadius (whom he j^dged too
weak to undertake the defense of the truth against Luther in the point of
Consubstantiation) N^a satis hum^rorum haber. Sleidan.
Shoulders as well as Gall. A good cause is never betrayed more, than when it
is prosecuted with much eagerness, but little sufficiency. This from the
Method.

Observe secondly the Apostles manner of speech, (...), As we are wrongfully
blamed. As we are slandered. As we are slanderously reported. And the word
indeed from (...).
Original imports no more: Observe. II.
and so Writers both profane and sacred use it. But yet in Scriptures by a
specialty it most times signifies the highest degree of Slander; when we open
our mouths against God, and speak ill, or amiss, or unworthily of God: that is
(...), and properly the sin we call blaspemy. And yet that very word of
Blaspemy, which for the most part refers immediately to God, the Apostle
here uses, when he speaks of himself and other Christian Ministers, (...),
as we are slandered, nay as we are blasphemed. A slander, or other wrong, or
contempt done to a Minister, qua talis, is a sin of a higher strain, than the
same done to Common Christian. Not at all for his persons sake: for so he is no
more Gods good creature than the other; no more free (...). Acts 14.15. and
Jam. 5.^7.
from sins, and infirmities, and passions, than the other. But for his Callings
sake; for so he is Gods 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassador, which the other is not: and for his works sake; for that is Gods
1 These. 2.1^.
Message, which the others is Personal Slanders and Contempts are to a
Minister, but as to another man: because his person is but as another man's
person. But slanders and contempts done to him as a Minister, that is, with
reference either to his Calling or Doctrine, are much greater than to another
man: as reaching unto God himself, whose Person the Minister represents in
his Calling; and whose errand the Minister delivers in his Doctrine. For
Contempts, S. Paul is express elsewhere; 1 These. 4.8.
He that despises, despises not man, but God. And as for Slanders; the very
choice of the word in my Text infers as much. The dignity of our Calling
enhaunceth the sin: and every Doctrines, is more than a bare Calumny; if no
more, at least petty We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses,
and against God. Acts 6.11.
blasphemy, (...), as we are slandered, as we are blasphemed. That from the
word.

Observe thirdly, the wrong done to the Apostle and to his Doctrine. He was
slanderously reported to have taught that which he never so thought: Observe.
III.
and his Doctrine had many scandalous imputations fastened upon it, whereof
neither he nor it were guilty, [ As we are slanderously reported, and as some
affirm that we say.] The best truths are subject to mis-interpretation: and
there is not that Doctrine, how firmly soever grounded, how warily soever
delivered; Calumny will not fasten, and stick slanderous imputations. Neither
Mat. 11.17 -- 19.
John's mourning, nor Christ's piping can pass the pikes: but the one has a
Devil; the other is a Glutton and a Wine-bibber. Though Mat. 5.17.
Christ come to fulfill the Law, yet there be will accuse him as a destroyer of
the Law, Matthew 5. And though he decide the question plainly for Caesar, and
that in the case of Tribute, Mat. 22. [ Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's:] yet there be that charge him,
as if he John 19.12.
spoke against Caesar, John 19. and that in the very case of Tribute, as if he
Luke ^3.2.
forbade to give Tribute unto Caesar, Luke. 23. Now if they Mat. 10.25.
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, Ministers and his Servants could
escape the stroke of men's tongues, and be free from calumny and cavil? How the
Apostles were slandered as Seducers and Sectaries, and vain bablers, and
Heretics, and broachers of new and false and pestilent doctrines; their
Epistles and the book of their Acts witness abundantly to us. And for
succeeding times, read but the Apologies of Athenagoras, and Tertullian, and
others: and it will amaze you to see what blasphemous, and seditious, and
odious, and horrible impieties were fathered upon the Ancient Christian
Doctors, and upon profession. But our own experience goes beyond all. Sundry
of the Doctors of our Church teach truly, and agreeably to Scripture the Acts
17.28. and Esaias 16.12.
effectual concurrence of GODS Will and Power, with subordinate Agents in
every, and therefore even in sinful actions; Gods Romans 9.1^, 1^, 18, etc.
free election of those whom he purposes to save of his own grace, without any
motives in, or from themselves; The immutability of Gods John 13.1. Romans 11.29.
and 5.9, 10. and 8.35, 38, 39.
Love and Grace toward the Saints elect, and their certain therein unto
Salvation; The Romans 3.28.
Justification of sinners by the imputed righteousness of Christ, apprehended
and applied unto them by a lively faith; without the works of the Law. These
are sound, and true, and (if rightly understood) comfortable, and right
profitable doctrines. And yet they of the Church of Rome have the forehead, (I
will not say to slander, my Text allows more,) to blaspheme GOD, and his
Truth, and the Ministers thereof for teaching them. Bellarmine, Gretser,
Maldonate, and the Jesuits; but none more than our own English Fugitives,
Bristow, Stapleton, Parsons, Kellison, and all the rabble of that crew, freely
spend their mouths God the author of sin: as if we would have men sin and be
damned by a Stoicall fatal necessity; sin whether they will or no, and be
damned whether they deserve it or no: as if we opened a gap to all
licentiousness and profaneness; let them believe, it is no matter how they
live, heaven is their own cocksure: as if we cried down good works, and
condemned charity. Slanders loud and false; yet easily blown away with one
single word, (...). These imputations upon us and our doctrine are unjust: but
(...), let them that thus mis-report us, know, that without repentance their
damnation will be just.

the grounds of this observation, and to press the uses of it something fully.
But because my aim lies another way; I can but point at them, and pass. If
seldom Truth escape unslandered, marvel not: the reasons are evident. On Gods
part, on Man's part, on the Devils part. God suffers, Man raises, and the
Devil furthereth these slanders against the Truth. To begin ordine retrogrado,
and to take them backwards. Devils part: a kind of Contrariety and Antipathy
betwixt him and it. He being the John 8.44.
Father of lies, and Ephesians. 6.12.
Prince of darkness, cannot away with the Truth, and with the Light: and the
Truth to the Light to darken it. Secondly, on Man's part: the understanding;
when the judgment either of it self weak, or else weakened through
precipitancy, prejudice, or otherwise, is deceived with fallacies instead of
substance, and mistaketh inferences for necessary and natural deductions.
Partly in the Will: when men of corrupt minds set themselves purposely against
the known truth, and out of malicious wilfulness (against the strong testimony
of their own hearts) slander it, that so they may the Affections; crooken the
Rule to their own bent, than to level themselves the Rule. Thirdly, Gods part;
who suffers his own Truth to be slandered and mistaken. Partly in his
Justice, as a fearful judgment 2 These. 1.10, 11, 12.
upon wicked goodness; as a powerful fiery trial of true Doctors, whose
constancy and sincerity 1 Cor. 11.19
approved with him, and the more eminent with men, if they John 10.12.
fly not when the Wolf comes, but keep their standing, and stoutly maintain
Gods truth, when it is deepliest slandered, and hotliest opposed. And partly,
in his Wisdom; as a rich occasion for those zeal, 2 Timothy 1.6.
to quicken industry, to muster up their abilities, to scour up their
spiritual armor, (which else through dis-use might gather rust) for the
defense and for the rescue of that 1 T^m 6.20. and 2 Timothy 1.14.
(...), that precious truth whereof they are depositaries, and wherewith he
has entrusted them.

These are the Grounds. The Uses, for instruction briefly are, to teach first,
so wickedly malicious, as without apparent cause to raise any slander; or
secondly, so foolishly credulous, as without severe examination, to believe any
thirdly, so basely timorous, as to flinch from any part of slander. But I must
not insist. This from the slander.

Observe fourthly, how peremptorily the Apostle is in his censure against
slanderers or abusers of holy truths: Whose damnation is just. Observe. IV.
Amorasius, Lyra, Piscator, Pareus, etc.
Some understand it with reference to the Slanderers; As we be slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say: Whose damnation is just: that is,
their damnation is just, who thus unjustly slander us. Chrysostomus, Caj^t^nus,
Erasmus, etc.
Others understand it with reference to that ungodly resolution: Let us do
evil, that good may come: whose damnation is just: that is, their damnation is
just for the evil they do, who adventure to do any evil, spiritual thrift;
where there are two senses given of one place, both agreeable to the Analogy
of Faith and Manners, both so indifferently appliable to the words and scope of
the place, as that it is hard to say, which was rather intended; though there
was but one intended, yet to make use of both. And so will we. Take it the
first way: and the slanderer may read his doom in it. Here is his wages, and
his portion, and the meed and reward of his slander; Damnation. And it is a
just reward. He condemns Gods unjustly: God condemns him justly for it, [
whose damnation is just.^ If we be countable (and we are countable at the day
of Judgment) for Mat. 12.36*
every idle word we speak; though neither in it self false, nor yet hurtful and
prejudicial unto others: what less than damnation can they expect, that with
much falsehood for the thing it self, and infinite prejudice in respect of
others, blaspheme God and his holy Truth?

But if it be done of purpose, and in malice to despite the Truth, Maliciously
to oppose the known Truth, is by most Divines accounted a principal branch of
that great unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost: by some, the very
sin it self. I dare not say it is so; nor yet that it is unpardonable, or has
final impenitency necessarily attending it: I would be loath to interclude the
hope of Repentance from any sinner; or to confine Gods Mercy within any bounds.
Yet thus much I think I may safely say; it comes shrewdly near the sin against
the Holy Ghost, and is a fair (or rather a foul) step toward it, and leaves
very little hope of pardon. That great sin against the Holy Ghost it self in
the Scriptures chooses, rather than by any other, to express by this name of
Mat. 12.31, 32.
Blasphemy, Mat. 12. And whereas our Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. says, That though he
were a Blasphemer, yet 1 Timothy 1.13.
he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: he leaves it
questionable, but withal suspicious, whether there may be any hope of Mercy
for such as blaspheme maliciously, and against knowledge. If any man's be;
certainly such a man's damnation is most just.

Slanderers of GODS truth are of that deep die: not all Slanderers, sinners in
that high degree. GOD forbid they should. the least degree, and with the most
favorable circumstances; still the Apostles sentence stands good: Without
Repentance their damnation is just. Admit the Truth be dark and difficult, and
so easily to be mistaken: admit withal the man be weak and ignorant, and so
apt to mistake; his understanding being neither distinct through incapacity to
apprehend and sort things aright, nor yet constant to it self through
unsetlednesse and levity of judgment. Certainly his misprision of the Truth is
so much Involuntarium minuit de ratione peccati.
lesser, than the others wilful Calumny; as it proceeds less from the
irregularity of the Will to the Judgment. And of such a man there is good
hope, that both in time he may see his error, and repent expressly and
particularly for it; and that in the mean time he does repent for it implicit,
and inclusively in his general contrition for, and confession of the massy
lump of his hidden and Psalm. 19.12.
secret and unknown sins. This Charity binds us both to hope for the future,
and to think for the present: and S. Paul's example and words in the 1 Timothy 1.13.
place but now alleged, are very comfortable to this purpose. But yet still
thus much is certain: He that through ignorance, or for want of apprehension or
judgment, or by reason of whatsoever other defect or motive, slander upon any
divine Truth; though never so perplexed with difficulties, or open to cavil:
unless he repent for it, either in the particular, (and that he must do, if
ever God open his eyes, and let him see his fault,) or at leastwise in the
general; it is still a damnable sin in him; His damnation is just. We have the
very case almost in laid down, and thus resolved in 2 Pet. 3. 2 Pet. 3.18.
In which are some things hard to be understood, (observe the condition of the
things; hard to be understood) which they that are unlearned and unstable,
(observe also the condition of the persons, unlearned and unstable,) wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, to their own destruction. Where we have the
matter of great difficulty, hard to be understood; the persons of small
sufficiency, unlearned and unstable: and yet if men, even of that weakness,
wrest and pervert truths, though of that hardness, they do it (...), to their
own destruction, says Saint Peter there; to their own just damnation, says S.
Paul in my Text. This

Take it in the other sense, with reference to this ungodly resolution, Let us
do evil, that good may come: it teaches us, that no pretension of doing it in
ordine ad Deum, for Gods glory, to a good end, or any other color whatsoever,
can excuse those that presume to do evil; but that still the evil they do is
damnable, and it is but just with GOD to render damnation to them for it. [
Whose damnation is just.] And thus understood, it opens us a way to the
consideration of that main Principle whereof I spoke, and whereon by your
patience I desire to spend the remainder of my time; namely this: We must For
the farther opening, and better understanding whereof, (since the rule is of
infinite use in the whole practice of our lives:) that we may the better know
when, and where, and how far to apply it aright for the direction of our
Consciences and Actions; we must of necessity unfold the extent of this word
evil, and consider the several kinds and degrees of it distinctly and apart. We
must not do evil, that good may come.

First, evil is of two sorts. The evil of fault, and the evil of punishment.
and Malum supplicii; as Tertul. l. 2. adv. Marcion. cap. 14.
Tertullian calls them: or as the more received terms are, Malum Culpae, and
Malum The evil we commit against God, and the evil God inflicteth upon us. The
evil we do, unjustly, but yet willingly: and the evil we suffer, unwillingly,
but yet justly. In a word, the evil of sin, and the evil of pain. Touching
evils of pain; if the Case be put, when two such evils are propounded, and both
cannot be avoided, whether we may not make choice of the one, to avoid the
other. The resolution is Inter haec datur electio; and minus damnum ficere
licet, ut evitetur majus. Parens hic.
common and good from the old Maxim, E malis minimum, we may incur the less,
to prevent the greater evil. As we may deliver our purse to a Thief, rather
than fight upon unequal terms to save it: and in a tempest cast our wares into
the Sea, to lighten old sore, to keep it from festering and spreading. And this
Principle in my Text is not a rule for that Case: that being propounded
concerning evils of pain; whereas my Text is intended only of the evils of
sin. We are herehence resolved, that we are not to do any evil, that good may
come of it: for all which yet we may suffer some evil, that good may come of
it. Although (to note that by the way) the common answer e malis minimum, even
in the evils of pain is to universally; but as commonly and ordinarily true.
For (as Slater on this place.
one says well) perhaps there are Cases, wherein two evils of Pain being at
once propounded, it may not be safe for us to be our own carvers.

But I must let pass the Questions concerning the evils of Pain, as evils of
sin are of two sorts. Some are evil formally, simply, and per se; such as are
directly against the scope and purpose of some of Gods Commandments: as
Atheism against the first, Idolatry against the second, and so against the
rest, Blasphemy, Profaneness, Disloyalty, Cruelty, Adultery, Injustice,
Calumny, Avarice, (positis quibuscunque circumstantiis) be done well. Othersome
are evil only respectively, and by accident: but otherwise in their own nature
indifferent; and such as may be, and are done sometimes well, sometimes ill. To
know the nature of which things the better, since they are of singular use for
the resolution of many Cases of Conscience: we must yet more distinctly inquire
into the different kinds (or rather degrees) of indifferent things; and into
the different means, whereby things otherwise in nature indifferent, become
accidentally evil for their use.

equally, or unequally such. We may call them for distinctions sake (and I
think it not altogether unfitly) (...).
indifferentia ad utrumlibet; and (...).
indifferentia ad unum. Indifferentia ad utrumlibet, or equally indifferent
things are such, as (barely considered) are arbitrary either way, and hang in
aequilibrio, between good and evil, without turning the Scale either one way or
other, as not having any notable inclination or propension unto either rather
than other: as to drink fasting, to walk into the fields, or to lift up ones
hand unto his head, etc. Now concerning such things as these, if any man should
be so scrupulous, as to make a matter of conscience of good or evil; as namely,
whether he should do well or ill, to walk abroad into the fields a mile or two
with his friend, the thing it self is so equally indifferent, that it were
resolution enough to leave it in medio, and to answer him, there were neither
good nor hurt in it: the Action of walking barely considered, being not
considerably either morally good, or morally evil. I say [ morally;] for in
matter of health or civility, or otherwise it may be good, or evil: but not
Quia eorum ^b^ectum non includit ^liquid pertinens ad ordinem rationis. Aquin.
1.2. qu. 18. art. 8. in corp.
morally, and spiritually, and in matter of conscience. And I say withal [
barely considered,] for there may be circumstances, accidentally evil. As to
walk abroad in the fields, when a man should be at Divine service in the
Church, is by accident morally evil; through the circumstance of Time: as on
the contrary, not to walk, if we have promised to meet a friend at such a time,
and in such a place, who stands in need of our present help, is by morally
evil, through the obligation of that former promise. But yet still these and
other circumstances set aside; barely to walk, or barely not to walk, and the
like, are Indifferentia ad utrumlibet, things in their own nature (and that
equally) indifferent.

Things unequally indifferent are such, as though they be neither universally
good, nor absolutely evil; yet even barely considered, sway more or less rather
the one way than the other. And that either unto good, or unto evil. Of the
former sort are such outward actions, as being in Moral precepts indefinitely
commanded, are yet sometimes sinfully and ill done: as, giving an Alms, hearing
a Sermon, reproving an Offender, and the like. Which are in themselves good;
and so be accounted, rather than evil, though some unhappy circumstance or
other may make them ill. Of the latter sort are such outward actions, as being
in Moral precepts indefinitely prohibited, are yet in some cases lawful, and
may be well done: as, swearing an oath, traveling on the Sabbath day, playing
for money, and the like. Which are in themselves rather evil, than good,
because they are ever evil, unless all circumstances concur to make them good.
Now of these actions, though the former sort carry the face of good, the latter
of evil; yet in very truth both sorts are indifferent. Understand indifferentia
contradictionis, such as may be indifferently either done, or not done; but
indifferent only indifferentia contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing) may
be indifferently either good or evil: because so they may be done, as to be
good, and so they may be done also; as to be evil. But yet with this
difference, that those former, though indifferent, and in some cases evil, are
yet of themselves notably and eminently inclined unto good rather than evil;
and these later proportionably unto evil rather than good. From which
difference it comes to pass, that to the Question barely proposed concerning
the former actions, whether indefinitely they are good: and contrarily
concerning the later actions, to say indefinitely they are evil.

Which difference well weighed (to note that by the way) would serve to
justify a common practice of most of us in the exercise of Ministry, against
such as distaste our doctrine for it, or unjustly otherwise take offense at it.
Ordinarily in our Sermons we indefinitely condemn as evil, swearing, and gaming
for money, and dancing, and recreations upon the Sabbath day, and going to Law,
and retaliation of injuries, and Monopolies, and raising of rents, and taking
etc. and in our own coat Non-residency, and Pluralities, etc. Most of which
yet, and many other of like nature, most of us do, or should know to be in some
cases lawful; and therefore in the number of those indifferent things which we
call Indifferentia ad unum. You that are our hearers should bring so much
charitable discretion with you, when you hear us in the Pulpits condemn things
of this nature; as to understand us no otherwise, than we either do or should
mean, and that is thus: that such and such things are evil, as now adays,
through the corruptions of the times, most men use them; and such as therefore
should not be adventured upon without mature and unpartiall disquisition of the
uprightness of our affections therein, and a severe trial of all
circumstances, whether they carry weight enough with them to give our
consciences Let every man be fully persuaded ((...)) in his own mind. v^r. 5.
sufficient security, not only of their lawfulness in themselves, and at
large, but of their particular lawfulness too unto us, and then. But this by
the way.

Now to proceed. There are diverse means whereby things not simply equally, or
unequally) indifferent, may yet become accidentally evil. Any defect or
obliquity, any unhappy intervening circumstance, is enough to poison a right
good action, and to make it stark naught. I may as well hope to graspe the Sea,
as to comprehend all those means. I make choice therefore to remember but a
few of the chiefest; such as happen often, and are very considerable. Things not
simply evil, may accidentally become such; as by sundry other means, so
especially by one of these three: Conscience, Scandal, and Comparison. First,
Conscience; in regard of the Agent. Though the thing be good, yet if the Agent
do it with a condemning, or but a doubting Conscience, the Action becomes
evil. [ Romans 14.14.
To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean; and
Ibid. v. 23.
he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats chap. 14. of this
Epistle.] Secondly, Scandal; in regard of other men. Though the thing be good,
yet if a brother Ibid. ver. 21.
stumble, or be offended, or be made weak by it, the action becomes evil. [
Ibid. ver. 20.
All things are pure; but it is evil for that man who eats with offense,
Comparison; in regard of other actions. Though the thing be good, yet if we
prefer it before better things, and neglect or omit them for it, the action
becomes evil, Math. 9.13.
Go, and learn what that is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: Mat. 9.]

The stuff thus prepared, by differencing out those things, which
undistinguished, might breed confusion; our next business must be, to lay the
rule, and to apply it to the several kinds of evil, as they have been
differenced. I foresaw we should not have time to go through all that was
intended: and therefore we will content our selves for this time, with the
consideration of this Rule, applied to things simply evil. In them the Rule
holds perpetually, and without exception: That which is simply evil, may not
for any good be done. We the Glory of God: we scarce know a lesser sin (if
any sin may be accounted little) than a harmless officious lie. Yet may not
Vide suse Augustinum in lib. de Mendacio, and contra Mendacium; and a libi^
this be done; no not for that. Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk
deceitfully for him? Job 13.7. If not for the glory of God; then life, not for
the Ad sempiterna^ salu^e^ nulus ducendus est o^itulante mendacio. Aug. de
mendac ca. 19.
conversion of a soul, not for the peace of a Church, and (if even that were
possible too) not for the redemption of a world. No Ea quae constat esse
peccata, nullo bonae causae obtentu, nullo quasi bono fine, nulla velut bona
intention facienda sunt. Aug. contra Mendac. c. 7.
intention of any end can warrant the choice of sinful means to compass it.

The Reasons are strong. One is; because sin in its own nature; is Suapte
natura repugnat peccato quod sit eligible: and propterea, nec propter se, nec
propter aliud bonum est eligibile. Cajet. in hunc locum.
de numero ineligibilium: and therefore as not eligible propter se, for it own
sake, (there is neither form nor beauty in it, that we should desire it;) so
neither propter aliud, with reference to any farther end. Actus peccati non est
ordinabilis in bonum finem; is the common resolution civil and popular
elections, if men make choice of such a person, to bear any office or place
among them; as by the local Charters, Ordinances, Statutes or other Customs
which should rule them in their choice, is altogether ineligible, the election
de jure nulla, naught and void; the incapacity of the person elected making a
nullity in the act of election. No less is it in moral actions and elections,
if for any intended end we make choice of such means, as by the Law of God
(which is our rule, and must guide us) are ineligible; and such is every sin.

Another reason is grounded upon that Principle, Aquin. 1. secundae. qu. 18.
art. 4. ad 3. and qu. 19. art. 6. ad 1. ex Dionys^o, cap. 4. de Divin. nomin.
Bonum ex ca^sa Any partial or particular defect, in Object, End, Manner, or
other Circumstance, is enough to make the an universal Non est actio bona
simpliciter, nisi omnes bon^tates concurrant: s^d quilibet defectus singularis
causat malum. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad 3.
concurrence of all requisite conditions in every of these respects: As a
disfigured eye, or nose, or lip, makes the face deformed; but to make it
comely, there is required the due proportion of every part. And any one short
Clause, or Proviso, not legal, is sufficient to abate the whole writ or
instrument, though in every other part absolute, and without exception. The
Intention then, be it granted never so good, is unsufficient to warrant an
Action good, so long as it fails the object, or manner, or any requisite
circumstance whatsoever. 1 Samuel 15.20, etc.
Saul pretended a good end, in sparing the fat things of Amalek; that he might
therewith do sacrifice to the Lord: but God rejected both it and him, 1 Samuel
15. We can think no other, but that 2 Samuel 6.6, 7
Vzzah intended the safety of Gods ark, when it tottered in the cart, and he
stretched out his hand to stay it from falling: but God interpreted it a
presumption, and punished it, 2 Samuel 6. Doubtless Mat. 16.22, 23.
Peter meant no hurt to Christ, but rather good; when he took him aside, and
advised him to be good to himself, and to keep him out of danger: yet Christ
rebuked him for it, and set him packing in the Devils Get thee behind me,
Satan. Matthew. 16.

But what will we say (and let that stand for a third reason) if our good
intention prove indeed no good intention? And certainly, be it as fair and
glorious, as we could be content to imagine it; such it will prove to be, if it
set us upon any sinful or unwarranted means: indeed no good intention, but a
bad. For granted it must be, that the Intention of any end does virtually
include the means: as in the Premises do the Conclusion. No more then can the
choice of ill means proceed from a good intention; then can a false Conclusion
be inferred from true Premises: and that is impossible. From which ground it
is, that the Greg. lib. 28. Moral. cap. 13. Eusebius. Emiss. hom. 26. and others.
Fathers, and other Divines do oftentimes argue from the intention to the
action, and from the goodness of the one, to the goodness of both: to that
purpose applying those speeches of our Savior, in the twelfth, and in the
sixth of Matthew, Mat. 12.33.
Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt; And, Mat. 6.12.
if thine eye be single, the whole body shall be full of light: but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body The light of the body is the eye; and of the work,
the intention. No marvel, when the eye is evil, if the whole body be dark; and
when the intention is evil, if the whole work be naught. That which deceives
most men in judging of good or bad intentions, is, that they take the end and
the intention for one and the same thing: betwixt which two there is a spacious
difference. For the end, is the thing propter quid, for which, we work, that
whereat we aim in working, and so has rationem causae finalis: but the
intention is the cause a qua, from which we work, that which sets us on
working; and so has rationem causae efficientis. Now between these the final
and the efficient, there is not only a great difference, but even a
repugnancy; in such sort, as that it is impossible they should at any time
coincidere, which some other kinds of causes may do. It is therefore an error
to think, that if the end be good, the intention of that end must needs be
good: for there may as well be Sed videte ne forte non sit vere oculus simplex,
qui fallatur. Been. de praecept. and dispensat.
a bad intention of a good end, as a bad desire of a good object. Whatsoever
the end be we intend, it is certain that intention cannot be good, which
puts us upon the choice of evil means.

Methinkes the Church of Rome should blush, (if her forehead died Relics, in
coining of Miracles, in compiling of Legends, in gelding of good Authors by
expurgatory Indexes; in juggling with Magistrates by lewd Equivocations, etc.
Practices warrantable by no pretense. Yet in their account but Sancta
Hypocrisis, was Dominicus his word.
piae frauds; for so they term them, no less ridiculously, than fasly: for
the one word contradicts the other. But what do I speak of these, but petty
things, in comparison of those her louder impieties? breaking covenants of
truce and peace; dissolving of lawful, and dispensing for unlawful marriages;
assoyling Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance; plotting Treasons,
Rebellions; excommunicating and dethroning Kings; arbitrary disposing of
Kingdoms; stabbing and murdering of Princes; warranting unjust invasions; and
blowing up Parliament-houses. For all which, and diverse other foul attempts,
their Catholic defense is the advancement (forsooth) of the Catholic Cause:
Like his in the Poet, Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Quocunque modo rem, is their Resolution: by right, or wrong, Gaudeo, sive per
veritatem, sive per occasionem, Romanae Ecclesiae dignitatem ex^olli. Joseph.
Stephanus de Osc. pe. in Epist. ad lect.
the State of the Papacy must be upheld. That is their unum necessarium: and if
heaven favor not; rather than fail, help must be had from hell, to keep
Antichrist in his throne.

But to let them pass, and touch nearer home. There are (God knows) many
Ignorants abroad in the world: some of them so unreasonable, as to think they
have sufficiently non-plus't any reprover; if being admonished of something ill
done, they have but returned this poor reply, Is it not better to do so, than
to do worse? But alas, what necessity of doing either so, or worse; when Gods
law binds James 2.10, 11.
He that said, Do not commit adultery; said also, and he that said, Do not
steal; said also, Do not lie. If then thou lie, or kill, or do any other
sin; though thou think thereby to avo^d stealth, or adultery, or some
other sin: yet thou art become a transgressour of the Law, and by offending
in one point of it, guilty of all. It is but a poor choice, when a man is
desperately resolved to cast himself away; whether he should rather hang, or
drown, or stab, or pine himself to death: there may be more horror, more pain,
more lingering, in one than another; but they all come to one period, and
determine in the same point; death is the issue of them all. And it can be but
a slender comfort lying, than for stealing, or whoring, or killing, or some
greater crime: Damnation is the wages of them all. Murder can but hang a man;
and (without favor) Petty Larceny will hang a man too. The greatest sins can
but damn a man; (and without Gods mercy) the smallest will damn a man too.
But what? will some reply: In case two sins be propounded, may I not do the
lesser, to avoid the greater; otherwise must I not of necessity do the greater?
The answer is short and easy: If two sins be propounded, do neither. E malis
minimum, holds as evils of Pain: But that is no Rule for evils of sin. Here
the safer Rule is, E malis nullum. And the reason is sound; from the Principle
we have in hand. If we may not do any evil, to procure a positive good;
certainly Eadem doctrina, qua horremus facere mala ut eveniant bona, horrere
debemus f^cere mala ut evitemus pejora. Evitare enim pejora, multo minus
bonumest, quam evenire bonum. Cajetan. hic.
much less may we do one evil, to avoid or prevent another.

But what if both cannot be avoided, but that one must needs be done? In such a
strait may I not choose the lesser? To thee; I say Choose neither. To the Case,
I answer; It is no Case: because, as it is put, it is a case impossible. For
Nemo angustiatur ad peccandum: the Case cannot be supposed, wherein a man
should be so straightened, as he could not come off fairly without sinning. A man
by rashness or fear, or frailty, may foully entangle himself; and through the
powerful engagements of sin drive himself into very narrow straits* or be so
driven by the fault or injury of others: yet there cannot be any such straits,
as should enforce a necessity of sinning; but that still there is one path or
other out of them without sin. The perplexity that seems to be in the things,
is rather in the Non enim datu^ p^rplexio ex part reru^: sed conting^re potest
ex p^rte hominis nescientis evadere, nec videntis aditum evade^di absque aliquo
peccato. Cajer. hic. See the Gloss on did. 13. item adversus, where he
proves against Gratian that there can be no perplexity.
men who puzzle and lose themselves in the Labyrinths of sin, because they care
not to heed the clue that would lead them out, if it were well followed. Say, a
man through heat of blood make a wicked vow to kill his brother: here he has
by his own rashness brought himself into a seeming strait, that either he must
commit a murder, or break a vow; either of which seems to be a great sin,
the one against the fifth, the other against the third commandment. But here
is in very deed no strait or perplexity at all: Here is a fair open course for
him without sin. He may break his vow; and there an end. Neither is this the
choice of the lesser sin; but only the Non docet eligere minus peccatum, sed
solutionem mino^is nex^s. Cajetanus hic, speaking of the Council of Toledo.
See. c. 22. q. 4. per tot.
loosening of the lesser bond: the bond of charity being greater than the bond
of a promise; and there being good reason that (in terms of inconsistencie,
when both cannot stand,) the lesser bond should yield to the greater. But is it
not a sin for a man to break a vow? Yes, where it may be kept salvis charitate
and justitia, there the breach is a sin: but in the case proposed it is no sin.
As Christ says in the point of swearing, so it may be said in the point of
breach of vow, Mat. 5.37.
(...). Never was any breach of vow, but it was peccatum, or ex peccato: the
breaking is either it self formally a sin: or it former sin, in the making. So
as the sin, in the case alleged, was before in making such an unlawful vow;
and for that sin the party must repent: but the breaking of it now it is made,
is no new sin; (Rather it is a necessary duty, and a branch of that repentance
which is due for the former rashness in making it,) because a hurtful vow is,
(and that virtute praecepti) rather to be broken then kept. The Exodus 1.16. etc.
Egyptian Midwives, not by their own fault, but by Pharaohs tyrannous command,
are driven into a narrow strait, enforcing a seeming necessity of sin: for
either they must destroy the Hebrew children, and so sin by Murder; or else
they must devise some hansome lying. And so they did; they chose rather to lie
then to kill, as indeed in the comparison it is by much the lesser sin. But
the very truth is, they should have done neither: they should flatly have
refused the Kings commandment, though with hazard of their lives; and have
resolved rather to suffer any evil, than to do any. And so See August. contra
mend^c. cap. 19.
Lot should have done: he should rather have adventured his own life, and
theirs too, in protecting the chastity of his Daughters, and the safety of his
guests; then have Genesis 19.8. P^rturbatio animi fui^, ^^n consilium. Hist.
Scholast. in Genesis cap. 5*
offered the exposall of his Daughters to the lusts of the beastly Sodomites,
though it were to redeem his guests from Absolutely: there cannot be a case
imagined, wherein it should be impossible to avoid one sin, unless by the
committing of another. The case which of all other comes nearest to a
Perplexity, is that of an erroneous conscience: Because of a double bond; the
bond of Gods Law; which Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.
transgress, is a sin; and the bond of particular conscience, which also to
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14.23.

Omne quod fit contra conscientiam aedificat ad gehenam. c. 28. q. 1. Omnes.
sec. Ex his.


transgress, is a sin. Whereupon there seems to follow an inevitable
necessity of sinning; when Gods Law requires one thing, and particular
conscience dictateth the flat contrary: for in such a case, a man must either
obey Gods Law, and so sin against his own conscience; or obey his own
conscience, and so sin against Gods Law. But neither in this case is there any
perplexity at all in the things themselves: that which there is, is through the
default of the man only, whose judgment being erroneous mis-leadeth his
conscience, and so casts him upon a necessity of sinning. But the necessity
is no simple and absolute, and unavoydable, and perpetual necessity: for it is
only a necessity ex hypothesi, and for a time, and continues but stante tali
errore. And still there is a way out betwixt those sins, and that without a
third: and that way is deponere erroneam conscientiam. He must rectify his
judgment, and reform the error of his Conscience, and then all is well. There
is no perplexity, no necessity, no obligation, no expediency; which should
either enforce, or persuade us to any sin. The resolution is damnable, Let us
do evil that good may come.

I must take leave, before I pass from this point, to make two instances; Rule
of my Text an answer to plainly; and I hope it shall be (by Gods blessing upon
it) effectually, for your good, and the Churches peace. One instance shall be
in a sin of Commission; the other in a sin of Omission.

The sin of Commission wherein I would instance, is indeed a sin beyond it is
the usurping of the Magistrates Office without a Commission. The Question is;
whether the zealous intention of a good end may not warrant it good, or at
least excuse it from being Case for the illustration of this instance: the
inconsiderate forwardness of some has made it to my hand. You may read it in
the disfigured windows and walls of this Church: Pictures and Statua's, and
Images: and for their sakes the windows and walls wherein they stood, have been
heretofore, and of late pulled down, and broken in pieces and defaced: without
the Command, or so much as leave of those who have power to reform things amiss
in that kind. Charity binds us to think the best of those that have done it:
that is, that they did it out of a forward (though mis-governed) zeal;
intending therein Gods glory in the farther Idolatry, by taking away these (as
they supposed) likely occasions of it. Now in such a case as this, the Question
is, whether the intention of such an end can justify such a deed? And the fact
of Number. 25.7, 8.
Phinehes, Nu. 25. (who for a much like end, for the staying of the people from
Idolatry, executed vengeance upon Zimri and Cosbi, being but a private man, and
no Magistrate;) seems to make for it.

But my Text rules it otherwise. If it be evil, it is not to be done,
Idolatry. I pass by some considerations first, whether Statua's and Pictures
may not be permitted in Christian Churches, for the adorning of Gods House, and
for civil and historical uses, not only lawfully and decently, but even
profitably? I must confess, I never heard substantial reason given, why they
might not: at the least, so long secondly, whether things either in their first
erection, or by succeeding abuse superstitious, may not be profitably
continued, if the Superstition be abolished? Otherwise, not Pictures only, and
Crosses, and Images; Hospitals, and Schools, and Colleges, and Churches too
must down: and so the hatred of Idolatry should but usher in licentious
Sacrilege, contrary to that passage of our Apostle in the next Chapter before
this, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest And thirdly, whether these forward ones
have not bewrayed somewhat their own self-guiltiness in this Act, at least for
the manner of it, in doing it secretly, and in the dark? A man should not dare
to do that, which he would not willingly either be seen, when it is doing; or
own, being done. To pass by these; Erranti nullus terminus: Error knows no
stay, and a false Principle once received, multiplieth into a (...).
thousand absurd conclusions. It is good for men to go upon sure grounds, else
they may run and wander in infinitum. A little error at the first, if there be
way given to it, will increase beyond belief; As a small spark may fire a large
City, and a 2 Kings 18.44, 45.
cloud no bigger than a man's hand, in short space overspread the face of the
whole Heavens. For grant, for the suppression of Idolatry, in case the
Magistrate will not do his office, that it is lawful for a private man to take
upon him a Magistrate (which must needs have been their ground, if they had
any, for this action) there can be no sufficient cause given, why by the same
reason, and upon the same grounds, a private man may not take upon him to
establish Laws, raise Powers, administer Justice, execute Malefactors, or do
any other thing the Magistrate should do; in case the Magistrate slack to do
his duty in any of the premises. Which if it were once granted (as granted it
must be, if these men's fact be justifiable:) every wise man sees, the end
could be no other but vast Anarchy and confusion both in Church and
Commonweal: Religion and State. If things be amiss, and the Magistrate help
it not; private men may lament it, and as occasion serves, and their condition
and calling permits, soberly and discreetly put the Magistrate in mind of
it: But they may not make themselves Magistrates to reform it.

Phinehes: though I rather think he did; yet what if he did not well in so
doing? It is a thing we are not certain Secondly, what if Phinehes had the
Magistrates authority Number. 25.5. especially paralleled with another Story of
much like circumstances, Exodus 32.27. that as there the Levites, so here
Phinehes drew the Sword in execution of the express command of Moses the
supreme Magistrate. If neither thus, nor so: Thirdly, (which cutteth off all
plea, and is the most common answer ordinarily given by Divines to this and the
like instances drawn from some singular actions of Gods worthies;) Men of
Heroical spirits and gifts, such as were David, Samson, Ehud, Moses, Elias, and
some others, especially at such times as they were employed in some special
service for the good of Gods Church, were exempt from the common rules of life:
and did many things, (as we are to presume) not without the N^c Samson aliter
excusatur, quod s^ipsum cum hostibus ruina domus oppressit, nisi quod latenter
Spiritus Sanctus hoc ^usserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. Aug. l^b. 1. de
Civ. Dei. ca. 21 Si defenditur non fuisse peccatum, privatum habuisse consilium
indubitanter credendus est. Bern. de prec. and disp^nsa^.
secret motion and direction of Gods holy and powerful Spirit, which were
therefore good in them (that secret direction being to them loco specialis
mandati, like that to Genesis 22.2.
Abraham for sacrificing Opera liberi spiritus, Chy^r. in Genesis 14. and in Exodus
3^.
say Divines, non sunt exigenda ad regulas communes, nec trahenda in exemplum
vitae. The extraordinary Heroical acts of Gods Worthies are not to be measured
by the common rules of life, nor to become exemplary unto others. Of which
nature was 1 Samuel 17.
David's single combat with Goliath; and Jud. 10.30.
Samsons pulling down the house upon himself and the Philistines; And Exodus
2.12.
Moses slaying the Egypan; and Judge. 3.^5, etc.
Ehuds stabbing of King Eglon; and 2 Kings 1.10 -- 12.
Eliahs calling down for fire from Heaven upon the Captains and their fifties,
and diverse others recorded in the Scripture. Of which last fact we Luc. 9. that
it was done by the extraordinary and peculiar instinct of GODS Spirit, but it
is not to be imitated by others, without Imitando ab aliis exprimi nec possunt,
nec debent, nifi e^dem (...) Spiritus exciteatur. Chy^r. in Exodus 2.
particular certain assurance of the like instinct. Where when the Disciples
would have called down for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, and alleged
Elias for their precedent; Luke 9.53.
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and consume
them, as Elias did? His answer was with a kind of indignation (as both his
(...). Luc. 9.55.
gesture and speeches show) Nescitis cujus spiritus estis; You know not what
manner of spirit you are of. Elias was endued with an extraordinary spirit, in
the freedom whereof he did what he then did: but it is not for you or others
to propose his example, unless you can demonstrate his spirit. And if Phinehes
Act also was (as most De Phinees autem dicendum est, quod ex inspiratione
divina, zelo D^i commotus, hoc fecit. Aqui. 2.2. qu. 60. art. 6. ad 2. and
Theologi passim.
think it was) such as these: it can no more justify the usurpation of
Magistracy; Then David's act can bloody Duels; or Samsons self-murder, or
Moses's secret slaughter, or Ehuds King-killing, or Eliahs private revenge. I
have stood the longer upon the discovery of this sin, that men might take right
warrantable or excusable by any pretension of zeal, or of whatsoever other
good: and that both such as have gone too far this way in their practice
already, for the time past, may acknowledge their own oversight, Sacerdos
debtor est, ut veritatem quam audivit a Deo libere praedicet. 11. qu. 3. noli
timere. Ex Chrysostom.
and be sorry for it; and others seeing their error, may for the time to come
forbear such outrages, and keep themselves within the due bounds of Christian
sobriety, and their particular Callings. And thus much of the former instance,
in a matter of Commission. I am to give you another in a matter of Omission.

Omission of a necessary duty is simply evil, as a sin. But affirmative
obligare ad semper: as, being many, it is impossible they should. And many
times duties otherwise necessary, in case of Superior reason and duties, cease
to be necessary pro hic and nunc: and then to omit them, is not to do evil.
Among other necessary duties this is one, for a Minister furnished with gifts
and abilities for it, to acquaint Gods people with all material needful truths,
as he can have convenient occasion thereunto. And (such convenience supposed)
not to do this, is simply evil. Now then, to make the Case and the Question.
The Case thus: A Minister has just opportunity to preach in a Congregation,
error in judgment, or outrageous sin in practice to be continued in with too
public allowance: He has liberty to make choice of his Text and Theme, and
leisure to provide in some measure for it; and his conscience tells him, he
cannot pro hic and nunc direct his speech with greater service to Gods Church,
then against those errors or sins. He sees on the other side some
withdrawments: his discretion may perhaps be called in question, for meddling
where he needed not; he shall possibly lose the good opinion of some, with whom
he has held fair correspondence hitherto; he shall preserve his own peace the
better, the Case. The Question is, Whether these latter considerations, and the
good that may come thereby, be sufficient to warrant unto him the omission of
that necessary duty?

rule of my Text resolves it negatively: they are not sufficient. The Duty
being necessary, pro hic and nunc, it is simply evil to omit it; and therefore
it may not be omitted for any other good. I deny not, but a Minister may with
good discretion conceal many truths from his flock; at least the opening and
amplifying of them: if they be not such as are needful for them to know,
either for the Faith, or practice of Life; as not only many nice School-points
and Conclusions are, but also many Genealogies, and Levitical rites, and other
things even in the Scriptures themselves. Nay more, a Minister not only in
discretion may, but is even in Conscience bound, at least in the public
exercise of his Ministry, some particular truths from his Auditory; yea though
they be such as are needful for the practice of life, and for the settling of
men's Consciences: if they be such with all, as are not fit to be publicly
spoken of; as are many Resolutions of Cases appertaining to the seventh
Commandment (Thou shall not commit Adultery;) and some also appertaining to
the eighth (Thou shall not steal.) Our men Moulin. Buckler of Faith, part 2.
sect. 4. and not only ours, but some of their own too: See Espenaecus ad Tit.
cap. 1.
justly condemn the Popish Casuists, for their too much liberty in this kind in
their Writings: whereby they reduce vices into an Art, under color of
reproving them; and convey into the minds of In quibus plus proficit vitiorum
ignoratio, quam cognitio virtutis. Justin. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2.
corrupt men, Notions of such prodigious filthiness, and artificial
Legier-du-main, as perhaps otherwise they would never have dreamed on, or
thirsted after. The loose writings of the unchaste Poets are but Quis veterum
Poetarum plus obscoenitatis, impuritatis, flagitiorum, professus est, quam
docet Poenitentiale Burchardi? -- Quot sunt qui ignorarent multa quae ibi
leguntur, nisi ex ipso didicissent? I.R. in confut. fab. Burdon. p. 305. Qui
Principum, sacerdotum, negotiatorum, ac praecipue mulierum vitia in c^ncionibus
suis i^sectentur: quae saepius ita depingunt; ut obscoenitatem doceant. Erasm.
in Adag. (...).
dull tutors of Lust, compared with the authorized Tomes of our severe Romish
Votaries. There be enormous sins of this rank, which a modest man would be
ashamed so much as to name, especially in public. Now of these, only the
generalities would be touched in the public; the specialties not unfolded, but
in the private exercise of our Ministry: nor yet that promiscuously to every
one that should out of curiosity desire satisfaction in them; but only to such
men, (and that but only so far) as they may concern conscience, and of
practice. Besides these there are other Cases many, in which it may be more
convenient to conceal, than to teach some divine truths at some times, and in
some places.

But yet in the Case is here proposed, if it be a truth questioned, about
distracted in their opinions; much mistaken by some through error in judgment;
much abused by sinful, especially public practice; occasioning Scandals and
offenses among custom, or multitude of those that think or do against it; and
be otherwise of material importance: I take it, the Omission of it upon
seasonable opportunity, is a grievous sin, and not colorable by any pretense.
Beloved, the Minister is not to come into the Pulpit, as a Fencer upon the
Stage, to play his prize, and to make a fair (...). 1 Cor. 9.26.
flourish against sin, (Here he could have it, and there he could have it, but
has it no where:) but rather as a Captain into the Field, to bend his forces
specially against the strongest Troops of the Enemy; and to squander, and break
through the thickest ranks; and to drive at the Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the King of Israel. 2 King. 22.31.
fairest. It Prophet Esaias 58.1.
to cry aloud, and to lift up his voice like a trumpet, and to tell Judah and
Israel of sins, and of transgressions at large: but if he would whet them up to
the battle, he must give a more If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who
shall prepare himself to the battle? 1 Cor. 14.8.
certain sound; he must tell Judah of her sins, and Israel of her
transgressions. If there be in Damascus, or Moab, or Ammon, or Tyrus, or Judah,
or Israel; Amos 1* and 2.
three transgressions, or four, more eminent than the rest: it is fit; they
that are sent to Damascus, and Moab, Ammon, and Tyrus, and Judah, and Israel,
should make them hear of those three or four, more than all the rest. Sins and
Errors, when they begin to get head and heart, must be handled roughly.
Silence in such a case is a kind of flattery: and it is Pene idem est fidem
nolle asserere and negare. Fulg. l. 1. ad Thrasim. c. 1. Sicut incauta locutio
in errorem p^rtrahit, ita indiscr^tum silentium in errore relinquit. Greg. in
Mor.
almost all one, when sins grow outrageous, to hold our peace at them; and to
cry Peace, Peace unto them. Our Apostle in Act. 20. would not have held himself
sufficiently discharged from the guilt of other men's blood; if he had shunned
(as occasion was offered) to have declared unto them Acts 20.26, 27.
(...), even the whole counsel of God.

Instance and Case, blame me not, if I mind, (and I dare say, the Truth too,
for substance) something freely, touching the Ceremonies and Constitutions of
our Church. And I have now also with like freedom, showed the unlawfulness of
the late disorderly attempts in this Town; and that from the ground of my
present Text. I was then blamed for that; I think unjustly; (for I do not yet
see what I should rerract of that I then delivered:) and it is not unlikely, I
shall be blamed again judge any man's heart; and at this time, that to slander
any truth, are (without repentance) sins justly damnable: (...), they that
offend either in the one, or the other, their damnation is just. To preserve
therefore both you from the sin, and my self from the blame; consider I pray
you, with reason and charity, what I shall say.

You that are our hearers, know not with what hearts we speak unto you: that is
only known to our own hearts; and to 1 ^oh. 3.20.
God who is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. That which you are
to (...). Acts 17.11. Non requiritur quis, vel qualis praedicet; sed quid
praedicet. Distinct. 19. Secundum. (...). Plat. in Charmide.
truth we speak unto you. So long as what we preach is true, and agreeable to
Gods Word, and right reason: you are not, upon I know not what light surmizes
or suspicions, to judge with what spirits, or with what dispositions of heart
we preach. Whether we Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.
preach Christ of envy, and strife, or of good will; whether sincerely, or of
contention; whether in pretense, or in truth; it is our own good, or hurt: we
must answer for that; and at our peril be it, if we do not look to that. But
what is that to you? Notwithstanding every way, so long as it is Christ, and
his truth which are preached, it is your part therein to rejoice. If an Gal.
1.8, 9.
Angel from Heaven should Let him be accursed: but if the very Devil of hell
should preach the truth, he must be heard, and believed, and obeyed. So long as
Mat. 23.23.
Scribes and Pharisees hold them to Moses's Text and Doctrine, let them be as
damned Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, Mat. 23.13, 14, etc.
Hypocrites as Scribes and Pharisees can be: yet all whatsoever they bid you
observe, that you are to observe and do.

untruth? It had been well done then to have shown it, that I might have
acknowledged, and retracted it. Did I speak nothing but the truth? with what
conscience then could any that heard me say, as yet I heard some did; that I
preached factiously, That I came to cast bones among them, That I might have
chosen a fitter Text, That I might have had as much thanks to have kept away?
For Faction; I hate it* my desire and the Peace of the Church, and the Unity of
Brethren. For casting bones (if that must the Devil: otherwise I should not
have found at my first coming such snarling about them, and such Gal. 5.15.
biting and devouring one another, as I did. My endeavor was rather to have
gathered up the bones, and to have taken away the matter of difference, (I
mean, the error in judgment about, and inconformity in practice unto, the
lawful Ceremonies of the Church) that so if it had been possible all might
h^ve been quiet, without despising or judging one another for these things; For
thanks; I hold not that worth the answering* alas, it is a poor aim for Gods
Minister, to preach for thanks.

Text and Argument, both then and now: liberty and plainness in reproving sin,
should not allow those that come amongst them that liberty and plainness
against themselves and their own sins? I dare appeal to your selves. Have you
never been taught, that it is the Ministers duty, as to oppose against all
errors and sins in the general, so to bend himself (as near as he can)
especially against the apparent errors and sins of his present auditory? And do
you not believe it is so? Why then might I not; nay how ought I not, bend my
speech, both then against a common error of Ceremony; and now against the late
petulancy, (or at least oversight) of some mis-guided ones? The noise of these
things abroad; and the scandal taken thereat by such as hear of them; and the
ill fruits of them at home in breeding jealousies, and cherishing contentions
among neighbors: cannot but stir us up, if we be sensible (as every good
member should be) of the damage and loss the Church acquireth by them, to put
you in mind and to admonish you (as opportunities invite us) both privately
and publicly. Is it not time, trow ye, to thrust in the sickle, when the
fields look white unto the harvest? Is it Pulpits should a little echo of
these things, when all the Country far and near ringeth of them?

For my own part; however others censure me, I am sure, my own heart tells
me, I could not have discharged my Conscience; if being called to this place, I
should have balked what either then or now I have delivered. My Conscience
prompting me, all circumstances considered, that these things were pro hic and
nunc necessary to be delivered, the Rule of my Text, and have done a great
evil, that some small good might come of it. But many thousand times better
were it for me, that all the world should censure me for speaking what they
think I should not; than that my own heart should condemn me for not speaking
what it tells me I should. And thus much of things simply evil.

We must not do evil, that good may come; unto evils, not simply, but
accidentally such: and that both Conscience, Scandal, or Comparison. In my
choice of the Scripture, I aimed at all this: and had gathered much of my
provision for it. But the Cases being many and weighty; I foresaw I could not
go onward with my first project, without much wronging one or both: either the
things themselves, if I should contract my speech to the scanting of time; or
you, if I should lengthen it to the weight of the matter. And therefore I
resolved here to make an end, and to give place (as fit it is) to the business
whereabout we meet. The Total of what I have said, and good end, of a good
meaning, of a good event, of any good whatsoever; either can sufficiently
warrant any sinful action to be done, or justify it being done: or
sufficiently excuse the Omission of any necessary duty, when it is necessary.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Now to
God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, etc.

AD Boston, Lincoln, 13. March 1620.
1 COR. 12.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man, to
profit withal.


first Verse of this Chapter S. Paul proposes to himself an Argument, which he
prosecuteth the whole Chapter through, and (after a profitable digression into
the praise of Charity in the next Chap.) resumeth again at the 14. Chapter,
spending also that whole Chapter therein: and it is concerning spiritual
gifts, [ Verse 1.
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant,
etc.] These gracious gifts of the holy Spirit of God, bestowed on them for the
edification of the Church; the Corinthians (by making them the (...). Chrysostom. in
1 Cor. hom. 29.
fuel pride, in despising those that were inferior to themselves; or of their
envy, in malicing those that excelled therein,) abused to the maintenance of
schism, and faction, and emulation in the Church. For the remedying of which
evils, the Apostle enters upon the Argument: discoursing fully of the variety
of these spiritual gifts, and who is the Author of them, and for what end they
were given, and in what manner they should be employed; omitting nothing

variety of these spiritual gifts: he shows, that howsoever manifold they
are either for kind, or degree, so as they may differ in the material and
formal; yet they do all agree both in the same efficient, and the same final
cause. In the same efficient cause, which is God the Lord by his Spirit, ver.
4, 6. [ Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are
differences of administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God which works all ] And in the same final
cause; which is the advancement of Gods glory, in the propagation of his
Gospel, and the edification of his Church; in this ver. [ But the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.]

By occasion of which words, we may enquire into the nature, convenience, use
of these gifts. First, their nature in themselves, and original; what they
are, and whence: they are the works the manifestation of the Spirit.] Secondly,
their conveyance unto us; how we come to have them, and to have property in
them: it is by gift; [ It is given to every man.] Thirdly, use and end; why
they were given us, and what we are to do with them: they must be employed to
the good of our Brethren, and of the Church; is given to every man [ to profit
withal.] Of these briefly, and in their order; and with special reference
ever to us that are of the Clergy.

By manifestation of the Spirit here our Apostle understands none the
adjective word (...) in the first, and by the substantive word (...) in the
last verse of the Chapter. Both which put together, do signify those spiritual
gifts and graces whereby God enableth men (and specially Churchmen) particular
Callings for the general good. Such as are those particulars, which are named
in the next following verses, Verse 8 -- 10.
the word of Wisdom, the word of Knowledge, Faith, the gifts of healing,
workings of miracles, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of tongues,
interpretation of tongues. All which, and all other of like nature and use,
because they are wrought by that one and self-same Verse 11.
Spirit, which divides to every one severally as he will; are therefore called
Verse 1.
(...), spiritual gifts; and here (...), the manifestation of the Spirit.

Spirit] though in Scripture it have many other significations, the holy Ghost,
the third Person in the ever blessed Trinity. For first, in ver. 3. that which
is called the Spirit of God in the former part, is in the latter part called
the Holy Ghost: [ Verse 1.
I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the spirit of God, calls
Jesus accursed; and ] Again, that variety of gifts, which in ver. 4. is said to
proceed from the Verse 4 -- 6.
same Spirit, is said likewise in ver. 5. to proceed from the same Lord, and in
ver. 6. to proceed from the same God: and therefore such a Spirit is meant, as
is also Lord and God; and that is only the Holy Ghost. And again, in those
words, in ver. 11. [ Verse 11.
All these ] the Apostle ascribes to this Spirit the collation and
distribution of such gifts according to the free power of his own will and
pleasure: which free power belongs to none but God alone, Verse 38.
Who has set the members every one in the body, as it has pleased him.

Which yet ought not to be so understood of the Person of the Spirit; the
Father, and the Son, had no part or fellowship in this business. For all the
Actions and operations of the Divine Persons, (those only excepted which are
of intrinsecall and mutual relation) are the joint and undivided works of the
whole three Persons: according to the common known maxim, constantly and
uniformly received in the Catholic Church, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa. And as to this particular, concerning gifts the Scriptures are clear.
Wherein, as they are ascribed to GOD the Holy Ghost the Father, [ James 1.17.
Every good gift and every perfect giving is from above, from the Father of
Lights: Jam. 1.] and elsewhere to God the Son, [ Ephesians. 4.7.
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: Ephesians. 4.] Yea, and it may be, that for this very reason in the three
verses next before my text, these three words are used; Spirit, in ver. 4.
Lord, in ver. 5. and God, in ver. 6. to give us intimation, that Ne gratia and
donum divisum sit per personas Patris, and Filii and Sp. Sancti, sed
indiscretae unitatis and naturae t^ium unum opus intelligatur. Ambros. in 1
Cor. 7. c. 61.
these spiritual gifts proceed equally and undividedly from the whole three
Persons; from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and from
the eternal Spirit of them both the Holy as from one entire, indivisible, and
coessentiall Agent.

But for that we are gross of understanding, and unable to conceive Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, otherwise then by apprehending some
distinction of their operations and offices to-us-ward: it has pleased the
wisdom of God in the holy Scriptures, (which, being written for our sakes,
were to be fitted to our capacities) so far to condescend to our weakness and
dullness, as to attribute some of those great and common works to one person,
and some to another, after a more special manner than unto the rest; although
indeed and in truth none of the three persons had more or V. Aquin. 1. qu. 39.7.
Appropriation. By which appropriation, as Power is ascribed to the Father, and
Wisdom to the Son; so is Goodness to the Holy Ghost. And therefore, as the
Work of Creation, wherein is specially seen the mighty power of God, is
appropriated to the Father; and the work of Redemption, the wisdom of God, to
the Son: and so the works of sanctification, and the infusion of habitual
graces, whereby the good things of God are communicated unto us, is
appropriated unto the Holy Ghost. And for this cause, the gifts thus
communicated unto us from God, are called (...), spiritual gifts, and (...),
the manifestation of the Spirit.

spirit! but then; why manifestation? The word, as most other verballs of that
form, may be understood either in the active or passive signification. And it
is not material, whether of the two ways we take it in this place: both being
true; and neither improper. For these spiritual gifts are the manifestation of
the spirit Actively: because by these the spirit manifests the will of God
unto the Church; these being the instruments and means of conveying the
knowledge of salvation unto the people of God. And they are the manifestation
of the spirit Passively too: because where any of these gifts, especially in
any eminent sort, appeared in any person, it was a manifest evidence that the
Spirit of God wrought in him. As we read in Acts 10. that they of the
Circumcision were astonished, Act. 10.45, 46.
When they saw, that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy
Ghost. If it be demanded, But how did For they heard them speak with tongues,
etc.] The spiritual Gift then is a Id est donum spiritus, quo dono spiritus
suam in homine praesentiam declarat. Metonymia eff^cti. Pisca. in schol. hic.
manifestation of the Spirit, as every other sensible effect is a manifestation
of its proper cause.

the Gifts and graces wrought in us by the holy spirit of God, are of two
sorts. The Scriptures sometimes distinguish them by the different terms of
(...) and (...): although those words are sometimes again used indifferently
and promiscuously, either for other. They are commonly known in the Schools,
and differenced by the names of V. Aquin. 1.2 qu. 111.1.
Gratiae gratum Which terms though they be not very proper, (for the one of
them may be affirmed of the other; whereas the members of every good
distinction ought to be opposite:) yet because they have been long received,
(and change of terms, though happily for the better, has by experience been
found for the most part unhappy in the event, in multiplying unnecessary
book-quarrells;) we may retain them profitably, and without prejudice. Those
former, which they call Gratum facientes, are the graces of Sanctification;
whereby the person that has them, is enabled to do acceptable service to God,
in the duties of his general these latter, which they call Gratis datas, are
the Graces of Edification; whereby the person that has them is enabled to do
profitable service to the Church of God in the duties of his particular
Calling. Those are given Nobis, and Nobis; both to us, and from us, that is
Duplex est operatio sancti spiritus; operatur enim in nobis aliud propter nos,
aliud propter proximos. Bern. in parvis S^r. 55.
chiefly for our own good: these Nobis, sed Nostris; to us indeed, but for
others, that is, chiefly for the good of our brethren. Geminae operationis
experimentum: Unius, qua nos primo intus virtutibus solidat ad salutem:
alterius, qua foris quoque muneribus ornat ad lucrum. Illas nobis, haec nostris
accepimus. Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 18.
ad salutem, for the saving of our own souls: these ad lucrum, for the winning
of other men's souls. Those proceed from the special love of God to the Person;
and may therefore be called personal, or special: these proceeed from the
General love of God to his Church, (or yet more general to humane societies:)
and may therefore be rather called Ecclesiastical or General Gifts or Graces.

Of that first sort are Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, Patience, Humility;
and all those other holy graces and Gal. 5.22.
fruits of the Spirit, the holy Spirit of God, after a most effectual, but
unconceivable manner, regenerating, and renewing, and seasoning, and Chosen.
But yet these are not the Gifts so much spoken of in this Chapter; and namely
in my Text: Every branch whereof excludes them. Of those graces of
sanctification first, we may have indeed probable inducements to persuade
hypocrisy may make such a semblance, that we may think we see spirit in a man,
in whom yet there is nothing but flesh; and infirmities may cast such a fogge,
that we can discern nothing but flesh in a man, in whom yet spirit. But the
gifts here spoken of do incur into the senses, and give us evident and
infallible assurance of the spirit that wrought them: here is (...), a
manifestation of the spirit. Again, Secondly, those Graces of sanctification
are not communicated by distribution, ( 1 Cor. 7.7.
Alius sic, alius vero sic;) Faith to one, Charity to another, Repentance to
another: but where they are given, they are given all at once and together, as
it were strung upon one thread, and linked into one chain. But the Gifts here
spoken of are distributed as it were by doal, and divided severally as it
pleased God, shared out into several portions, and given to every man some, to
none all; Verse 8.
to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, to another the word of
Knowledge, etc. Thirdly, those Graces of sanctification, though they may and
ought to be exercised to the benefit of others, Mat. 5.16.
shining of our light, and the sight of our good works, may be provoked to
glorify God by walking in the same paths: yet that is but utilitas emergens,
and not finis proprius; a good use made of them upon the bye, but not the main,
proper and direct end of them, for which they were chiefly given. But the Gifts
here spoken of, were given directly for this end, and so intended by the giver,
to be employed for the the benefit of others, and for the edifying of the to
profit withal.

It then remains, to understand this Text and Chapter of that spiritual
Gifts: Those Graces of Edification, (or Gratiae gratis datae) whereby men are
enabled in their several Callings, according to the quality and measure of the
graces they have received, to be profitable members of the public body, either
faculties of the soul only excepted, which flowing a principiis speciei, are
in all men the same and like;) I comprehend all other secondary endowments, and
abilities whatsoever of the reasonable soul, which are capable of the degrees
of more and less, and of better and worse; together with all subsidiary helps
any way conducing to the exercise of any of them. Whether they supernatural
graces, given by immediate and extraordinary infusion from God: such as were
the gifts of tongues and of miracles, and of healings, and of prophecy
properly so called, and many other the Church, and when this Epistle was
written, according as the necessity of those primitive times considered, God
saw it expedient for his Church. Or Secondly, such as Philosophers call
Natural dispositions: such as are promptness of Wit, quickness of Conceit,
fastness of Memory, clearness of Understanding, soundness of Judgment,
readiness of Speech, and other like; which flow immediately a principiis
individui, from the individual condition, constitution, and temperature of
particular persons. Or, whether they be, Thirdly, such as Philosophers call
Intellectual habits: which is, Education, Art, Industry, Observation, or
Experience, that men become thereby skillful Linguists, subtle Disputers,
copious Orators, profound Divines, powerful Preachers, expert Lawyers,
Physicians, Historians, Statesmen, Commanders, Artisans, or excellent in any
Science, Profession, or faculty whatsoever. To which me may add in fourth
place, all outward subservient helps whatsoever, which may any way further or
facilitate the exercise of any of the former graces, dispositions, or habits:
such as are health, strength, beauty, and all those other Bona Corporis; as
also Bona Fortunae, Honor, Nature, or perfection from Art, may in some sort be
called (...), spiritual gifts: in as much as the spirit of God is the first
and principal worker of them. Nature, Art, Industry, and all other subsidiary
furtherances, being but second Agents under him; and as means ordained, or as
instruments used by him, for the accomplishing of those ends he has appointed.

spiritual gifts spoken of in this Chapter, and of the manifestation of the
spirit inferences for our Edification: We may here first behold, and admire,
and magnify the singular love, and care, and providence of God for and over
his Church. For the building up whereof, he has not only furnished it with
fit materials, men endowed with the faculties understanding, reason, will,
memory, affections; not only lent them tools out of his own rich storehouse,
his holy Word, and sacred Ordinances: but, as sometimes he filled Exodus 35.30,
etc.
Bezaleel and Aholiab with skill and wisdom for the building of the material
Tabernacle; so he has also from time to time raised up serviceable Men, and
enabled them with a large measure of all needful gifts and graces, to set
forward the building, and to give it both strength and beauty. A Body, if it
had not difference and variety of members, were rather a lump, than a Body; or
if having such members, there were yet no vital spirits within to enable them
to their proper offices, Corpse than a Body: but the vigor that is in every
part to do its office, is a certain evidence and manifestation of a spirit of
life within, and that makes it a living Organicall body. So those active
gifts, and graces, and abilities, which are to be found in the members of the
mystical body of Christ, (I know not whether of greater variety or use) are a
strong manifestation, that there is a powerful Spirit of God within, that
knitteth the whole body together, and works all in all, and all in every part
of the body.

Secondly, though we have just cause to lay it to heart, when men of eminent
gifts and place in the Church are taken from us, and to own, and the Churches
loss: yet we should possess our souls in patience, and sustain our selves with
this comfort, that it is the same God that still has care over his Church; and
it is the same H^ad Jesus Christ, that still has influence into his members;
and it is the same blessed Spirit of God and of Christ, that still actuateth
and animateth this great mystical Body. And therefore we may not doubt, but
this Spirit, as he has hitherto done from the beginning, so will still
manifest himself from time to time, unto the end of the world; in raising up
instruments for the service of his Church, and furnishing them with gifts in
some good measure meet for the Ephesians. 4.11, 13
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all meet in the unity of the Faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. He has promised long since, who was
never yet touched with breach of promise, that he would Mat. 28.20.
be with his Apostles (and their successors) always unto the end of the world.

Thirdly, where the Spirit of God has manifested it self to any man by the
distribution of gifts, it is but reason, that man should manifest the Spirit
that is in him, by exercising those gifts in some manifestation of the Spirit
in my Text, imposes upon every man the Necessity of a Calling. Our Apostle in
the seventh of this Epistle, joyneth these two together, a Gift, and a Calling;
as things that may not be severed? 1 Cor. 7.17.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one. Where
the end of a thing is the use, there the difference cannot be great, whether we
abuse it, or but conceal it. The Mat. 25.30.
unprofitable servant, that wrapped up his Masters talent in a napkin, could
not have received a much heavier doom, had he misspent it. O then up and be
doing: Mat. 20.6.
Why stand you all the day idle? Do not say, because you heard no voice, that
therefore no man has called you: those very gifts you have received, are a
Real Call, pursuing you with continual restless importunity, till you have
disposed your selves in some honest course of life or other, wherein you may be
profitable to humane society, by the exercising of some or other of those
gifts. All the members of the have their proper and distinct offices, according
as they have their proper and distinct faculties; and from those offices they
have also their proper and distinct names. As then in the Body, that is indeed
no member, which cannot call it self by any other name, than by the common name
of a member: so in the Church, he that cannot style himself by any other name
than a Christian, does indeed but usurp that too. If thou say, thou art of
the body: I demand then, What is thy office in the Body? If thou have no office
in the body, then thou art at the best but Tumor praeter naturam (as Physicians
scab, or botch, or wenne, or some other monstrous and unnatural excrescency
upon the body; but certainly thou art no true part and member of the body. And
if thou art no part of the body, how dare thou make challenge to the head, by
mis-calling thy self Christian? If thou have a Gift, get a Calling.

Fourthly, we of the Clergy, though we may not ingrosse the unto our selves, as
if none were spiritual persons but our selves: yet the voice of the World has
long given us the Name of the Spiritually after a peculiar sort; as if we were
spiritual persons in some different singular respect from other men. the name,
and thing. The very name seems to be thus used by S. Paul in the 14. Chapter
following, where at ver. 37. he makes a Prophet and a Spiritual man all one,
(and by prophesying, in that whole Chapter he mostwhat means Preaching:) 1
Cor. 14.37
If any man think himself to be a Prophet, either spiritual, let him
acknowledge, etc. But howsoever it be for the title, the thing it self has
very sufficient ground from that form of speech which was used by our blessed
Savior, when he conferred the Ministerial power upon his Disciples; and is
still used in our Church at the collation of Holy Orders, John 20.22.
Accipite spiritum sanctum, Since then at our admission into holy Orders we
receive a spiritual power by the imposition of hands, which others have not;
we may thenceforth be justly styled spiritual persons. The thing for which I
note it, is, that we should therefore endeavor our selves 2 Timothy 1.6.
(...), so to stir up those spiritual gifts that temporal men, we may show
our selves to be indeed, what we are in name, Spiritual persons. If we be of
the spiritualty, there would be in us another gates manifestation of the
spirit, then is ordinarily to be found in the Temporalty. God forbid I should
censure all them for intruders into the Ministry, that are not gifted for the
Pulpit. The severest censurers of Non-preaching Ministers, if they had lived in
the beginning of the Reformation, must have been content, as the times then
stood, to have admitted of some thousands of non-preaching Ministers, or else
have denied many Parishes and Congregations England the benefit of so much as
bare reading. And I take this to be a safe Rule: Whatsoever thing the help of
any circumstances can make lawful at any time, that thing may not be condemned
as universally, and de toto genere unlawful. I judge no man's conscience then,
or calling, who is in the Ministry; be his gifts never so slender; I dare not
deny him the benefit of his Clergy, if he can but read: if his own heart
condemn him not, neither do I. But yet this I say; As the Times now are,
wherein learning abounds even unto wantonness; and wherein the world is full
of questions, and controversies, and novelties, and niceties in Religion; and
Gentry, very Women and all (by the advantage of long Peace, and the customs of
modern Education, together with the help of a multitude of English books and
translations) are able to look through the ignorance of a Clergyman, and
censure it, if he be tripping in any point of History, Cosmography, Moral or
Natural Philosophy, Divinity, or the Arts; yea, and to chastise his very method
and phrase, if he speak loosely, or impertinently, or but improperly, and if
every thing be not point-vise: I say, as these times are, I would not have a
Clergyman content himself with every mediocrity of gifts; but by his prayers,
care and industry improve those Romans 1.11.
impart a spiritual gift to the people of God, whereby they may be
established, and to speak with such understanding, and sufficiency, and
pertinency (especially when he has just warning, and a convenient time to
prepare himself,) in some good measure of proportion to the quickness and
ripeness of these present times, as they that love not his Coat, may yet
approve his labors, and not find any thing therein, whereat justly to
quarrel: Tit. 2.7, 8.
Showing in his Doctrine (as our Apostle writes to Titus) uncorruptness,
gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of
the contrary part may be ashamed, having They that are called spiritual
persons, should strive to answer that name by a more than ordinary
manifestation of spiritual gifts. And thus much shall suffice us to have
spoken concerning the name and nature of these spiritual gifts, by occasion of
the title here given them, The manifestation of the spirit.

the second place, the conveyance of these property in them, and by what right
we can call them ours. The Conveyance is by deed of gift; the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man. Understand it not to be so much intended
here, that every particular man has the manifestation of the spirit, (though
that may also be true in some sense;) as that every man that has the
manifestation of the Spirit, has it given him, and given him withal to this
end, that he may do good with it. Like as when we say, Every man learneth to
read before he learn to write; it is no part of our meaning to signify each
particular person so to do, (for there be many that the received order of the
things to be such, as that every man that learneth both, learneth that first.
As we conceive his meaning, who directing us the way to such or such a place,
should tell us, Every man rides this way; and as we conceive of that speech of
the Ruler of the Feast in the Gospel, John 2.10.
Every man at the beginning sets forth good Wine, and then after that which
is worse; though there be many thousand men in the world that never rode that
way, or had occasion to set forth any Wine at all, either better or worse: very
so ought we to conceive the meaning of the universal particle Every man both
in (...) restring^ndum est ad praesentem hypothesin. Piscat. schol. in Luc.
20.38. Instances, see John 11.7. To. 5.18, etc.
due limitations according to the tenor and purpose of the thing spoken of. It
mattereth not then, as to the intent of this present speech (be it true, be it
false otherwise,) whether every man have received a spiritual gift, or no:
only thus much is directly intended, that Unicuique datur) intellige,
Unicuique cui datur. Piscat. in schol. hic.
every man who has received such a gift, has received it by way of gift. All
spiritual graces, all those dispositions, habits, and abilities of the
understanding part, from which the Church of God may receive edification in any
kind, together with all the secondary and inferior helps that any way conduce
thereunto; they are all the good gifts of God. [ The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man.]

variety, both of the gifts meet for several offices, and of the offices
wherein to employ those gifts, is wonderful, and no less wonderful the
distribution of both gifts and offices. But all that (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
hom. 29. 1 Cor. 12.8, etc.
variety is derived from one and the same fountain, the holy Spirit of God: and
all those distributions pass unto us by one and the same way, of most free and
liberal donation. Have all the Word of Wisdom? Have all the Word of
Knowledge? Have all Faith? Have all Prophecy? or other spiritual grace? No;
they have not: but b to one the Word and to others other gifts. There is both
variety you see, and distribution of these graces. But yet there is the same
Author of them, and the same manner of communicating them: For to one Ibid.
is given by the spirit the Word of Wisdom; to another the Word of Knowledge
by the same Spirit, and to the same Spirit, and they are all given. And as the
gifts, so the offices too. To that question in ver. 29. Verse 29.
Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? Answer may be made, as
before, negatively, No; they are not: but some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Teachers. There is the like variety, and distribution, as before: but
withal, the same Donor, and the same donation, as before. For Ephesians. 4.11.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers:
Ephesians. 4. And 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set some in the Church; first, Apostles; secondarily, Prophets;
thirdly, Teachers, etc. beneath at ver. 28. Both gifts and offices, as they are
a Deo, for the Author: so they are ex dono, for the manner: from God, and by
way of gift. If we had no other, the very names they carry, like the
superscription upon Caesar's penny, were a sufficient proof, from whom we first
had them. When we call them (...), Gratias gratis datas, gifts and graces, and
manifestations of the Spirit; do we not by the use of those very names confess
the receipt? For what more free than gift? and what less of debt or desert than
grace? Heathen men indeed called the best of their perfections, (...) Habits:
but Saint James has taught us Christians a fitter name for ours, Jam. 1.17.
(...), gifts. They say they had them, and looked no farther: but we must know,
as that we have them, so as came by them. And therefore this Apostle above at
Chap. 4. joyneth the having and the receipt together; as if he would have us
behold them uno intuitu, and at once. [ 1 Cor. 4.7.
Quid habes, quod non accepisti? what have thou, that thou have not received?

Possibly thou will allege thy excellent natural parts; these broughtest them
into the world with thee: or thou will vouch what thou have attained to by Art
and Industry; and these were not given thee, but thou have won them proprio
Mart, and therefore well deservest to wear them. Deceive not thy self: it is
neither so, nor so. Our Apostle in the place now 1 Cor. 4.7.
Quis te discrevit? who made thee to differ from another?] Say there were (as
there is not) such a difference in and from Nature as thou conceivest; yet
still in the last resolution there must be a receipt acknowledged: for even --
Cum illius sit gratiae, quod creatus es. Hieron. Epist. 139. Attendamus gratiam
Dei non solum qua fecit nos -- Aug. in Psalm. 144.
Nature it self in the last resolution is of Grace; for GOD gave thee that. Or,
say there were (as there is not) such a difference of desert, as thou
pretendest; yet still that were to be acknowledged as a gift too: for GOD gave
thee that Deuteronomy. 8.18. (...). dictum Agam^mnonis ad Achillem apud Homer. Iliad.
^.
power whatsoever it was, whereby thou have attained to whatsoever thou have.
But the truth is; the difference that is in men in regard of these gifts and
abilities, the power of Nature, nor from the merit of labor; otherwise than as
GOD is pleased to use these as second causes under him: but it comes merely
from the good will and pleasure of that free spirit, which blows where, and
when, and how he lists; 1 Cor. 12.11
dividing his graces to every man severally as he will, (at the eleventh) and
Ibid. 18.
as it has pleased him, (at verse 18. of this Chapter,) Nature is a necessary
agent, and, if not either hindered by some inferior impediment, or overruled
by some higher power, works always alike, and produces the same effects in
all individuals of the same kind: and how is it possible she should make a
difference, that knows none? And as for Desert; there is indeed no such
thing: and therefore it can work nothing. For can God be a debtor to any man?
or has any man Romans 11.35.
given to him first, that it might be recompensed him again? As a lump of Esaias
64.8.
Clay lies before the Potter; so is all mankind in the hand of GOD. The Potter
at his pleasure out of that Romans 9.21.
Lump frames vessels of all sorts, of different shape, proportion,; as he
thinks good, unto the several uses for which he intends them. So God after
the good pleasure of his own will, out of mankind, as out of an untoward lump
of Clay, (all of the same piece, equal in nature and desert,) makes up
vessels for the use of his Sanctuary: by fitting several men with several
gifts, more or less, greater or meaner, better or worse, according to the
difference of those offices and employments for which he intended them. It is
not the Clay, but the Potter, that makes the difference there: neither is it
any thing in man, but the Spirit of God, that makes the difference here.
Whatsoever spiritual abilities we gift and by grace. The manifestation of the
spirit is given to every man.

gifts. And first, all of us generally may hence take two profitable
directions: the one, if we have any useful gifts, whom to thank for them; the
other, if we want any needful gifts, where to seek for them. Whatsoever
manifestation of the spirit thou have, it is given thee: and to whom can thy
thanks for it be due, but to the giver? Sacrifice not to thine own Hab. 1.16.
nets, either of Nature, or Endeavor; as if these Abilities were thine own
spirit: but enlarge thy heart to magnify the goodness and bounty of him who is
Heb. 12.9.
Pater spiritum, the Father of the spirits of all flesh, and has wrought those
graces in thee by communicating his spirit unto thee. If thou shinest as a star
in the firmament of the Church whether of a greater or lesser magnitude, (as 1
Cor. 15.41
one star differs from another in glory;) remember thou shinest but by a
borrowed light from him who is James 1.17.
Pater luminum, the Father and Fountain of all lights, as the Sun in the
firmament, from whom descends every good gift, and every perfect giving.
Whatsoever Grace thou have, it is given thee: therefore be thankful to the
giver.

want any grace, or measure of grace, which seems needful for thee in
that station and calling, wherein God has set thee: herein is a second
direction for thee, where to seek it, even from his hands, who alone can give
it. James 1.5.
If any man lack wisdom (says James) let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally; and it shall be given him. A large, and liberal promise; but
yet a promise most certain, and full of comfortable assurance; provided, it be
understood aright, viz. with these two necessary Limitations: if God shall see
it expedient; and if he pray for it as he ought. Thou may pray with an
humble and upright affection, and put to thy best endeavors withal; and yet
not obtain the gift thou prayest for: because, being a common Grace, and not of
absolute necessity for salvation, it may be in the wisdom of GOD (who best
knows what is best, and when) not expedient for thee, or not for his Church,
at that sanctification, pray for them absolutely, and thou shall absolutely
receive them* there needs no conditional clause of Expediency in thy prayers
for them; because they can never be inexpedient. But these may: and thefore as
thou ought not to pray for them, but with all subjection of thy desires to
his most holy and most wise appointments; so thou ought to take a denial
from him, not only contentedly, but even thankfully, as a gracious fruit of
his love unto thee, and a certain sign of the inexpediency of the thing desired.

But if it be expedient; it will not yet come for asking, unless it aright.
Jam. 1.6, 7.
But let him pray in Faith, says Saint James: Who so does not, let not that
man think to receive any thing of the Lord. Now that man only prays in
Faith, who looks to receive the thing he prays for, upon such terms, as
God has promised to give it: for Faith ever looks to the promise. And God
has not made us any promise of the End other then conditional; viz. upon our
conscionable use of the appointed means. And the means which he has ordained
both for the obtaining, and the improving of spiritual gifts, are study and
industry, and diligent meditation. We must not now look, as in the infancy of
the Church, to the teats put into our mouths, and to receive spiritual graces
by immediate infusion: That Manna, as Hoskins Sermon. on Luke 12.48.
one says, was for the Wilderness. But now the Church is possessed of the
Land, and grown to years of better strength; we must plow, and sow, and eat
of the fruit of the Land, in the sweat of our faces: and now he that 2 These.
3.10
will not labor, he may thank himself if he have not to eat. He prays but
with an overly desire, and not from the deep of his heart, that will not bend
his endeavors withal to obtain what he desires or rather indeed he prays
not at all. You may call it wishing and woulding; (and we have proverbs against
wishers and woulders;) rather Praying. Solomon accounts the idle man's prayer
no better; and it thriveth accordingly with him: Prove. 13.4.
The soul of the sluggard lusts, and has nothing, Prove. 13.

To make all sure then, here is your course. Wrestle with GOD by your fervent
prayers; and wrestle with him too by your faithful endeavors; and he will not
for his goodness sake, and for his promise sake he cannot, dismiss you
without a blessing. But omit either; and the other is lost labor. Prayer
without study, is presumption; and study without prayer, Atheism: the one
bootlesse; the other fruitless. You take your books in vain into your hand, if
you turn them over, and never look higher: and you take Gods Name in vain
within your lips, if you cry Da Domine, and never stir farther. The Ship is
then like to be steered with best certainty and success; when there is Oculus
ad coelum, manus ad clavum: when the Pilot is careful of both, to have his eye
upon the Compass, and his hand at the Stern. Remember these abilities you pray
or study for, are the gifts of GOD: and as not to be had ordinarily without
labor, (for God is a God of order, and works not ordinarily, but by ordinary
means;) so not to be had merely for the labor; for then should it not be so
much a gift, as a purchase. It was Simon Magus his error, to think that Act.
8.20.
the gift of God might be purchased with money: and it has a spice of his sin,
and so may go for a kind of Simony, for a man to think these spiritual gifts
of God may be purchased with labor. You may rise up early, and go to bed late,
and study hard, and read much, and devour the fat and the marrow of the best
Authors; and when you have all done, unless God give a blessing unto your
endeavors, be as thin and meagre in regard learning, as Pharaohs Genesis 41.21.
lean Kine were after they had eaten the fat ones. It is God 2 Cor. 9.10.
that both ministers seed to the sower, and multiplieth the seed sown: the
Principal, and the Increase, are both his. If then we expect any gift, or the
increase of any gift from him, neither of which we can have without him: let us
not be behind, either with our best endeavors to use the means he has
appointed, or with our faithful prayers to crave his blessing upon those
means. These Instructions are general; and concern us all, whatsoever our
gifts be.

I must now turn my speech more particularly to you, to whom the manifestation
of his Spirit in a larger proportion firstborn, a Deuteronomy. 21.17.
double portion of his Spirit, as 4 Kings 2.9.
Elisha had of Eliah's; or perhaps dealing with you yet more liberally, as
Joseph did with Benjamin, whose mess (though he were the youngest) he
appointed to be Genesis 43.34.
five times as much as any of his brethrens. It is needful that you of all
others, should be eft-soones put in remembrance, that those eminent
manifestations of the Spirit you have, were given you. First, it will be a good
help to take down that Scientia inflat. 1 Cor. 8.1
swelling, which, as an Aposteme in the body through rankness of blood, so is
soul through abundance of Knowledge; and to let out some of the corruption. It
is Magna and rara virtus profecto est, ut magna licet operantem, magnum te
nescias. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 13.
a very hard thing Multum sapere, and not altum sapere; to know much, and not
to know it too much; to excel others in gifts, and not perk above them in
self-conceipt. S. Paul, who Phil. 4.12.
in all other things was sufficiently instructed, was yet put very hard to it,
when he was to try the mastery with this temptation, which arose from the 2
Cor. 12.7.
abundance of revelations. If you find an aptness then in your selves, (and
there is in your selves, as of your selves such an aptness, as to no one thing
more,) to be exalted above measure in your own conceits; boastingly to make
ostentation of your own sufficiencies; with a kind of unbecoming compassion to
cast scorn upon your meaner brethren; and upon every light provocation to fly
out into those terms of defiance [ Hic verse. 21
I have no need of thee; and, I have no need of thee:] to dispell this windy
humor I know not a more sovereign remedy, then to chew upon this meditation;
that all the Abilities and perfections you have, were given you, by one who was
no way so bound to you, but he might have given them as well to the meanest of
your brethren as to you, and that without any wrong to you, if it had so
pleased him. You may take the Receipt from him, who himself had had some
experience of the infirmity; even Saint Paul in the fourth of this Epistle. [ 1
Cor. 4.7.
What have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast as if thou had not received it?

Secondly; Every wise and conscionable man should advisedly Gifts, and make
them his Rule to work by: not thinking Law compels him to do, or if he do as
much as other neighbors do. Indeed where Laws bound us by Negative Precepts,
[ Hitherto thou may go, but further thou shall not,] we must obey, and we
may not exceed those bounds. But where the Laws do barely enjoyne us to do
somewhat, lest having no Law to compel us, we should do just nothing; it can
be no transgression of the Law, to do more. Whosoever therefore of you have
received more or greater Gifts then many others have; you must know your selves
bound to do so much more good with them, and to chargeable with so much the
deeper account for them. Gregor.
Crescunt dona, crescunt rations. When you shall come to make up your
accounts; your receipts will be looked into: and if you have received ten
talents, or five, for your meaner brothers one; when but one shall be required
from him, you shall be answerable for ten or five. For it is an equitable
course, that Luke 12.48.
to whom much is given, of him much should be required. And at that great day,
if you cannot make your accounts straight with your receipts, you shall
certainly find that most true in this sense, which Solomon spoke in another,
Eccles. 1.18.
Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem: the more and greater your gifts are,
thankfulness for them, and your diligence with them rise to some good like
proportion thereunto; the greater shall be your condemnation, the more your
stripes.

But thirdly; though your Graces must be so to your selves, yet Rules to
others. A thing I the rather note, because the fault is so frequent in
practice, and yet very rarely observed, and more rarely reprehended. God has
endowed a man viz. an Ability to enlarge himself in prayer readily, and with
fit expressions upon any present occasion. Being in the Ministry, or other
Calling, he is careful to exercise his gift by praying with his family,
praying with the sick, praying with other company upon such other occasions as
may fall out. He thinks (and he thinks well,) that if he should do
otherwise or less than he does, he should not be able to discharge himself from
the guilt of unfaithfulness, in not employing the talent he has received to
the best advantage, when the exercise of it might redound the giver. Hitherto
he is in the right: so long as he makes his gift a Rule but to himself. But
now if this man shall stretch out this Rule unto all his brethren in the same
Calling, by imposing upon them a necessity of doing the like; if he shall
expect or exact from them, that they should also be able to commend unto God
the necessities of their families, or the state of a sick person, or the like,
by extemporary prayer; but especially if he shall judge or censure them, that
dare not adventure so to do, of intrusion into, or of unfaithfulness in their
Callings: he commits a great fault, and well deserving a sharp reprehension.
For what is this else, but to burdens upon men's shoulders, then they can stand
under? to make our selves judges of other men's consciences, and our abilities
Rules of their actions, yea, and even to lay an imputation upon our Master,
with that ungracious servant in the Gospel, as if he were Mat. 25.24.
an hard man, reaping where he has not sown, and gathering where he has not
strewed, and requiring much where he has given little, and like Pharaoh's
taskmasters, exacting the Exodus 5.18.
full tale of bricks without sufficient allowance of materials? Shall he that
has a thousand a year, count him that has but a hundred, a Churl if he do not
spend as much in his house weekly, keep as plentiful a table, and bear as
common charge, as himself? No less unreasonable is he that would bind his
brother of inferior gifts to the same frequency and method in preaching, to
the same readiness and copiousness in praying, to the same necessity and
measure in the performance of other duties; whereunto, according to those gifts
he finds in himself, he finds himself bound. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man: let no man be so severe to his brother, as to
look he should manifest more of the Spirit then he has received.

Now as for you to whom God has dealt these spiritual gifts, First, thou have
no reason, whosoever thou art, to grudge at the scantness of thy gifts, or to
repine at the Giver. How little soever God has given thee, it is more then
(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 29.
owed thee. If the distribution of the Spirit were a matter of justice debt;
God, we know, is no Acts 10.34.
accepter of persons, and he would have given to thee, as to another. But
being, as it is, a matter of gift, not of debt; nor of justice, but of grace:
take that is thine thankfully, and be content withal; Mat. 20.3-15.
He has done thee no wrong: may he not do as he will, with his own? Secondly,
since the manifestation the Spirit is a matter of free gift: thou have no cause
to envy thy Brother, whose portion is greater. Why should Mat. 20.15.
thy eye be therefore evil against him, because God has been so good unto him?
Shall the foot envy the hand, or the ear the eye* because the foot cannot work,
nor the ear see? If the Hic Verse 17 -- 19.
whole body were hand, where were the going? and if the whole were eye, where
were the hearing? or member, where were the body? If the hand can work, which
the foot cannot; yet the foot can go, which the hand cannot: and if the eye can
see, which the ear cannot; yet the ear can hearken, which the eye cannot. And,
if thy brother have some abilities, which thou have not; thou art not so bare,
but thou have othersome again, which he has not. Say, thine be meaner: yet the
meanest member, as it has his Hic Ver. 22.23.
necessary office, so it is not destitute of his proper comeliness in the Body.
Thirdly, if thy gifts be mean, thou have this comfort withal, that thy
accounts will be so much the Merchants that have the greatest dealings, are not
ever the men. And how happy a thing had it been for many men in the world, if
they had had less of other men's goods in their hands! The less thou have
received, the less thou have to answer for. If God have given thee but one
single talent, he will not require five: nor if five, ten. Fourthly, in the
meaneness of thy gifts thou may read thy self a daily lecture of humility:
and humility alone is a thing of more the perfections that are in the world
besides, without it. This think: that God, who disposes Romans 8.28.
all things for the best to those that are his, would have given thee other and
greater gifts, if he had seen it so expedient for thee. That therefore he has
holden withheld those things from thee: conceive it done, either for thy
former unworthiness, and that should make thee humble; or for thy future good,
and that should make thee also thankful. Lastly, remember what the Preacher
says in Eccles. 10. [ Eccl. 10.10. Maximum mediocris ingenii subsidium,
diligentia. Sen. in controv.
If the Iron be blunt, then he must put to the more strength.] Many men that
well left by their friends, and full of money; because they think they shall
never see the bottom of it, take no care by any employment to increase it, but
spend on upon the stock, without either fear or wit, they care not what, or
how, till they be sunk to nothing before they be aware: whereas on the
contrary, industrious little to begin withal, yet by their care and
providence, and pains-taking, get up wonderfully. It is almost incredible, what
industry, and diligence, and exercise, and holy (...) ver. 31. hic.
emulation (which our Apostle commends in the last verse of this Chapter,)
are able to effect, for the bettering and increasing of our spiritual gifts:
provided ever we join with these hearty prayers unto, dependence upon God, for
his blessing thereupon. I know no so lawful (...). Mat. 25.27.
usury, as of these spiritual talents; nor do I know any so profitable usury,
or that multiplieth so fast as this does: your use upon use, that doubleth the
principal in seven years, is nothing to it. Oh then, Luke 19.23.
cast in thy talent into the bank; make thy returns as speedy, and as many as
thou can; lose not a market, or a tide, if it be possible; 2 Timothy 4.2.
be instant in season and out of season; omit no opportunity to take in, and
put off all thou can get: so, though thy beginnings be but small, thy latter
end shall wonderfully increase. But this means, thou shall not only profit
thy self, in the increase of thy gifts unto thy self: but (which no other usury
does besides) thou shall also profit others, by communicating of thy gifts unto
them. Which is the proper end for which they were bestowed; and of which we are
next to speak. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

To profit whom? it may be, Himself. It is true; Prove. 9.12.
If thou said Solomon; and Solomon knew what belonged to wisdom as well as
another. For, Syrac. 14.5.
Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? He that is not good to himself, it is but a chance
that he is good to any body else. When we seem to pity a man by saying, He is
no man's foe but his own, or he is worst to himself; we do indeed but flout him,
and in effect call him a fool, and a prodigal. Such a fool is every one, that
guiding the feet of others into the way of peace, himself treads the paths
that lead unto destruction; and that 1 Cor. 9.27.
preaching repentance unto others, himself becomes a Castaway. He that has a
gift then, he should do well to look to his own, as well as to the profit of
others; and as unto doctrine, so as well and first to 1 Timothy 4.16.
take heed unto himself: that so doing he may save himself, as well as those
that hear him.

Sunt qui scire volunt, ut aedificent, and charitas est: sunt qui scire volunt
ut aedificentur, and prudentiae est. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 36.
Wisdom we cannot do less; but in Charity we are bound to do more than thus
with our gifts. If our own profit only had been intended, (...) would have
served the turn as well: but the word here is (...), which imports such a
kind of profit as redoundeth to Utilitatem sc. Ecclesiae. Pisc. in Schol. hic.
community, such as before in the 10. Chapter he professes himself to have
sought after, [ 1 Cor. 10.33.
Not seeking mine own profit, (he means, not only his own,) but the profit
of many, that they may be saved.] We noted it already, as the main and
essential difference between those graces of sanctification, and these graces
of edification: that those, though they would be made profitable unto also, yet
were principally intended for the proper good of the owner; but these, though
they would be used for the owners good also, yet were principally intended for
the profit of others. You see then, what a strong obligation lies upon every
man that has received the Spirit, confer aliquid in publicum, to cast his
gifts into the common treasury of the Church, to employ his spiritual graces
so, as they may some way or other be profitable to his brethren and
fellow servants in Church and Commonwealth. It is an old received Canon,
Beneficium propter officium. No man seetteth a Steward over his house, only to
receive his rents, and then to keep the moneys in his hand, and make no
provision out of it for his Hines and servants: but it is the Luke 12.42.
office of a good and wise Steward to give every one of the household his
appointed portion at the appointed seasons. And who so receives a spiritual
gift, ipso facto takes upon him the office, and is bound to the duties of a
Steward; [ 1 Pet. 4.10.
As 1 Pet. 4.] It was not only for orders sake, and for the beautifying of his
Church, (though that also) that God Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers: but also, and especially, for more necessary and profitable uses;
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, Ephs. 4.11, 12. The members of the body, are
not every one for it self, but every one for other, and all for the whole. The
stomach eats, not to it self, but to nourish the Body; the Eye sees, not to
please it self, but to epsy for the Body; the foot moves, not to exercise it
self, but to carry the Body; the Hand works, not to help it self, but to
maintain the body; every Ephesians. 4.16.
joint supplieth something according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, for the fit joining together, and compacting, and increasing of
the body to the edifying it self in love. Hic Ver. 27.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

Now this necessity of employing spiritual gifts to the good and others,
arises first from the will and the intent of the Giver: intent was; The
manifestation of the Spirit was therefore given to every man, that he might
profit withal. Certainly, as Deus and natura nihil saciunt sustra.
Nature does not, so much less does the God of Nature, make any thing to no
purpose, or barely for show; but for use: and the use, for which all these
things were made and given, is 1 Cor. 14.26
edification. He that has an estate made over to him in trust and for uses,
has in equity therein no estate at all, if he turn the commodities of the
thing some other way, and not to those special uses for which he was so
estated in it. So he that employeth not his spiritual gift to the use for
which it was given, to the In communem utilitatem collatum est. Erasm. in
paphr. hic.
profit of the Church; he has de jure forfeited it to the giver. And we have
sometimes known him de facto to take the forfeiture; as from the unprofitable
servant in the Gospel, [ Mat. 25.28. See Hieron. in Agg. 2.9.
Take the talent from him.] We have sometimes seen the experiment of it. Men of
excellent parts, by slackning their zeal, to have lost their very gifts; and by
neglecting the use, to have lost the Principal; finding a sensible decay in
those powers, act. It is a just thing with the Jam. 1.15.
Father of Lights, when he has lighted any man a candle, by bestowing
spiritual gifts upon him; and lent him a candlestick too whereon to set it* by
providing him a stay in the Church: if that man shall then Matthew. 5.15.
hide his candle under a bushel, and envy the light and comfort of it to them
that are in the house; either to remove his candlestick, or to put out his
candle in obscurity.

the intent of the Giver, so secondly, the nature and quality of the gift
calls upon us for employment. It is not with these spiritual gifts, as with
most other things, which when they are imparted, are empaired; and lessened by
communicating. Here is no place for that allegation of the Virgins, Matthew. 25.9.
Ne non sufficiat: Lest there be not enough for you and for us. These graces
are of the number of those things, that communicate themselves by
Multiplication, not Division; and by diffusion, without waste. As the seal
makes impression in the wax, and as fire conveyeth heat into Iron, and as one
candle tindeth a thousand: all without loss of figure, heat, or light. Had
ever any man less knowledge, or wit, or learning, by teaching of others? had he
not rather more? Eccles. 12.9.
The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the People Knowledge,
Solomon, Eccles. 12. and certainly the more he taught them knowledge, the more
his own wisdom increased. As the ^ King. 4.4.
Widows oil increased, not in the vessel, but by pouring out; and as the Joh.
6.11.
barley bread in the Gospel multiplied, not in the whole loaf, but by breaking
and distributing; and as the 2 Cor. 9.10.
grain brings increase, not when it lies on a heap in the garner, but by
scattering upon the land: so are these spiritual graces best improved, not by
Absconsione minnitur, and communicatione multiplicatur. Cassiod. in Epist.
keeping them together, but by distributing them abroad. Tutius in credito quam
in sudario: the talent gathers nothing in the napkin, unless it be rust and
canker; but traveling in the bank, besides the it does as it passes to and
fro, it ever Quo in plures diffunditur, ^o redundantior manet (forte leg.
manat.) and in suum fontem recurrit. In se enim refluit ubertas prudentiae; and
quo pluribus fluxerit, ea exercitius fit omne quod remanet. Ambr. 2. Offic. 15.
returns home with increase.

Thirdly, our own unsufficiency to all offices, and the need we have of other
men's gifts, must enforce us to lend them the help and comfort of ours. GOD has
so distributed the variety of his gifts with singular wisdom, that there is no
man so mean, but his service may be useful to the greatest: nor any man so
eminent, but he the meanest of his brethren: of purpose, that whilst each has
need of other, each should help, none should despise other. As in a Societas
nostra lapidum fornica i^xi simillima est: quae casura, nisi* invicem
obstarent, hoc uno sustinetur. Senec. Epist. 95.
building, the stones help one another, supporting the higher from falling to
the ground, and every higher stone saving the lower from taking wet; and as in
the body, every member Ephesians. 4.16.
lends some supply to the rest, and again receives supply from them: so in
the spiritual building, and mystical body of the Church, God has so tempered
the parts, use, and each his defects; Hic. V. 24, 5^.
that there should be no schism in the body, but that the members should have
the same care one for another. Such a consent there should be in the parts, as
was between the Anthol. 1.4.
blind and lame man in the Epigram: mutually covenanting the Blind to carry the
Lame, and the Lame to direct the Blind; that so the Blind might find his way by
the others eyes, and the Lame walk therein upon the others legs. When a man is
once come to that all sufficiency in himself, as he may truly say to the rest
of his brethren, Hic Ver. 21.
I stand in no need of you: let him then keep his gifts to himself: but let him
in the mean time remember, he must employ them master, and to the benefit of
his brother. [The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.]

Surely then those men, first of all, run a course strangely exorbitant; the
profit, bend those gifts they have received, (whether spiritual or temporal)
to the ruin and destruction of their brethren. Instead of winning souls to
Heaven; with busy and cursed diligence Mat. 23.15.
compassing Sea and Land, to draw Proselytes to the Devil: and instead of
raising up seed to their elder brother Christ, seeking to make their brethren
(if it were possible) ten times more the children of hell then themselves.
Abusing their Power to oppression, their wealth to luxury, their strength to
drunkenness, their wit to Scoffing, Atheism, Profaneness, their learning to
the maintenance of Heresy, Idolatry, Schism, Novelty. If there be a fearful
woe due to those that Mat. 25.30. Intelligatur poena interversoris ex poena
pigri. Aug. in Psalm. 99.
use not their gifts profitably; what woes may we think shall overtake them,
that so ungraciously abuse them?

But to leave these wretches: be persuaded in the second place, all you, whom
God has made Stewards over his household, and Mat. 13.52.
bring forth of your treasures things both new and old; manifest the spirit God
has given you, so the profit of your brethren. The spirit of God when he gave
you wisdom, and knowledge, intended not so much the wisdom and the knowledge
themselves, as the manifestation of them, or (as it is in the next verse) Hic
Ver. 8.
the Word of Wisdom, and the Word of Knowledge: as Christ also promised his
Apostles, to give them Luke 21.15.
Os and sapientiam; A mouth, and wisdom. Alas, what is wisdom without a mouth?
but as a pot of treasure hid in the ground, which no man is the better for.
Syrac. 20.30.
Wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them
both? O then do not knit up your Masters talent in a Luc. 19.20.
Napkin, smother not his light under a Mat. 5.15.
bushel; not his servants of their due Luc. 12.42 -- 46.
provision; pot not up the Exodus 16.^0.
Manna you have gathered till it stink, and the worms consume it: but above
all, squander not away your rich portions by riotous living. Let not either
sloth, or envy, or pride, or pretended modesty, or any other thing hinder you,
from laboring to discharge faithfully that trust and duty, which God
expects, which the necessity of the Church challenges, which the measure of
your gifts promises, calling exacteth from you. Remember the manifestation of
the Spirit was given you to profit withal.

Thirdly, since the end of all gifts is to profit: aim most at those gifts that
will profit most; and endeavor so to frame those you have in the exercise of
them, as they may be likeliest to bring profit to those that shall partake
them. Hic ver. 31.
Covet earnestly the best gifts, says my Apostle at the last verse of this
Chapter, and you have his Comment upon that Text in the first verse of the
fourteenth Chapter, 1 Cor. 15.1.
Covet spiritual gifts, (...), but rather that ye may prophecy. And by
propecying, he means Prophetas interpretes dicit scripturarum Ambr. in 1 Cor.
c. 63. Prophetia i. e. donum interpretandi, scripturas. Piscat. schol. in 1
Cor. 1.22. Mysticum sensum ad salutem auditorum explanantes. Eras. in Paraphr.
ad 1 Cor. 14.
the Instruction God in the needful doctrines of faith toward God, Repentance
from dead works, and new and holy Obedience. It is one Stratagem of the
Arch-enemy of mankind, (and when we know his wiles, we may the better be able
to defeat him,) by busying men of great and useful parts in by-matters, and
things of lesser consequence; to divert them from following that unum
necessarium, that which should be the main in all our endeavors, the beating
down of sin, the planting of Faith, and the reformation of manners.
Controversies, I confess, are necessary, the Tongues necessary, Histories
necessary, Philosophy and The Arts Knowledge of all sorts necessary in the
Church: for Truth must be maintained, Scripture-phrases opened, Heresy
confuted, the mouths of Adversaries stopped, Schisms and Novelties suppressed.
But when all is done, Positive and Practique Divinity is it must bring us to
Heaven* that is it must poise our judgments, settle our consciences, direct
our lives, mortify our corruptions, increase our graces, strengthen our
comforts, save our souls. Hoc opus, hoc studium: there is no study to this,
none so well worth the labor as this, none that can bring so much profit to
others, nor therefore so much glory to God, nor therefore so much comfort to
our Titus 3.8.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly (says S. Paul to Titus) that they which have believed in God might
be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and profitable unto
men. You cannot do more good unto the Church of God, you cannot more profit the
people of God, by your gifts; then by pressing effectually these two great
points, Faith, and good works. These are good and profitable unto men.

I might here add other Inferences from this point, as namely, the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one of us for this end, that we
may profit the people with it, that therefore fourthly, in our preaching we
should rather seek to profit our hearers, though perhaps with sharp and
unwelcome reproofs, then to please them by flattering them in evil: and that
fifthly, we should more desire to bring profit unto them, then to gain applause
more, nor prosecute these any farther at this time, but give place to other
business. God the Father of Lights, and of Spirits, endow every one of us, in
our Places and Callings, with a competent measure of such Graces, as in his
wisdom and goodness he shall see needful and expedient for us, and so direct
our hearts, and tongues, and endeavors in the exercise and manifestation
thereof, that by his good blessing upon our labors we may be enabled to
advance his Glory, propagate his Truth, benefit his Church, discharge a good
Conscience in the mean time, and account with comfort at the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
Grantham, Lincoln, 22. August 1634.
ROMANS 14.23. -- For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.


ONE remarkable difference (among many other) Good and Evil, is this: that
there must good; whereas to make a thing evil, a single defect in any one
condition alone will suffice. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 18. art. 4. ad 3.
Bonum ex causa integra, malum ex partiali. If we propose not to our selves a
right end; or if we pitch not upon proper and convenient means for the
attaining of that end, or if we pursue not these means in a due manner, or if
we observe not exactly every material circumstance in the whole pursuit; if we
fail but in any one point: the action, though one defect becomes wholly
sinful. Nay more, not only a true and real, but even a supposed and
imaginary defect; the bare opinion of unlawfulness, is able to vitiate the
most justifiable act, and to turn it into sin. [ I know there is nothing
unclean of it self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him
it is unclean, at the 14 verse of this Chapter.] Nay yet more, not only a
settled opinion doubtfulnesse of our minds whether we may lawfully do it or no,
makes it sometimes unlawful to be done (of us,) and if we do it, sinful. [
He that but doubts is damned, if he eat; because he eats not of faith:] in
the former part of this verse. The ground whereof the Apostle delivers in a
short and full Aphorism; and concludes the whole Chapter with it, in the words
of the Text, [ For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.]

Liberty indifferent nature well worthy our Christian consideration, if we had
time and leisure for them. But this last Rule alone will find us work enough:
and therefore omitting the rest, we will (by Gods assistance with your
patience) presently fall in hand with this, and intend it wholly, in the
Explication first, and then in the Application of it. For by how much it is of
more profitable and universal use for the regulating of the common offices of
life: by so much is the mischief greater if it be, and accordingly our care
ought to be so much the greater that it be not, either misunderstood, or
misapplyed. Quod non ex fide, peccatum: that is the Whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin. In the Explication of which words, there would be little difficulty,
had not the ambiguity of the word Faith occasioned difference of
interpretations, and so left a way open to some misapprehensions, Faith is
verbum (...), as most other words are. There be that have Marlorat. in Enchirid.
reckoned up more than twenty several significations of it in the Scriptures.
But I find three especially looked at by those, who either purposely or
occasionally have had to do with this Text: each of which we shall examine in
their Order.

First and most usually, especially in the Apostolical writings, the Faith is
used to signify that Theological virtue, or gracious habit, whereby we
embrace with our minds and affections the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only
begotten Son of God, and alone Savior of the world, casting our selves wholly
upon the mercy of God through his merits, for remission and everlasting
salvation. It is that which is commonly called a lively or justifying faith:
whereunto are ascribed in holy Writ those many gracious effects, of Acts 15.9.
purifying the heart, Joh. 1.12. and Galat. 4.26.
adoption, Romans 3.28. and 5.1.
justification, Hab. 2.4. and Gal. 2.20.
life, Romans 15.13. 1 Pet. 1.8.
joy, Romans 5.1.
peace, Acts 16.34. Ephesians. 1.8.
salvation, etc. Not as to their proper and primary cause; but as to the
instrument, whereby we apprehend and apply Christ, whose merits spirit are the
true causes of all those blessed effects. And in this notion many of our later
Divines seem to understand it in our present Text: whilst they allege it for
the confirmation of this Position, that All the works (even the best works) of
unbelievers are sins.

the Trent-Council, and* that under a curse; taking it (as I suppose) in a
wrong construction; Si qui^ dixerit opera omnia quae ante justificationem fiunt
vere esse peccata, Anathema sit. Con-Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 7.
but not the doctrine of our Church in the thirteenth Article of her
Confession, and according to the tenor of those Scriptures whereon that
doctrine is grounded, Viz. Mat. 12.33. Romans 8.8. Tit. 1.15. Heb. 11.6, etc.
Howbeit I take it (with subjection of judgment) that that Conclusion, what
truth soever it may have in it self, has yet no direct foundation in this
Text. The Verb (...) to believe, and the Nown (...) faith or belief, are both
of them found sundry times in the Act, or the Nown the Habit, of this saving or
justifying Faith, of which we now speak. But being opposed every where, and
namely in this last verse unto doubtfulnesse of judgment concerning the
lawfulness of some indifferent things; must therefore needs be understood of
such a persuasion of judgment concerning such lawfulness, as is opposite to
such doubting. Which kind of Faith may be found in a mere heathen man: who
never having heard the least syllable of the mystery of salvation by Christ,
may yet be assured out of clear evidence of reason, that many of the things he
does are such may and ought to do. And as it may be found in a mere heathen
man, so it may be wanting in a true believer: who steadfastly resting upon the
blood of Christ for his eternal redemption, may yet through the strength of
temptation, sway of passion, or other distemper or subreption incident to
humane frailty, do some particular act or acts, of the lawfulness whereof he
is not sufficiently persuaded. The Apostle then here speaking of such a Faith
as may be both found in an unbeliever, and also wanting in a true believer: it
appears that by Faith he means not that justifying Faith, which makes a
true believer to differ from an unbeliever; but the word must be understood in
some other notion.

excuse them from the imputation of having (at least wilfully) handled the Word
of God deceitfully. First, that the thing it self the words also sounding so
much that way, might easily induce them to conceive that to be the very
meaning. And common equity will not that men should be presently condemned, if
they shall sometimes confirm a point from a place of Scripture not altogether
pertinent, if yet they think it to be so: especially so long as the substance
of what they write is according the analogy of Faith and Godliness. Secondly,
that albeit these proper and immediate sense will not necessarily enforce that
Conclusion: yet it may seem deducible therefrom with the help of some topicall
arguments, and by more remote inferences; as some learned men have endeavored
to show, not altogether improbably. And thirdly, that they who this Text as
aforesaid, are neither singular nor novell therein; but walk in the same path,
which some of the ancient Fathers have trod before them. The Though S. August.
sometimes applies it also to prove, that all the actions of infidels (meaning,
etc.) be sin Rhem. annot. in loc.
Rhemists themselves confess it of S. Augustine: to whom they might have added
also Et omne quod non est ex fide peccatum est: ut sc. intelligat justitia^
in^ideliu^ non esse justitiam: quia sordet natura sine gratia. Prosper. in
Epist. ad Rufin. V. etiam eundem contra Collat.
S. Prosper, and (whose authority alone is enough to stop their mouths for
ever) Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam nihil est integrum, nil^l castum, dicente
Apostolo, Omne quod non, etc. Leo sermon. 2. de jejun. Pentec.
Leo Bishop of Rome, who have all cited these words for the self-same purpose.

But we are content, for the reasons already shown, to let it pass as a
collection impertinent: and that I suppose is the worst that can be made of it.
There is a second acception of the word Faith: put, the whole systeme of that
truth which God has been pleased to reveal to his Church in the Scriptures of
the old and new Testament, or some part thereof: or else ((...)) for the assent
of the mind thereunto. In which signification some conceiving the words of this
Text to be meant, do hence infer a false and dangerous conclusion; which yet
they would obtrude upon the Christian Church as an undoubted principle of
truth: that T C l. 1 p. 59 etc. apud Hooker lib. 2.
men are bound for every particular action they do to have direction and
warrant from the written word of God, or else they sin in the doing of it.
For (say they) faith must be grounded upon the word of God, Romans 10.17.
( Faith comes Romans 10.) Where there is T.C. l. 1 p. 27 apud Hooker lib. 2.
Sect. 4.
no Word then, there can be no Faith: and then, by the Apostles doctrine, that
which is done without the Word to warrant it, must needs be sin, for whatsoever
is not of faith is sin. This is their opinion, and thus they would infer it.

counterfeit doctrine, that has passed so currently in the world, with so
little suspicion of falsehood, and so little open contradiction as this has
done. One chief cause whereof I conjecture to be, for that it seems to make
very much for the honor and perfection of Gods sacred Law: the fullness and
sufficiency Papists or Atheists will deny* In which respect, the very
questioning of it now, will perhaps seem a strange novelty to many, and
occasion their miscensures. But as God himself, so the Holy Word of God is so
full of all requisite perfection, that it needs not to beg honor from an
untruth. ( Job 13.7
Will you speak wickedly for God? or talk deceitfully for him?) I hold it very
needful therefore, both for the vindicating of my Text from a common abuse,
and for the arming of all my brethren as well of the Clergy as Laity against a
common and plausible error, that neither they teach it, nor these receive it:
briefly proposed it, and many have understood it, (for it is capable of a good
interpretation, wherein it may be allowed;) first is utterly devoid of truth;
and secondly draws after it many dangerous consequents and evil effects; and
Thirdly, has no good warrant from my present Text.

Opinion is, that to do any thing at all without direction the Scripture is
unlawful and sinful. Which if they would understand only of the substantials
of Gods worship, and of the exercises of spiritual and supernatural graces,
the assertion were true and sound: but as they extend it, to I say that the
Word of God contains whatsoever things can fall into any part of man's life.
T. C. lib. 1. p. 20. apud Hooker lib. 2. Sect. 1.
all the actions of common life whatsoever, whether natural or civil, even so
far as to the taking up of a straw: so it is altogether false and
indefensible. I marvel what warrant they that so teach have from the Scripture
for that very doctrine: or where they are commanded so to believe or teach. One
of their chiefest refuges is the Text we now have in hand: but I supernatural
truths to be believed, or else of works of grace or worship to be performed*
as of necessity unto salvation: which is not to the point in issue. For it is
freely confessed, that in things of such nature the Holy Scripture is, and so
we are to account it, a most absolute and sufficient direction. Upon which
ground we heartily reject all humane traditions, devised and intended as
supplements to the doctrine of faith contained in the Bible, and annexed as
Codicils to the holy Testament of Christ, for to supply the defects thereof.
The question is wholly about indifferent, such as are the use of our food,
raiment, and the like; about which the common actions of life are chiefly
conversant: Whether in the choice and use of such things, we may not be
sometimes sufficiently guided by the light of reason and the common rules of
discretion: but that we must be able, (and are so bound to do, or else we
sin) for every thing we do in such matters, to deduce our warrant from some
place or other o^ Scripture.

Before the Scriptures were written it pleased GOD by visions, dreams, and
other like revelations, immediately to make Patriarchs and Prophets, and by
them unto the people: which kind of Revelations served them to all the same
intents and purposes, whereto the sacred Scriptures now do us, viz. to instruct
them what they should believe and do for his better service, and the
furtherance of their own salvations. Now as it were unreasonable for any may to
think, that they either had or did expect an immediate revelation from God
every time they ate, or drank, or bought, or sold, or did any other of the
common actions of life, for the warranting of each of those particular actions
to their consciences: no less unreasonable it is to think, that we should
warrant from the Scriptures for the doing of the like actions. Without all
doubt the Law of nature, and the light of reason, was the rule whereby they
were guided for the most part in such matters: which the wisdom of God would
never have left in them or us, as a principal relike of his decayed image in
us, if he had not meant, that we should make use of it, for the direction of
our lives and actions thereby. Certainly God never infused any power into any
creature, whereof he intended not some use. Else, what shall we say of the
Indies and other barbarous nations, to whom God never vouchsafed the lively
oracles of his written word? Must we think that they were left a lawless
people, without any Rule at all whereby to order their actions? How then come
they to be guilty of transgression? for where there is Romans 4.15.
no Law, there can be no transgression. Or how comes it about that their
consci^nces should at any time or in any case either Romans 2.15.
accuse them, or excuse them, if they had no guide nor rule to walk by? But if
we must grant they had a Rule, (and there is no way, you see, but grant it
other Rule for humane actions besides the written word: for that we presupposed
these nations to have wanted. Which Rule what other could it be, then the Law
of Nature and of right reason, imprinted Romans 2.15.
in their hearts! Which is as truly the Law and Word of God, as is that which
is printed in our Bibles. So long as our actions are warranted either by the
one or the other, we cannot be said to want the warrant of Gods Word: Tertul.
de coron. milit. cap. 4.
Nec differet Scriptura an ratione consistat, says Tertullian; it mattereth
not much from whether of both we have our direction, so long as we have it from
either.

You see then those men are in a great error, who make the holy the sole rule
of all humane actions whatsoever. For the maintenance whereof, there was never
yet produced any piece of an argument, either from reason, or from authority of
holy writ, or from the testimony either of the ancient Fathers, or of other
classical Divines of later times; which may not be clearly and abundantly
answered, to the satisfaction of any rational man not extremely fore-possessed
with prejudice. They who think to salve the matter by this mitigation; that at
least wise our actions ought to be framed according to those general rules of
the Law of Nature, viz. That we should do as we would be done to; That all
things be done decently, and orderly, and unto edification; That nothing be
done against conscience, and the like:) speak somewhat indeed to the truth, but
little to the purpose. For they consider not, First, that these general Rules
are but occasionally and incidentally mentioned in Scripture; rather to
manifest unto us a former, than to a new obligation. Secondly, that those rules
had been of force for the ordering of men's actions, though the Scripture had
never expressed them: and were of such force, before those Scriptures
expressed. For they bind not originally qua scripta, but qua justa; because
they are righteous, not because they are written. Thirdly, that an action
conformable to these general rules might not be condemned as sinful, although
the doer thereof should look at those rules merely the law of nature; and
should not be able to vouch his warrant for it from any place of Scripture,
neither should have at the time of the doing thereof any present thought or
consideration of any such place. The contrary whereunto, I permit to any man's
reasonable judgment, if it be not desperately rash and uncharitable to affirm.
Lastly, that if men's rules are said to be of faith, precisely for this reason,
because those rules are contained in the word: then it will follow, that before
those particular Scriptures were written wherein any of those rules are first
delivered, every action without faith, (there being as yet no Scripture for
it;) and consequently had been a sin. So that by this doctrine it had been a
sin (before the writing of Mat. 7.12.
S. Matthews Gospel) for any man to have done to others as he would they should
do to him; and it had been a sin (before the writing of the 1 Cor. 14.40
former Epistle to the Corinthians) for any man to have done any thing decently
and orderly; supposing these two rules to be in those two places first
mentioned: because (this supposed) there could then have been no warrant
brought from the Scriptures for so doing.

Well then, we see the former Opinion will by no means hold, the rigor of it,
nor yet in the mitigation. We are therefore to beware of it; and that so much
the more heedfully, because of the evil consequents and effects that issue from
it: to wit, a world of superstitions, uncharitable censures, bitter
contentions, contempt of superiors, perplexities of conscience. First, it
fills men's heads with many superstitious conceits, making them to cast
impurity upon sundry things, which yet are lawful to as many as use them
lawfully. For the taking away of the indifferency of any thing that is
indifferent, is in truth Superstition: whether either of the two ways it be
done, either by requiring it as necessary, or by forbidding it as unlawful. He
that condemns a thing as utterly unlawful, which yet indeed is indifferent,
and so lawful, is guilty of superstition, as well as he that enjoyneth a thing
as absolutely necessary, which yet indeed is but indifferent, and so arbitrary.
They of the Church of Rome, and some in our Church, as they go upon quite
contrary grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite contrary errors, and
both superstitious. They decline too much on the left hand, denying to the holy
Scripture that perfection which of right it ought to have; of containing all
things appertaining to that supernatural doctrine of faith and holiness which
God has revealed to his Church for the attainment necessity, many things which
the Scriptures require not: and that is a Superstition. These wry too much on
the right hand, ascribing to the holy Scripture such a kind of perfection as it
cannot have; of being the sole directour of all humane actions whatsoever:
whereupon they forbid unto Christian people, and that under the name of sin,
sundry things Scripture condemns not: and that is a superstition too.

Superstition proceeds in the second place uncharitable censuring: as
evermore they that are the most superstitious, are the most supercilious. No
such severe censurers of our blessed Saviors person and actions, as the
superstitious Scribes and Pharisees were. In this Chapter the special fault,
which the Apostle blames in the weak ones, (who were somewhat superstitiously
affected,) was their rash and uncharitable Ver. 3.4.10. and 13.
judging of their brethren. And common and daily experience among our selves
shows how freely censures upon so many of their brethren, as without scruple
do any of those things, which they upon false grounds have superstitiously
condemned as utterly unlawful.

thirdly, as unjust censures are commonly entertained with scorn and contumely;
they that so liberally condemn their brethren of profaneness, are by them
again as freely flouted for their preciseness: and so whiles both parties
please themselves in their own ways, they cease not mutually to provoke and
scandalize and exasperate the one the other, pursuing their private spleens so
far, till they break out into open contentions and oppositions. Thus it stood
Roman Church, when this Epistle was written. They Ver. 3.
judged one another, and despised one another, to the great disturbance of the
Churches peace: which gave occasion to our Apostles whole discourse in this
Chapter. And how far the like censurings and despisings have embittered the
spirits, and whetted both the tongues and pens of learned men one against
another in our own Church; the raised, and are still upheld by the factious
opposers against our Ecclesiastical constitutions, government, and ceremonies,
will not suffer us to be ignorant. Most of which stirs, I verily persuade my
self, had been long ere this either wholly buried the weakness and danger of
the error whereof we now speak, had been more timely discovered, and It is
indeed fully handled by M. Hooker in his second book of Eccles. Policy: but few
men of that party will read his works though written with singular learning,
wisdom, godliness, and moderation.
more fully and frequently made known to the world, than it has been.

Fourthly, let that doctrine be once admitted, and all humane authority will
soon be despised. The commands of Parents, Masters, and Princes, which many
times require both secrecy and expedition, shall be taken into slow
deliberation; and the equity of them sifted by those that are bound to obey,
though they know no cause why, so long as they know no cause to the contrary.
Pet. Blesens. Epist. 131.
Delicata est obedientia, It is a nice obedience in Delicata satis, imo nimis
molesta est ista obedientia, etc. Bern. de praecept. and dispens.
S. Bernards judgment, yea rather troublesome and odious, that is overcurious
in Infirmae prorsus voluntatis indicium est, statuta lenio. ii studiosius
discutere; haerere ad singula quae injunguntur; exigere de quibusque rationem;
and male suspicari de omni praecepto cujus causa latuerit; nec unquam libenter
obedire, nisi, etc. Bern. Ibid.
discussing the commands of superiors; boggling at every thing that is
enjoined, requiring a why for every wherefore, and unwilling to stir until the
lawfulness and expediency of the thing reason, or undoubted authority from the
Scriptures.

Lastly, the admitting of this doctrine would cast such a snare upon
judgments, but tender consciences, as they should never be able to unwind
themselves thereout again. Men's daily occasions for themselves or friends, and
the necessities of common life, require the doing of a thousand things within
the compass of a few days; for which it would puzzle the best Textman that
lives, readily to bethink himself of a sentence in the Bible, clear enough to
satisfy a scrupulous conscience of the lawfulness and expediency of reason
and discretion, he might receive easy and speedy resolution. In which cases if
he should be bound to suspend his resolution, and delay to do that which his
own reason would tell him were presently needful to be done, until he could
happily call to mind some precept or example of Scripture for his warrant: what
stops would it make in the course of his whole life? what languishings in the
duties of his calling? how would it fill him with doubts and irresolutions,
lead him into a maze of uncertainties, entangle him in a world of woeful
perplexities, and (without the great mercy of God, and despair? Since the chief
end of the publication of the Gospel, is to Esaias 40.1, 2.
comfort the hearts, and to revive and refresh the spirits of Gods people with
Esaias 61.1-3.
the glad tidindgs of liberty from the spirit of Romans 8.15.
bondage and 2 Timothy 1.7.
fear, and of gracious acceptance with their GOD; to anoint them with Psalm.
45.7.
the oil of gladness, giving them beauty for ashes, and instead of Psalm. 30.11.
sackcloth girding them with joy: we may well suspect that doctrine not to be
Evangelicall, which thus sets the consciences of men upon the rack,
tortureth them with continual fears and perplexities, and prepares them
thereby unto hellish despair.

effects and pernicious consequents that will the Scripture for every thing
whatsoever we do: not only in spiritual things, (wherein alone it is
absolutely true,) nor yet only in other matters of weight, though they be not
spiritual, (for which perhaps there might be some color) but also in the
common affairs of life, even in the most slight and trivial things. Yet for
that the Patrons of this opinion build themselves as much upon the authority of
this present Text, as upon any other passage of Scripture whatsoever, (which is
the reason why we have stood thus the Text from that their mis-interpretation.
The force of their collection stands thus (as you heard already:) that faith
is ever grounded upon the word of God; and that therefore whatsoever action is
not grounded upon the word, being it is not of faith, by the Apostles rule
here, must needs be a sin. Which collection could not be denied, if the word
Faith were here taken in that sense which they viz. for the doctrine of
supernatural and divine revelation, or for the belief thereof: which doctrine
we See Articles of the Church of England. Artic. 6.
willingly acknowledge to be completely contained in the holy Scriptures alone,
and therefore dare not admit into our belief, as a branch of divine
supernatural truth, any thing not therein contained. But there is a third
signification of the word Faith, nothing so frequently found in the Scriptures
as the two former; which yet appears both by the course of this whole
Chapter, and by the consent of the best and most approved interpreters as well
ancient as modern, to have been properly intended certain persuasion of mind,
that what we do may lawfully be done. So that whatsoever action is done by us,
with reasonable assurance and persuasion of the lawfulness thereof in our own
consciences, is in our Apostles purpose so far forth an action of Faith:
without any inquiring into the means whereby that persuasion was wrought in us;
whether it were the light of our own reason, or the authority of some credible
person, or the declaration of Gods revealed will in his written Word. And on
the other side, whatsoever action is done, either directly contrary to the
judgment and verdict of our own consciences, doubtingly and before we are in
some competent measure assured that we may lawfully do it: that is it which S.
Paul here denies to be of faith, and of which he pronounces so peremptorily
that it is (and that co nomine) a sin.

Faith we need not to trouble our selves to fetch it from a trope, either of
Heming in Romans 14.1.
a Metonymie or Piscat. ibid.
Synecdoche, as some do. For though (as I say) it do not so often occur in
Scripture; yet it is indeed the primary and native signification of the word
(...) faith, derived from the root (...) to persuade. Because all kinds of
Faith whatsoever consist in a kind of persuasion. You shall therefore find the
words, (...) which signifies properly to believe, and (...) which signifies
properly not to be persuaded, to be opposed as contrary either to other in Joh.
3.3, 6. and Acts 14.1, 2.
John Acts 14. and other places. To omit the frequent use of the words (...)
and Fides, in Greek and Latin authors in this signification: observe but the
passages of this very Chapter, and you will be satisfied in it. At the second
verse, Hic Verse 2.
(...), one believes that he may eat all things: that is, he is verily
persuaded in his conscience that he may as lawfully eat flesh as herbs, any one
kind of meat as Verse 14.
(...), I know and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self. That
is, I steadfastly believe it is a most certain and undoubted truth. Again at the
two and twentieth verse, Verse 22.
(...); Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God: that is, art thou in
thy conscience persuaded that thou may lawfully partake any of the persuasion
suffice thee for the approving of thine own heart in the sight of God: but
trouble not the Church, nor offend thy weaker brother, by a needless and
unseasonable ostentation of that thy knowledge. Lastly, in this three and
twentieth verse, Verse 23.
(...), He that doubts is damned if he that is, he that is not yet fully
persuaded in his own mind, that it is lawful for him to eat some kinds of
meats, (as namely swines flesh, or bloodings,) and yet is drawn against his own
judgment to eat thereof because he sees others so to do, or because he would
be loath to undergo the cast and condemned by the judgment of his own heart as
a transgressor, because he adventureth to do that which he does not believe to
be lawful. And then the Apostle proceeding ab hypothesi ad thesin, immediately
reduces that particular case into a general rule in these words, For
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. By the process of which his discourse it
may appear, that by Faith no other thing is here meant, than such a persuasion
of the mind and conscience as we have now declared, and that the true purport
and intent of these words is but thus much in effect: Whosoever shall verily
believes to be unlawful, or at leastwise is not reasonably well persuaded of
the lawfulness of it; let the thing be otherwise and in it self what it can
be, lawful or unlawful, indifferent or necessary, convenient or inconvenient,
it mattereth not: to him it is a sin howsoever.

Which being the plain evident and undeniable purpose of these refutation of
such conclusions as are mis-inferred hence, which fall of themselves; or in the
farther Explication of the meaning of the Text, which already appears: but
address my self rather to the application of it. Wherein, because upon this
great principle may depend the resolution of very many Cases of Conscience,
which may trouble us in our Christian and holy walking: it will not be
unprofitable to proceed by resolving some of the most material doubts and
questions, among those which have occurred unto my thoughts by occasion of this
Text in my meditations thereon.

First, it may be demanded, What power the Conscience has, to lawful, to
become unlawful and sinful? and whence it has that power? I answer, First,
that it is the of any thing whatsoever, either in respect of quality or degree:
but that still every thing that was good remains good, and every thing that
was evil remains evil; and that in the very same degree of good or evil as it
was before, neither better nor worse, any man's particular judgment or opinion
thereof notwithstanding. For the differences between good and evil, and the
several degrees of both, spring from such conditions as are intrinsecall
Respectus non mutant natural.
Outward respects, (and much less then men's opinions) can vary. He that
esteems any creature unclean, may defile himself, but he cannot bring
impurity upon that by such his estimation. Secondly, that Opinio nostra nobis
legem facit. Ambr^. de paradis.
men's judgments may make that which is good in its own nature, (the natural
goodness still remaining) become evil to them in the use: essentially good,
and quoad rem; but quoad hominem, and accidentally evil. It is our Apostles own
distinction in the fourteenth verse of this Chapter: Nothing unclean of it
self: but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, unclean to him. But
then we must know withal, that it judgments or opinions, although they may
make that which is good in it self, to become evil to them; yet they cannot
make that which is evil in it self, to become good either in it self, or to
them. If a man were verily persuaded, that it were evil to ask his father
blessing, that mis-perswasion would make it become evil to him: But if the same
man should be as verily persuaded that it were good to curse his father, or to
deny him relief being an unbeliever; that mis-perswasion could not make either
of them become good to him. Some that persecuted the Apostles were persuaded
they John 16.2.
did God good service in it. It was Saint Paul's Acts 26.9.
verily thought in himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus. But those their persuasions would not serve to justify those
their actions. Saint Paul confesses himself to have been 1 Timothy 1.13.
a persecutor, and blasphemer, and injurious for so doing, although he followed
the guidance of his own conscience therein: and to have stood in need of mercy
for the remission of those wicked acts, though he did them ignorantly, and Acts
23.3, 4. and Phil. 3.6.
out of zeal to the Law. The reason of which difference is, that which I
touched in the beginning, even because any one defect is enough to render an
action evil; and consequently a defect in the agent may the substance of the
action remain still (as it was) good: but all conditions must concur to make an
action good; and consequently a right intention in the agent will not suffice
thereunto, so long as the substance of the action remains still (as it was)
evil. Thirdly, that the Conscience has this power over men's wills and Law of
God, which he establishes by an ordinance of nature in our first creation:
that the will of every man (which is the fountain whence all our actions
immediately flow) should conform it self to the judgment of the practique
understanding or conscience, as to its proper and immediate rule, and the
understanding through Error point out a wrong way, and the will follow it: the
fault is chiefly in the understanding for mis-guiding the will. But if the
understanding show the right way, and the will take a wrong: then the fault is
merely in the will, for not following that guide which GOD has set over it.

secondly, Whether or no in every particular actual consideration of the
lawfulness and expediency thereof be so requisite, as that for want thereof we
should sin in doing it? The reason of the doubt is, because otherwise how
should it appear to be of faith? and Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. I
answer, First, that in matters of weight and worthy of consultation, it is very
necessary that the lawfulness and expediency of them secondly, that even in
smaller matters the like examination is needful apparent cause of doubting.
But thirdly, that in Ubi est suspicio, ibi discus^io necessaria. Bernard. Ep. 7.
and wherein no doubt arises to trouble us; an actual consideration of their
lawfulness or expediency is so far from being requisite, that it would rather
be troublesome and incommodious. True it is, that all voluntary actions are
done with some deliberation, more or less: because it is the nature of the
will to consult with the understanding in every act; else it should be
irrational and brutish. Yet there are many things which we daily do, wherein
Ratio in rebus manifestis non inquirit, sed statim judicat. Aquin. 1.2. qu.
144. ad 2.
the sentence of the understanding is so quick and present, because there is no
difficulty in them; that they actus indeliberati: (...), etc. Arist. 1. Mag.
Moral. 18.
such as are to sit down and to rise up, to pluck a flower as we walk in a
Garden, to ask the time of the day, or the name of the next Town as we travel
by the way, or whether we eat of this or that dish at the table, (...). Arist.
2. Eth. 5.
and the like. For the doing of every of which, it were a ridiculous servility
to be imposed upon men, if they should be tied to district examination of the
lawfullnesse and expediency thereof. There is not in them dignus vindice nodus:
and a man's time ought to be more precious unto him, than to be trifled away in
such needless and minute enquiries. It is even as if we should tie a great
learned man that is ready in his Latin tongue, to bethink grammar rule or
example for the declining and parsing of every word he were to speak, before he
should adventure to utter a Latin sentence. But as such a man is sufficiently
assured out of the habit of his learning, that he speaks congruously and with
good propriety, though he have no present actual reference to his Grammar
rules: so here, an habitual knowledge of the nature and use of indifferent
things is sufficient to warrant to the conscience the lawfulness of these
common actions of life; so as they may be said to be of faith, though there be
no farther actual or particular disquisition used about them. A very needful
thing it is the whilst, for Christian right judgment concerning indifferent
things: without which it can scarcely be avoided, but that both their
Consciences will be full of distracting scruples within themselves, and their
conversations full of unbrotherly carriage toward others.

It may be demanded thirdly, Since Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; What
measure of Faith, or what degree of Persuasion is necessary for a Latitude in
such things as these are: which may be straightened or extended more or less,
according to the exigence of present occasions, and as the different state or
quality of particular businesses shall require. There is a (...), a fullness of
persuasion arising from evident infallible and demonstrative proofs, which is
attainable for the performance of sundry duties both of civil Justice and of
Religion. And where it may be attained, it is to be endeavored after, (though
it absolute necessity:) for we cannot make our assurances too strong. The
Apostle uses that word at the fifth ver. ( Ve^se 5. hic. plen^ certus sit.
Heming.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind,) (...): it is a
metaphorical word, and seems to be borrowed from a Ship under Quasi plenis
v^lis feratur. Piscat. in Sh^l. ad Romans 14.5.
full sail, that has both wind and tide with it to carry it with a straight
and speedy course to the desired point, and nothing to hinder it. But as men,
when they are to purchase lands, will desire and propose to have as good
assurance as by learned counsel can be devised; but yet must be content to
take such assurance as the sellers can make, or else they shall make but a few
markets: so although we may desire ex abundanti) a full assurance of faith in
every weighty action we shall enterprise; yet ordinarily and in most things we
must content our selves to take up with a conjectural, probable, and moral
certainty, or else we shall find very few things left for us to do. Fides
Logica is not to be expected in all cases: in some and those the most, Fides
Ethica must serve the turn. Nay I say yet further, and I beseech you
(brethren) to take notice of it as a matter of special use both for the
directing and quieting of your consciences: that ordinarily and in most things
we need no other warrant for what we do than this only, that there is not (to
our knowledge) any law either of Nature or Scripture against them. As the
Lawyers use to say of men's persons, Quisque praesumitur esse bonus, etc. The
Law takes every man for a good man and true, till his truth and honesty be
legally disproved; and as our Savior sometimes said, Luke 9.50.
He that is not against us, is for us: so in these matters we are to believe
all things to be lawful for us to do, which cannot be shown by good evidence
either of Scripture or Reason to be unlawful. Those men therefore go quite the
wrong way to work, to the fearful puzling of their own and other men's
consciences, who use to argue on this manner. [This I have no warrant to do;
for where is it commanded?] Whereas where is it forbidden?] Apply this now a
little to those Ceremonies, that for orders sake, and to add the greater
solemnity to sacred actions, are appointed in the Church; Wearing the Surplize,
bowing at the Name of the Lord Jesus, kneeling at the Holy Communion, in
genere, that is to say, as they fall within the compass of decent Ceremonies,
by virtue of that grand Ecclesiastical Canon, ( 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done honestly and in order;) and that even in specie too
they are commanded by the authority of those governors whom God has set over
us, and to whom we are bound in conscience, and by virtue of Gods commandment,
to yield obedience: Yet I waive all this for the present, because it is not so
direct to the point in hand. Only I ask, Where are any of these things
forbidden? if they be, let it be shown: weak collections, and remote
consequences, which are good for nothing but to engender strifes, and to
multiply disputes without end; but by direct and full evidence either of
Scripture-text or Reason, which (for any thing I know) was never yet done,
neither (as I verily believe) will ever be done. But if it cannot be shown that
these things are forbidden; without any more ado, the use of them is by that
sufficiently warranted. He that will not allow of this doctrine, besides that
he cherishes an error which will hardly suffer him to have a quiet
Conscience: I yet see not how he can reconcile his opinion with those sundry
passages of our Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.4.
Every creature of God is good, Tit. 1.15.
To the pure all things are pure, Romans 14.14.
I know nothing is of it self unclean, 1 Cor. 6.12.
All things are lawful, etc.] From which passages we may with much safety
conclude, that it is lawful for us to do all those things, concerning which
there can be nothing brought of moment to prove them unlawful. Upon which
ground alone if we do them, we do them upon such a persuasion of faith as is
sufficient. Provided, that we have not neglected to inform our judgments the
best we could for the time past; and that we are ever ready withal to yield
our selves to better information, whenever it shall be tendered unto us, for
the time to come.

fourthly, Suppose a man would fain do something, of the lawfulness whereof he
is not in his conscience sufficiently resolved; whether he may in any case do
it notwithstanding the reluctance of his Conscience, yea or no? As they write
of Herodo^. in Clio; Senec. 3. de ira. 21
Cyrus, that to make passage for his Army, he cut the great river Gyndes into
many smaller channels, which in one entire stream was not passable: so to make a
clear and distinct answer to this great question, I must divide it into some
lesser ones. For there are sundry things considerable in it; whether we respect
the conscience, or the Person of the doer, or the Action to be done. As namely
and especially, in the conscience, whether the reluctance thereof proceed from
a settled and steadfast resolution, or from some doubtfulnesse only, or but from
some scruple? And in respect of the person, whether he be sui juris his own
Master, and have power to dispose of himself at his own choice in the things
questioned; or he be under the command, and at the appointment of another? And
in respect of the Action or thing to be done: whether it be a necessary thing,
or an unlawful thing, or a thing indifferent and arbitrary? Any of which
circumstances may quite alter the case, and so beget new questions. But I shall
reduce all to three questions: whereof the first shall concern a resolved
Conscience, the second a doubtful conscience, and the third a scrupulous
conscience.

First Question then is, if the Conscience be firmly resolved, that the thing
proposed to be done is unlawful; whether it may then be done, or no? Whereunto
I answer in these two conclusions. The first conclusion. If the Conscience be
firmly so resolved, and that upon a true ground, (that is to say, if the thing
be indeed unlawful, Qui agit contra conscientiam qua credit Deum aliquid
prohibuisse, licet erret, contemnit Deum.

Bonavent. 2. sent. did. 39.


contempt of God, than for a man to despise the power of his own conscience:
which is the highest sovereignty under heaven, as being Gods most immediate
deputy for the ordering of his life and ways. Menand.
(...), a heathen man could say. Woeful is the estate of those men (unless
they repent) who for filthy lucre, or vain pleasure, or spiteful malice, or
tottering honor, or lazy ease, or any other reigning lust, dare lie, or
swear, or cheat, or oppress, or commit filthiness, or steal, or kill, or
slander, or flatter, or betray, or do the secret whisperings, or murmurings, no
nor yet the loud roarings, and bellowings of their own consciences there
against. Pers. Satyr. 5.
Stat contra ratio, and secretam gannit in aurem. It does so: but yet they turn
a deaf ear to it, and despise it. Wonder not, if when they out of the terrors
of their troubled consciences shall houle and roar in the ears of the
Almighty for mercy, or for some mitigation at least of their torment; he then
turn a deaf ear against them, and despise them. Jam. 4.17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, James 4.
sin not to be excused by any plea or color: But how the evil he should not
do, and yet will do it? There is not a proner way to Quod fit contra
conscientiam aedificat ad gehennam. c. 28. qu. 1. Omnes. Sect. ex his.
Hell, than to sin against Conscience. Romans 14.22.
Happy is he which condemns not himself in that which he allows: but most
wretched is he that allows himself to the practice of that, which in his
judgment he cannot but condemn. Neither makes it any difference at all here,
whether a man be otherwise sui juris or not. For although there be a great
respect due to the higher powers in doubtful cases, (as I shall touch anon,)
yet where the thing required is simply unlawful, and understood so to be,
inferiors must absolutely resolve to disobey, whatsoever come of it. Gods
faithful servants have ever been most resolute in such exigents. Dan. 3.16 --
18.
We are not careful to answer thee in this matter; (belike in a matter of
another nature they would have taken care to have given the King a more
satisfactory, at least a more respective answer: but in this matter,) Be known
to thee O c. 11. qu. 3. Qui resistit. ex Augustino.
Da veniam Imperator, etc. You know whose answers they were. If we be sure God
has forbidden it, we sin against our own consciences if we do it at the
command of any mortal man whosoever, or upon any worldly inducement
whatsoever. That is the first Conclusion.

The second is this. If a man be in his conscience fully persuaded that evil
and unlawful, which yet in truth is not so, but lawful; the thing by him so
judged unlawful cannot by him be done without sin. Even an erroneous
conscience binds thus far, that a man cannot go against it, and be
guiltless: because his practice should his judgment; and so the thing done
could not be of Faith. For if his reason judge it to be evil, and yet he will
do it, it argues manifestly that he has a will to do evil, and so becomes a
transgressour of that general Law which binds all men to eschew all evil.
Yet in this case we must admit of some difference, according to the different
nature of the things, and the different condition of the persons. For if the
things so judged unlawful be in their own nature not necessary, but
indifferent, so as they may either be done or left undone without sin; and the
person withal be sui juris in respect of such things, no superior power
having determined his liberty therein: then, although he may not do any of
these things, by reason of the contrary persuasion of his conscience, without
sin; yet he may without sin leave them undone. As for example. Say a man should
hold it utterly unlawful (as some erroneously do,) to play at cards or dice,
or to lay a wager, or to cast lots in trivial matters: if it be in truth
lawful to do every of these things, (as I make no question but it is, so they
be done with sobriety and with due circumstances,) yet he that is otherwise
persuaded of them cannot by reason of that persuasion do any of them without
sin. Yet, for so much as they are things no way necessary, but indifferent; both
in their nature, use also, no superior power having enjoined any man to use
them, therefore he that judges them unlawful may abstain from them without
sin, and so indeed he is in conscience bound to do, so long as he continues
to be of that opinion. But now on the other side, if the things so mis-judged
to be unlawful be any way necessary; either in respect of their own nature, or
by the injunction of authority: then the person is by that his error brought
into such a strait between two sins, as he can by no possible means avoid
both, so long as he persisteth in that his error. For both if he do the thing,
he goes against the persuasion of his conscience, and that omitteth a
necessary duty, or else disobeyeth lawful authority; and to do either of both,
is a sin too. Out of which snare since there is no way of escape but one,
which is to rectify his judgment, and to quit his pernicious error: it
concerns every man therefore that unfeignedly desires to do his duty in the
fear of God, and to keep a good conscience, not to be too stiff in his present
apprehensions, but to examine well the principles and grounds of his opinions,
strongly suspecting that wind that drives him upon such rocks, to be but a
blast of his own fancy, rather than a breathing of the holy Spirit of truth.
Once this is most certain, that whosoever shall adventure to do any thing
repugnant to the judgment of his own conscience, (be that judgment true or be
it false,) shall commit a grievous sin in so doing: (...), because it cannot be
of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

hang even, so as a man cannot well resolve whether way he should rather take!
Now he is -- animo nunc huc, nunc stuctuat illuc. Virg. Aeneid. 10.
in one mind, by James his Jam. 1.8.
(...), a double minded man. This is it we call a doubting conscience:
concerning which the second question is, what a man ought to do in case of
doubtfulnesse. Perfect directions here, (as in most deliberatives) would
require a large discourse: because there are so many considerable circumstances
that may vary the case; especially in respect of the cause from which that
doubtfulnesse of mind may spring. fickleness of mind, or weakness of
judgment; as the lightest things are soonest driven out of their place by the
wind: Even as St. James says, Ibid.
a double minded man; and S. Paul speaks of some that were like Ephesians, 4.14.
children, off and on,, soon wherryed about with every blast of doctrine.
Sometimes it proceeds from tenderness of Conscience, tender things may soon
miscarry, if they be not the more choisely handled,) very obnoxious through
Satan's diligence and subtilty to be the probability of those reasons that seem
to stand on either side, betwixt which it is not easy to judge which are
strongest: or from the differing judgments and opinions of learned and godly
men thereabout, and from many other causes: But for some general resolution of
the Question, (what is to be done where the conscience is doubtful?) I answer.

First, that if the doubtfulnesse be not concerning the lawfulness of any of
the things to be done considered simply and in themselves, but of the
expediency of them as they are compared one with another; (as when of two
things proposed at once, whereof one must, and but one can be done, I am
sufficiently persuaded of the lawfulness of either, but am doubtful whether
of the two rather first to weigh himself alone; and to do that which then shall
appear to him to be subject to the fewer and lesser inconveniences. Or if the
reasons seem so equally strong on both of himself deside the doubt; then
secondly, (...). Arist. 3. Ethic. 4.
matter be of weight, and worth the while, he should do well to make his
doubts known to some prudent and pious man: (especially to his own spiritual
Pastor, if he be a man meetly qualified for it,) resolving to rest upon his
judgment, and to follow his direction. Or if the matter be of small moment, he
may then thirdly do whether of both he has best liking to; (as the Apostle
says in one particular case, and it may be applied to many more, 1 Cor. 7.36.
Let him do what he will, he sins not:) resting his conscience upon this
persuasion, that so long as he is unfeignedly desirous to do for the best, and
has not been negligent to use Non tibi imputabitur ad culpam, quod invitus
ignoras. Aug. de not and great.
requisite diligence to inform himself aright; God will accept of his good
intention therein, and pardon his error, if he shall be mistaken in his
choice.

But secondly, if the question be concerning the very lawfulnsse of the thing
it self, whether it may be lawfully done, or no; and the conscience stand in
doubt, because reasons seem to be probable both pro contra, and there are
learned men as well of the one opinion as of the other, etc. as we see it is
(for instance) in the question of Usury and of second marriage after divorce,
and in sundry other doubtful cases in moral divinity: in such a case the
person (if he be sui juris) is certainly Nil faciendum, de quo dubites sit
neone recte factum. Cic. l. 1. de Offic.
forbear the doing of that thing of the lawfulness whereof he so doubts: and
if he forbear it not, he sins. It is the very point the Apostle in this
verse intends to teach; and for the confirming whereof he voucheth this Rule
of the Text: He that doubts, says he, is damned if he eat; he is (...),
condemned of his own conscience: because he does that willingly whereof he
doubts, when he has free liberty to let it alone, no necessity urging him
thereunto. And the reason why he ought rather to forbear than to adventure the
doing of that whereof he doubts, is; because in doubtful cases wisdom would
that the safer part should part is safer, which if we choose, we are sure we
shall do well; than that, which if we choose, we know not but we may do ill. As
for example, in the instances now proposed. If I doubt of the lawfulness of
Usury, or of Marrying after divorce, I am sure that if I marry not, nor let out
my money, I shall not sin in so abstaining: but if I shall do either of both
doubtingly, I cannot be without some fear lest I should sin in so doing; and so
those actions of mine being not done in faith, must needs be sin, even by the
Rule of the Text, (...), For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

But then thirdly, if the liberty of the agent be determined by the superior
power to whom he owes obedience; so as he is not now sui juris ad hoc, to do
or not to do at his own choice, but to do what he is commanded: this one
circumstance quite alters the whole case, and now he is bound in conscience
to do the thing commanded; his doubtfulnsse of mind whether that thing be
lawful or no, notwithstanding. To do that whereof he doubts, where he has
free liberty to leave it undone, brings upon wilful transgression: but not
so where he is not left to his own liberty. And where lawful authority
prescribes in alterutram partem, there the liberty ad utramque partem
contradictionis is taken away, from so many as are under that authority. If
they that are over them have determined it one way; it is not thenceforth any
more at their choice, whether they will take that way, or the contrary: but
they must go the way that is appointed them without gainsaying or grudging. And
if in the deed done at the command of one that is endued with lawful authority
there be a sin, it must go on his score that requires it wrongfully, Subjects
to serve in his Wars: it may be the quarrel is unjust, it may be there may
appear to the understanding of the subject great likelihoods of such injustice;
yet may the subject for all that fight in the quarrel; yea he is bound in
conscience so to do: nay he is deep in disloyalty and treason if he refuse the
service, whatsoever pretensions he may make of conscience for such refusal.
Neither need that fear trouble him lest he should bring upon himself the guilt
of innocent blood; for Is damnum dat, qui jubet dare: ejus vero nulla culpa
est, cui p^rere necesse si^. L. 169. F. de div. Reg. jur.
the blood that is unrighteously shed in that quarrel, he must answer for that
set him on work, not he that spilt it. And truly it is a great wonder to me,
that any man endued with understanding, and that is able in any measure to
weigh the force of those precepts and reasons which bind inferiors to yield
obedience to their superiors, should be otherwise minded in cases of like
nature. Whatsoever is commanded us by those whom God has set over us, either
in Church, Commonwealth, or Family, ( B^rnard. de praecept. and dis.
Quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo, says S. Bern.) which is not
evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought to be of us received and
obeyed no otherwise, then as if God himself had commanded it, because God
himself has commanded us to Romans 13.1.
obey the higher powers, and to Pet. 2.13.
submit our selves to their ordinances. Say it be not well done of them to
command it! Sed enim quid hoc refert tua? says he; What is that to thee? Let
them look to that whom it concerns: Toll quod tuum est, and vade. Do thou
what is thine own part faithfully, and never trouble thy self further. Ipsum
quem pro Deo habemus, tanquam Deum in his quae aperte non sunt contra Deum
audire debemus; Bernard still Gods Vicegerents must be heard and obeyed in all
things that are not manifestly contrary to the revealed will of God.

against my conscience, may some say; and I may not go against my conscience,
for any man's pleasure. Romans 13.5.
to obey for conscience sake, that thou should disobey, and that for
conscience sake too: He charge thee upon thy conscience to be subject; and
thou pretendest thy conscience to free thee from subjection. This by the way;
now to the point. against thy conscience: I say again, that (in the case
whereof we now speak, the case of doubtfulnesse) it is not against thy
conscience. For doubting properly is Isidor.
motus indifferens in utramque partem contradictionis; when the mind is held
Dubious, incertus q^asi duarum via^um. Isid. 10. E^^m. (...).
in suspense between two ways, uncertain whether of both to take to. When the
scales hang even (as I said before) and in aequilibrio, without any notable
propension or inclination to the one side more than to the other. And surely
where things hang thus even, if the weight of authority will not cast the scale
either way: we may well suppose, that either the authority is made very light,
or else there is a great fault the beam. Know (brethren) the gainsaying
conscience is one thing, and the doubting conscience another. That which is
done repugnante conscientia, the conscience of the doer flatly gainsaying it,
that is indeed against a man's conscience, (the conscience having already passed
a definitive sentence the one way:) and no respect or circumstance whatsoever
can free it from sin. But that which is done dubitante conscientia, the
conscience of the doer only doubting of it and no more; that is in truth no
more against a man's conscience than with it, (the conscience as yet not having
passed a definitive sentence either way:) and such an action may either be a
sin, or no sin; according a judgment upon a thing, and condemned it as
simply unlawful; in that case it is true that a man ought not by any means to
do that thing, no not at the command of any Magistrate, no not although his
conscience have pronounced a wrong sentence, and erred in that judgment: for
then he should do it, repugnante conscientia, he should go directly against his
own conscience, which he ought not to do whatsoever come of it. In such a case
certainly he may not obey the Magistrate: yet let him know thus much withal,
that he sins too disobeying the Magistrate; from which sin the following
of the judgment of his own conscience cannot acquit him. And this is that
fearful perplexity whereof I spoke, whereinto many a man casts himself by
his own error and obstinacy, that he can neither go with his conscience, nor
against it, but he shall sin. And who can help it, if a man will needs
cherish an error, and persist in it? But now if the conscience be only
doubtful whether a thing be lawful or no, but have not as yet passed a
peremptory judgment against it, (yea although it rather incline to think it
unlawful: Plus est standum prae epto praelati, quam conscientiae. Bonav. 2.
sent. distinct. 39.
) in that case if the Magistrate shall command it to be done, the subject with
a good conscience may do it, nay he cannot with a good conscience refuse to do
it, though it be dubitante conscientia.

But you will yet say, that in doubtful cases the safer part is to be chosen.
So say I too; and am content that rule should decide this only let it be
rightly applied. Thou think it safer, where thou doubtest of the
unlawfulness, to forbear then to do: as for example, if thou doubtest whether
it be lawful to kneel at the Communion, it is safest in thy opinion therefore
for thee not to kneel. So should I think too, if thou were left merely to thine
own liberty. to kneel, which whether it be lawful for thee to do, or not, thou
doubtest; it cannot choose but thou must needs doubt also, whether thou may
lawfully disobey, or not. Now then here apply thine own Rule, In dubiis pars
tutior, and see what will come of it. Judge, since thou can not but doubt in
both cases, whether it be not the safer of the two, Gregor.
to obey doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly. Tene certum, demitte incertum,
is S. Gregory his rule: where there is a certainty, and an let the uncertainty
go, and hold to that which is certain. Now the general is certain, that thou
art to obey the Magistrate in all things not contrary to the will of God; but
the particular is uncertain, whether the thing now commanded thee by the
Magistrate be contrary to the will of God: (I say uncertain to thee, because
thou doubtest of it.) Deal safely therefore, and hold thee to that which is
certain, and obey.

But thou will yet allege, that the Apostle here condemns gainsaying, but
even with a doubting conscience: because doubting also is contrary to faith; he
that doubts is even for that condemned, if he eat. Oh beware of mis-applying
Scripture! it is a thing easily done, but not so easily answered. I know not
any one gap that has let in more and more dangerous errors into the Church,
than this: that men take the words of the sacred Text fitted to particular
occasions, and to the condition of the times wherein they were written; and
then apply them to themselves and others as they find them, without due respect
had to the differences that may be between those times and cases, and the
present. Sundry things spoken in Scripture agreeably to that infancy of the
Church, would sort very ill with the Church in her fullness strength and
stature: and sundry directions very expedient in times of persecution, and when
believers lived mingled with Infidels, would be very unseasonably urged where
the Church is in a peaceable and flourishing estate, enjoying the favor and
living under the protection of gracious and religious Princes. Thus the
Constitutions that the Apostles made concerning Deacons and Widows in those
primitive times, are with much importunity, but very importunely withal, urged
by the Disciplinarians: And sundry other like things I might instance in of
this kind, worthy the discovery, but that I fear to grow tedious. Briefly
then, the Apostles whole discourse in this Chapter, Scandals, is to be
understood only in that case where men are left to their own liberty in the
use of indifferent things: the Romans, Corinthians, and others to whom S. Paul
wrote about these matters, being not limited any way in the exercise of their
liberty therein by any overruling authority. But where the Magistrates have
interposed, and thought good impose Laws upon those that are under them,
whereby their liberty is (not infringed, as some unjustly complain, in the
inward judgment, but only) limited in the outward exercise of it: there the
Apostolical directions will not hold in the same absolute manner, as they were
delivered to those whom they then concerned; but only in the equity of them, so
far forth as the cases are alike, and with such meet qualifications and
mitigations, as the difference of the cases otherwise does require. So that a
man ought not out of private fancy, or merely because he would not be observed
for not doing as others do, or for any the like weak respects, to do that thing
of the lawfulness competently persuaded, where it is free for him to do
otherwise: which was the case of these weak ones among the Romans, for whose
sakes principally the Apostle gave these directions. But the authority of the
Magistrate intervening so alters the case, that such a forbearance as to them
was necessary, is to as many of us as are commanded to do this or that,
altogether unlawful, in regard they were free, and we are bound: for the
reasons already shown, which I now rehearse not.

But you will yet say, (for in point of obedience men are very loath to yield so
long as they can find any thing to plead,) those that lay these burdens upon
us, at leastwise should do well to satisfy our and to inform our consciences
concerning the lawfulness of what they enjoin; that so we might render them
obedience with better cheerfulness. How willing are we sinful men to leave the
blame of our miscarriages any where rather than upon our selves! But how is it
not incongruous the while, that those men should prescribe rules to their
governors, who can scarcely brook their governors should prescribe Laws to
them? (...) Solon apud Stob. Sermon. 3.
It were good we would first learn how to obey, ere we take upon us to teach
our betters how to govern. However, what governors are bound to do, or what is
fit for them to do, in the point of information; that is not now the question.
If they their bounden duty, they shall be sure to reckon for it one day: but
their failing cannot in the mean time excuse thy disobedience. Although I think
it would prove a hard task, for whosoever should undertake it, to show that
Superiors are always bound to inform the consciences of their inferiors
concerning the lawfulness of every thing they shall command. If sometimes they
do it, where they see it expedient or needful; sometimes again (and that
perhaps oftener,) it may be thought more expedient for them, and more conducible
for the public peace and safety, only to make known to the people what their
pleasures are, reserving to themselves the reasons thereof. I am sure, in the
point of Ecclesiastical ceremonies and Constitutions, (in which case the
aforesaid allegations are usually most stood upon,) this has been abundantly
done in our Church, not only in the learned writings of sundry private men,
but by the public declaration also of authority, as is to be seen at large in
the preface commonly printed before the book of Common prayer concerning that
argument: enough to satisfy those that are second Question, touching a
doubting conscience: whereon I have insisted the longer, because it is a point
both so proper to the Text, and whereat so many have stumbled.

other Question, and that of far smaller difficulty; What is to be done, when
the conscience is scrupulous? I call that a scruple, when a man is reasonably
well persuaded of the lawfulness of a thing, yet has withal some jealousies
and fears, lest perhaps it should prove unlawful. Such scruples are most
incident to men of melancholy dispositions, or of timorous spirits; especially
tender-conscienced withal: and they are much increased by the false
suggestions of Satan; by reading the books, or hearing the Sermons, or
frequenting the company of men more strict, precise, and austere in sundry
points, than they need or ought to be; and by sundry other means which I now
mention not. Of which scruples it first, to be wary that he do not at all admit
secondly, he endeavor so far as may be to eject them speedily out of his
thoughts, as Satan's snares, and things that may breed him worser
inconveniences: or, if he cannot be so rid of them, that then thirdly he
resolve to go on according to the more profitable persuasion of his mind, and
despise those scruples. And this he may do with a good conscience, not only in
things commanded him by lawful authority, but even in things indifferent and
arbitrary, and wherein he is left to his own liberty.

declaration and confirmation of these points. But you see I have been forced
to wrap things together, that deserve a more full and distinct handling, that I
might hold some proportion with the time. I had a purpose briefly to have
comprised the sum of what I have a gainsaying, a doubting, and a scrupulous
conscience, in some few conclusions for your better remembrance, and to have
added also something by way of direction, what course might be the most
probably taken for the correcting of an erroneous conscience, for the settling
of a doubtful conscience, and for the quieting of a scrupulous conscience. But
it is more then time that I should give place to other business: and the most,
and most material of those directions, have been here and there occasionally
touched in that which has been delivered already: in which respect I may the
better spare that labor. Beseech we God the Father of our Lord Jesus good
conscience, and to yield all due obedience to him first, and then to every
Ordinance of man for his sake.

Now to this Father, Son, and blessed Spirit, three persons, and one eternal
God, be ascribed all the Kingdom, the power and the glory, both now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Grantham, Lincoln, 11 June 1623.
JOB 29. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. 14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me:
my judgment was as a Robe and Diadem.

15. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.

16. I was a Father to the poor: and the cause which

17. And I brake the jaws of the wicked; and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth.


WHere silence against foul and false imputations may be Si, cum mihi furta,
largitiones -- objiciuntur, ego respondere soleo meis -- non tam sum
existimandus de rebus gestis gloriari, quam de objectis non confiteri. Cic. pro
domo sua.
Confession; there the protestation of a man's own innocence is ever just, and
sometimes Mihi de mem^tipso et^m multa dicendi necessitas quaedam imposita est
ab illo. Cic. pro Syll.
necessary. When others do us open wrong; it is not Vanity, but Charity, to do
our selves open right: and whatsoever appearance of folly or vain boasting
there is in so doing; they are chargeable with all that compel us thereunto,
and not we. (I am become a fool in glorying; but ye have compelled me, 2 Cor.
pride nor passion in Job, but such a compulsion as this, that made him so often
in this book proclaim his own righteousness. Amongst whose many and grievous
afflictions, as it is hard to say which was the greatest; so we are sure this
was not the least, that he was to wrestle with the unjust and bitter
upbraidings of unreasonable and incompassionate men. They came to visit him as
friends; and as friends they should have comforted him. But sorry friends they
were, and Job 16.2.
miserable comforters: indeed not comforters, but tormenters; and Accusers
rather than Friends. Seeing Gods hand heavy upon him; for want of better or
other proof, they charge Hypocrisy. And because they would not seem to deal
all in generalities (for against this general accusation of hypocrisy, it was
sufficient for him as generally to plead the truth and uprightness of his
heart;) they therefore go on more particularly, (but as falsely) and as it were
by way of instance, to charge him with Oppression. Thus Eliphaz by name taxes
him: Chap. 22.6, etc. Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught; and
have stripped the naked of their clothing. Thou have not given water to the
weary to drink, and thou have withholden bread from the hungry. But as for the
mighty man, he had the earth; and the honorable man dwelt in it. Thou have

shamefully, indeed shamelesly, upbraided to his face, without any desert of
his, by those men, E^si ego dignus hac^ ontumelia, at tu indignus qui faceres
tamen. Terent.
who (if he had deserved it) should least of all have done it, his Psalm. 55.12.
-- 14.
neighbors and familiar friends; can you blame the good man, if to remove such
false aspersions, he do with more then ordinary freedom insist upon his own
integrity in this behalf? And that he does in this Chapter something largely;
wherein he declares how he demeaned himself in the time of his prosperity in
the administration of his Magistracy, far When the ear heard me, then it
blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me. Because I
delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy] in the next immediate verses before
these. And then he goes on in the words of my Text, I put on righteousness,
etc.

Job was a good man, as well as a great: and being good, he was by so much the
better, by how much he was the greater. Nor was he only Bonus vir, a good man;
and yet if but so, his friends Hypocrite: but he was Bonus Civis too, a good
Common-wealths-man; and therefore his friends did him yet more wrong to make
him an Oppressor. Indeed he was neither the one, nor the other. But it is not
so useful for us to know what manner of man Job was; as to learn from him what
manner we should be. The grieved spirit of Job indeed at first uttered these
words for his own justification: but the blessed spirit of God has since
written them for our instruction. To teach us from Jobs example how to use that
measure of greatness and power which he has given us, be it more, be it less,
to his glory, and the common good. So that in these words we have to consider,
as laid down unto us under the person, and from the example of Job, some of the
main and principal duties which concern all those that live in any degree of
Eminency or Authority either in Church or Commonwealth; and more especially
those that are in the Magistracy, or in any office Justice.

And those Duties are four. One, and the first, as a more transcendent
fundamental duty: the other three, as accessory helps thereto, or subordinate
parts thereof. That first is, a Care and Love, Zeal of Justice. A good
Magistrate should so make account of the administration of Justice, as of his
chiefest business; making it his greatest glory and delight. Ver. 14. [ I put
on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was a robe and a diadem.]
The second is Mercy, and Charity, and Compassion. A good Magistrate should have
compassion of those that stand helpful unto them, ver. 15. and part of 16. [ I
was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame, I was a father to the poor.]
The Third is Diligence in Examination. A good Magistrate the first tale, or be
carried away with light informations: but he should hear, and examine, and scan
and sift matters as narrowly as may be for the finding out of the truth, in the
remainder of ver. 16. [ And the cause which I knew not I searched out.] The
Fourth is Courage and Resolution in executing. A good fear the faces of men, be
they never so mighty or many; but without respect execute that which is equal
and right even upon the greatest offender, Ver. 17. [ And I brake the jaws of
the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.] Of these four in their
order: of the first, first; in these words, I put on righteousness, etc.

This Metaphor of clothing is much used in the Scriptures in this the soul, and
things appertaining to the soul. In Psalm 109. David uses this imprecation
against his enemies; [ Psalm. 109.29.
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with
their own confusion as with a cloak.] And the Prophet Esaias speaking of Christ
and his Kingdom, and the righteousness Chap. 11. thus describes it, [ Esaias
11.5.
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins.] Likewise in the New Testament, Saint Paul in one place bids
us Romans 13.14.
put on the Lord Jesus Christ: in another exhorts women to 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
adorn themselves instead of broydered hair and gold and pearls and costly
array, with shamefastness and sobriety, and (as becoming women professing
godliness) with good works: in a third furnishes the spiritual soldier with
Ephesians. 6.14, etc.
Shoes, Girdle, Breastplate, Helmet, and all necessary accoutrements from top
to toe. In all which and other places, where the like Metaphor is used; it is
ever to be understoood with allusion to one of the three special ends and uses
of apparel. For we clothe our selves, either first, for necessity, and common
decency, to cover our nakedness; secondly, for security and defense against
enemies; or thirdly, state and solemnity, and for distinction of offices and
degrees. cover our nakedness: and these are Indumenta, known by no other but
by the general name of Clothing or Apparel. Soldiers in the wars wear
Morions, and Cuiraces, and Targets, and other habiliments for defense: and
these are called Arma, Arms, or Armor. Kings and Princes were Crowns and
Diadems; inferior Nobles, and Judges, and Magistrates, and Officers, their
Robes, and ^urres, and Hoods, and other ornaments fitting to their several
degrees and offices, for solemnity of state, and as ensigns or marks of those
places and stations wherein God has set them: and these are Infulae, Ornaments
or Robes. It is true; Justice, and Judgment, and every other good virtue and
grace is all this unto the soul; serving her both for covert, and for
protection, and for ornament: and so stand both for the garments, and the
armor, and for the Robes of the soul. But here I take it, Job alludeth
esecially to the third use. The propriety of the very words themselves give it
so: for he says he put righteousness and judgment upon him as a Robe and a
Diadem; and such things as there are worn, not for necessity, but state. Job
was certainly a Magistrate, a Judge at the least; it is evident from the
seventh verse: and to me it seems not improbable that he was a Non dubito
quin Job fuerit R^x. Didac. Stun. in Job 1.3.
King; though not likely such as the Kings of the earth now are (whose
dominions are mider, and power more absolute,) yet possibly such as in those
ancient times, and in those Eastern parts of the world were called Kings, a
kind of petty Monarch, and supreme governor within his own territories, though
perhaps but of one single City with the Suburbs, and some few neighboring
Villages. In the first Chapter it is said that he was Job 1.2.
the greatest man of all the East: and in this Chapter he says of himself,
that Job 29.9.
When he came in presence, the Princes and the Nobles held their tongues; and
that Ibid. ver. 25.
He sat as chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army; and in this verse he
speaks as one that wore a Diadem, an ornament (...), Suid. in (...).
proper to Kings. Now Kings, we know, and other Magistrates place much of their
outward glory and state in their Diadems, and Robes, and peculiar Vestments:
these things striking Cultus magnificus addit hominibus authoritatem. Quintil.
8. Inst.

(...) Hom. (...) Odyss. 19. Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis More
dabat populis. Virgil. Aen. 7. See Franc. Pollet. 3 Hist. fori. Romans 6.


reverence into the subject toward their Superior; and adding in the
estimation of the people, both glory and honor, and Majesty to the person, and
withal pomp and state, and solemnity to the actions of the wearer. By this
speech then of putting on Justice and Judgment as a Robe and a Diadem, Job
shows that the glory Kings and Potentates are wont to take in their Crowns,
and Scepters, and royal Vestments, is not more, than the glory and honor
which he placed in doing justice and judgment. He thought that was true
honor, not which reflected from these empty marks and ensigns of Dignity, but
which sprang from those virtues, whereof these are but dumb remembrances. If we
desire yet more light into the Metaphor; we may borrow some from David, Psalm.
109.16, 17.
Psalm. 109. where speaking of the wicked, he says ver. 17. that he clothed
himself with cursing like a garment: and by that he means no other than what
he had spoken in the next verse before, plainly and His delight was in Cursing.
By the Analogy of which place we may not unfitly understand these words of
Job, as intimating the great love he had unto Justice, and the great pleasure
and It is joy to the just to do judgment. Prove. 21.15.
delight he took therein. Join this to the former; and they give us a full
meaning. Never ambitious usurper took more pride in his new gotten Crown or
Scepter, never proud Minion took more pleasure in her new and gorgeous
apparel; then Job did true Iuris and aequitatis, quae virum princip^m ornant,
studiosissimus eram. Vatabl. hic.
glory and delight in doing Justice and Judgment. He put on righteousness,
and it clothed him; and Judgment was to him what to others a Robe and a Diadem
is: honorable and delightful.

Here then the Magistrate and every Officer of Justice may learn his first and
principal, and (if I may so speak) his Master-duty, (and first observation:)
namely, to do justice and judgment with delight, and zeal, and cheerfulness.
I call it his Master-duty; because where this is once rightly and soundly
rooted in the conscience, the rest will come on easily, and of themselves. This
must be his primum, and his ultimum; the foremost of his desires, and the
utmost of his endeavors, to do Justice and Judgment. He must make it his
chiefest business; and yet count it his lightsome recreation: the first and
lowest step of his care; and yet withal count it the last and highest rise of
his honor. The first thing we do in the morning before we either eat or drink,
or buckle about any worldly business, is to put our clothes about us: we say,
we are not ready till we have done that. Even thus should every good Magistrate
do: before his private, he should think of the public affairs; and not count
himself ready to go about his own profits, his shop, his ship, his lands, his
reckonings, much less about his vain pleasures, his jades, his curres, his
kites, his any thing else, till first with Job, he had put on righteousness as
a garment, and clothed himself with judgment as

Nor let any man think this affection to justice to have been singular Job:
much less impute it to simplicity in him. For behold another like affectioned;
and he a greater, and I may say too a wiser than Job, for God himself has
witnessed of him, that for 3 King. 3.12.
wisdom there was never his like before him, nor should come after him,
Solomon the King. Who so much manifested his love and affection justice and
judgment, that when God put him to his choice to ask what he would, and he
should have it; he asked 3 Kings. 3.5 -- 11.
not long life, or riches, or victory, or any other thing, but only Wisdom;
and that in this kind Prudentiam regitivam, Wisdom Ibid. ver. 9. to discern
judgment, ver. 11.
to discern between good and bad, that he might go in and out before the people
with skill, and rule them prudently with all his might in righteousness and
equity: And the Text says, Ibid. ver. 10.
The speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. Magistrates
should subscribe to Solomon's judgment, who is wiser then the wisest of them:
and yet for farther conviction, behold a wiser then Solomon is here; Jesus
Christ the righteous, the God of Solomon, and the Savior of Solomon, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hidden all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Of whom David
having said in Psalm. 45. that the scepter of his kingdom is a righteous
scepter, he proceeds immediately to show wherein especially consisted the
righteousness of the Scepter of his Kingdom: Not so much in doing
righteousness, and punishing iniquity, (though that also;) as in loving
righteousness, and hating iniquity. [ Psalm. 45.6, 7.
The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a righteous scepter: Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, etc.] And you heard already
out of the eleventh of Esaias, Esaias 11.5.
righteousness was the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his
reins. Magistrates from the examples of Job, of Solomon, of Jesus Christ
himself, should learn to make justice and judgment their greatest both glory
and delight.

examples will draw us on fast enough; without, yea, many times against reason:
but in good things, it is well if examples and reasons together can any thing
at all prevail with us. And here if reason may rule us; surely good reason
there is, we should be thus affectioned to justice, as has been said: whether
we respect the it self, or GOD, or our selves, or others. The thing it self,
Justice, virtue, is, as every other virtue is, honorable and lovely, and to be
desired for its own sake: and in the special nature of it, as it is Justice,
is a virtue so necessary and profitable to humane society, and withal so
(...). Aristot. Eth. Nicom. 3. ex Theogn.
comprehensive of all other virtues, as that those men who labor to pervert
it, do yet honor it; and even those men (...). Philop. in Prior. Arist.
who themselves will not use it, cannot yet but love it, at leastwise commend
it in others. Judgment, Mercy, and Faithfulness our Savior Christ reckons
as the Mat. 23.23.
weightiest matters of the Law, Mat. 23. And Prove. 24.26.
every man (says Solomon, Prove. 24.) will^ kiss his lips that gives a right
that is, Every man will love and honor him that loves and honors Justice.
Ought you to delight in any thing more then virtue: or in any virtue more then
the best? and such is Justice. Again, by due administration of Justice and
judgment GOD is much glorified. Glorified in the encouragement of his
servants, rewarded: glorified in the destruction of the wicked, when for
offending they are punished: glorified in the increase, and in the peace and
prosperity of his Kingdom, which hereby is both preserved and enlarged:
glorified in the expression and imitation of his infinite perfections, when
they who are his Ministers and Deputies for this very thing, for the execution
of Justice, do labor to resemble him whose ministers and deputies they are, in
this very thing, in being just, even as he is just. Ought you not to count it
your greatest glory to seek his? and can you do that more readily and
effectually, than by doing justice and judgment? our selves; What Quid est
suavius quam been rem gerere hono publico? Plaut. in Capt. 3.2.
comfort will it be to our souls, when they can witness with us that we have
even set our selves to do set us? Every man that has a Calling, must Romans
12.7.
wait thereon, and do the duties belonging thereto, at his peril: and it will
be much for his ease to be lightsome and cheerful therein. So shall he make of
a Faxis ut libeat quod est necesse.

Auson. in Sent. Periand.


necessity a virtue; and do that with pleasure, which he must do howsoever, or
answer for the neglect: whereas otherwise, his Calling will be a continual
burden and weariness unto him, and make his whole life no better nor other
then a long and lasting affliction. And besides, private good to be severed
from the public; and so neglect the public employments to follow our own
private affairs. For the private is not distinguished from the public; but
(...). Xenop. de venatione; apud Stob^um.
included in it: and no man knows what mischiefs unawares he prepares for
his private estate in the end; whilst thinking to provide well enough for
himself, he cherishes in the mean time, or suffers abuses in the public.
Ought we not by making justice and judgment our glory and delight, to reap the
comfort of it in our consciences, to Quapropter edulcare convenit vitam. Cn.
Marius in Mimiambis, apud A. Ge^l. 15.25.
sweeten the miseries and travailes of our lives and callings, and to secure
our private in the common safety: Justice, or doing it heavily and heartlesly,
wound our own Consciences, make the afflictions of this life yet more
afflictive, and in the decay of the public, insensibly promote the ruin of
our private state and prosperity? And lastly, if we respect others; what can be
more glorious for us, than by our zeal and forwardness shame and then to
quicken up the backwardness of others; that with joint hearts and hands they
and we together may aim at the peace and prosperity, and good of the
Commonwealth? It is not easy to say what manifold benefits redound to the
Commonwealth from the due execution of justice: or from the mischiefs! How
honorable are we and glorious, if by our zeal we have been the happy
instruments of those so many, so great benefits? How inglorious and vile, if by
our negligence we have made our selves guilty of these so many, so great
mischiefs! If we neglect Justice, we countenance disorders, which by Justice
are repressed; we disarm innocence, which by Justice is protected; we banish
Peace, which by Justice is maintained; we the King and his Throne, which by
justice are Prove. 16.12.
established; we pull upon us Gods plagues and judgments, which by justice are
averted. Ought we not much rather by our forwardness in doing justice to
repress disorders, protect innocence, maintain peace, secure the King and
State, and turn away Gods judgments from our selves and others? See now if we
have not reason to love Justice and Judgment, and to make it our delight; to
put righteousness upon us, and to clothe us with judgment as with a Robe and
a Diadem: being a thing in it self so excellent; and being from it there
redoundeth so much glory to God, to our selves so much comfort, and benefit
unto others. The inferences of use from this first Duty, as also from the rest,
I omit for the present: reserving them all to the latter end: partly, because I
would handle them all together; partly also, and especially, for that I desire
to leave them fresh in your memory, when you depart the Congregation. And
therefore without farther ado, I proceed forthwith to the next duty, contained
in these words, [ I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame; I was a
father to the poor.]

Wherein Job declares his own readiness in his place and distressed, or
necessities required. And like him should every Magistrate be in this also;
which I propose as the second Duty of the good Magistrate: he must be forward
to (...). Sophocl.
succor those that are distressed and oppressed; and to help and relieve them
to his power. Men's necessities are many, and of great variety: but most of them
spring from one of these two defects, ignorance, or want of skill; and
impotence, or want of power: here signified by Blindness, and Lamenesse. The
blind man perhaps has his limbs, and strength to walk in the way, if he could
see it: but because he eyes, he can neither find the right way, nor spy the
rubbes that are in it; and therefore he must either sit still, or put himself
upon the necessity of a double hazard, of stumbling, and of going wrong. The
lame man perhaps has his eyes and sight perfect, and knows which way he
should go, and sees it well enough: but because he wants his limbs, he is
not able to stir a foot forward; and therefore he must have patience perforce,
and be content to sit still, because he cannot do withal. Both the one and
the other may perish, unless some good body help them: and become a guide to
the blind, a staff to the lame; leading supporting the other. Abroad in the
world there are many, in every Society, Corporation, and Congregation, there
are some, of both sorts: some Blind, some Lame. Some that stand in need of
Counsel, and Advice, and Direction; as the Blind: others that stand in need of
Help, and Assistance, and Lame. If there be any other besides these, whose case
deserves pity, in what kind so ever it be; the word Poor comprehends him,
and makes him a fit object for the care and compassion of the Magistrate. To
each of these the Magistrate must be a succourer to his power. He must be, as
here Job was, an eye to the blind, Lyra hic.
ignorantem dirigendo; by giving sound and honest counsel the best he can to
them that are simple, or might without his help be easily overseen. And he must
be, as here Job was, feet to the lame, impotentem adjuvando; by giving
countenance and assistance in just and honest causes the best he can to them
that are of meaner ability, overborn. If there be either of these, or any other
defect, which stands in need of a supply in any other man; he must be, as
here Job was, a See Syrac. 4.10.
father to the poor, indigentem sublevando; by giving convenient safety and
protection the best he can to them that are destitute of help, and fly unto him
as to a sanctuary for shelter and for refuge in any misery, grievance, or
distress. Upon these he must both have compassion inwardly: and he must show
it too outwardly: Affectu, and Effectu; pitying them in his heart, and helping
them with his hand. It is not enough for him to see the Blind, and the Lame,
and the Poor; and to be sorry for them: compassion must be real. He must lend
his eyes to the Blind, direct them; and he must lend his feet to the Lame, to
support them; and he must pity the Poor as a father does his children, so pity
them, that he do something for them.

Princes, and Judges, and Magistrates were not Non mihi, sed populo. AE.
Adrianus Imp.

(...). Arist. in Epist. ad Alex.


ordained altogether, nor yet so much for their own sakes, that they might have
over whom to bear rule and to It a magnae vires gloriae decorique sunt, si
illis salutaris potentia est. Nam pestifera vis est, valere ad nocendum.
Seneca. 1. de clem. 3.
dominiere at pleasure; as for the peoples sakes, that the people might have to
whom to resort, and upon whom to depend for help and succor, and relief in
their necessities. And they ought to remember, that for this end GOD has
endued them power which others want; that they might by their power help them
to right, who have not power to right themselves. [ Senec. in Medea. 2.2.
Hoc reges habent magnificum and ingens, etc. Prodesse miseris, supplices fido
lare Protegere, etc.] This is the very thing wherein the preeminence of
Princes, and Magistrates, and great ones above the ordinary sort singularly
consists, and wherein specially they have the advantage, and whereby they
hold the title of Psalm. 82.6. Hoc tecu^ commune Deis, quod utrique rogati
Supplicibus vestris far soletis opem. Ovid. 2. de Ponto 9.
Gods, that they are able to do good and to help the distressed, more than
others are. For which ability how they have used it, they stand accountable to
him from whom they have received it: and woe unto them, if the accounts they
bring the receipts. Wisd. 6.6.
Potentes potenter: into whose hands Luke 12.48.
much has been given, from their hands much will be required; and the mighty
ones, if they have not done a mighty deal of good withal, shall be mightily
tormented. And as they have received power from God; so they do receive
honors, and services, and tributes from their people for the maintenance of
that power: and these as wages by Gods righteous ordinance the peoples good.
God has imprinted in the natural conscience of every man notions of fear, and
honor, and reverence, and obedience, and subjection, and contribution, and
other duties to be performed toward Kings, and Magistrates, and other
superiors, Romans 13.5.
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: and all this for the
maintenance of that power in them, by the right use whereof themselves are
again maintained. Now the same conscience which binds us who are under
authority, to the performance; binds you who are in authority to the
requital, of these duties. I say, the same Conscience; though not the same
wrath: for here is the difference. Wrath and Conscience bind us to our duties;
so that if we withdraw our subjection, we both wound our own Consciences, and
incur your just wrath: but only Conscience binds you to yours, and not
Wrath; so that if ye withdraw your help, we may not use wrath, but must suffer
it with patience, and permit all to the judgment of your own consciences, and
of God the judge of all men's consciences. But yet still in Conscience the
obligation lies equally upon you and us: As we are bound to give you honor,
so are you to give us safety; as we to fear you, so you to help us; as we to
fight for you, so you to care for us; as we to pay you tribute, so you to do us
For Romans 13.6.
For this cause pay we tribute and other duties, unto you who are Gods
ministers; even because you ought to be attending continually upon this very
thing, to approve your selves as Romans 13.4. (...). Luke 22.25.
the ministers of God to us for good. Oh that we could all superiors and
inferiors, both one and other, remember what we owed each to other; and by
mutually striving to pay it to the utmost, so endeavor our selves to Romans 13.8.
fulfill the Law of God! But in the mean time, we are still injurious, if
either we withdraw our subjection, or you your help; if either we cast off the
duty of children, or you the care of Fathers. Time was, when Judges, and
Nobles, and Princes delighted to be called by the name Fathers. The Philistims
called their Kings by a peculiar appellative, Genesis 20.2. and 26.1. and Psalm.
34. in titulo.
Abimelech; as who say, The King my Father. In Rome the Senators were of old
time called Patres, Fathers: and it was afterward accounted among the Romans
the greatest title of honor that could be bestowed upon their Consuls,
Generals, Emperors, or whosoever had deserved best of the Commonwealth, to
have this addition to the rest of his style -- sed Roma parentem, Roma patrem
patriae Ciceronem libera dixit. Juven. Satyr 8. -- patrem patriae appellavimus,
ut sciret datam sibi potestatem patriam; quae est, temperatissima, liberis
consulens, suaque post illos ponens. Senec. 1. de Clem. 14.
Pater patriae, a Father to his Country. Naamans servants in 4 King^ 5. call
him Father, 4 Kings 5.13.
My Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee, etc. And on the other side David
the King speaks unto his Subjects, as a Father to his children in Psalm. Psalm.
34.11.
Come ye children, etc. and Solomon in the Proverbs every where, My son: even
as Job here accounts himself a Father to Certainly to show that some of these
had, and that all good Kings and Governors should have a Ut eos quasi filios
^erneret per amorem, quibus pater praeerat per protectionem. Gloss. interlin.
hic (...) etc. Philo, de creat. Principis.
fatherly care over, and bear a fatherly affection unto, those that are under
them.

All which yet, seeing it is intended to be done in bonum universitatis, must
be so understood as that it may stand cum bono universitatis, stand with equity
and justice, and with the common good. For Prove. 3.3. Mat. 23.23. Non auferat
verit as misericordiam, nec misericordia impediat veritatem. August. sent. 110.
apud Prosperum.
Mercy and Justice must go together, and help to temper the one the other. The
Magistrate and Governor must be a Father to the poor: to protect him from
injuries, and to relieve his necessities; but not to maintain him in idleness.
All that the Father owes to the Child love and maintenance: he owes him too
Education; and he owes him correction. A Father may love his Child too
fondly, and make him a wanton; he may maintain him too highly, and make him a
prodigal: But he must give him Nurture too, as well as Maintenance, lest he be
better fed than taught; and correct him too, as well as love him, lest he bring
him most grief when he should reap most comfort from him. Such a fatherly care
ought the civil Magistrate to have over the poor. He must carefully defend them
from wrongs and oppressions; he must providently take order for their
convenient relief and maintenance: But that is not all, he must as well make
provision correction when they grow idle, stubborn, dissolute, or any way out
of order. This he should do, and not leave the other undone. There is not any
speech more frequent in the mouths of beggars and wanderers, wherewith the
Country now swarmeth, then that men would be good to the poor: and yet scarce
any thing so much mistaken as that speech in both the terms of it: most men
neither understanding aright who are the poor, nor yet what it is to be good to
them. Not he only is good to the poor, that delivers him when he is
oppressed: nor is he only good to the poor, that relieveth him when he is
distressed: but he also is good to the poor, that punishes him when he is
idle. He is good to the poor that helps him, when he wants: and he is no
less good to the poor, that whippeth him when he deserves. This is indeed to
be good to the poor; to give him that alms first, which he wants most; if he
be hungry, it is alms to feed him; but if he be idle and untoward, it is Non
solum qui dat esurienti cibam, sitienti potum -- verum e^^am and qui emendat
verbere in q^e^ postet as datur, v. l `co^rcet aliqua disciplina in eo quod
corripit, and aliqua emendat^ria poena pl. ctit, el^e mosynam dat, quia
misericordiam praestat. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 72.
alms to whip him. This is to be good to the poor: But who then are the poor
we should be good to, as they interpret goodness? Saint Paul would have* 1 Timothy 5.3.
Widows honored; but yet those that are widows indeed: so it is meet the
poor should be relieved, but yet those that are poor indeed. Not every one that
begges is poor; not every one that wants is poor indeed. They are the poor,
whom we private men in Charity, and you that are Magistrates in justice stand
bound to relieve, who are old, or impotent, and unable to work; or in these
hard and depopulating times are willing but cannot be set on work; or have a
greater charge upon them than can be maintained by their work. These, and such
as these, are the let us all be good to such as these. Be we that are private
men as brethren to these poor ones, and show them mercy: be you that are
Magistrates as Fathers to these poor ones, and do them justice. But as for
those idle stubborn professed wanderers, that can and may and will not work,
and under the name and habit of poverty rob the poor indeed of our alms and
their maintenance: let us harden our hearts against them, and not give them; do
you execute the severity of the Law upon them, and not spare them. It is Saint
Paul's Order, nay it is the Ordinance of the Holy Ghost, and we should all put
to our helping hands to see it kept, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
He that will not labor, let These Ulcers and Drones of the Commonwealth are
ill worthy of any honest man's alms, of any good Magistrates protection.
Hitherto of the Magistrates second Duty, with the Reasons and extent thereof, I
was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I was a Father to the poor.
Follows next the third Duty, in these words, The cause which I knew not I
searched out.

Of which words some frame the Coherence with the former, as if Job mercy to
the poor from suspicion of partiality and injustice: and as if he had said I
was a Father indeed to the poor; pitiful and merciful to him; and ready to
show him any lawful favor: Ne crederetur quod saveret cis nimis in
praejudicium justitiae; subditur [and causam.] Lyran. hic.
in pity to him, to forget or pervert justice. I was ever careful before I
would either speak or do for him, to be first assured his cause was right and
good: and for that purpose, if it were doubtful, Ne forte motu pi^tatis
indiscretae condescenderem ei in praejudicium justitiae. Lyran. hic.
I searched it out, and examined it, before I would countenance either him or
it. Certainly thus to do is agreeable to the rule of Justice; yea and of Mercy
too: for it is one Rule in showing Mercy, that it be ever done salvis pietate
and justitia, without prejudice done to piety and justice. And as to this
particular, the commandment of God is express for it in Exodus 23. Exodus 23.3.
Thou shall not countenance no not a poor man in his cause. Now if we should
the coherence of the words; the special duty which Magistrates should hence
learn, would be indifferency: in the administration of Justice not to make
difference of rich or poor, far or near, friend or foe, one or other; but to
consider only and barely the equity and right of the cause, without any
respect of persons, or partial inclination this way or that way.

This is a very necessary duty indeed in a Magistrate of justice; observation
from the necessity of any consequence from the words themselves otherwise. For
what need all that care and pains and diligence in searching out the cause, if
the condition of the person might overruled the cause after all that search,
and were not the judgment to be given merely according to the goodness the
cause, without respect had to the person? But the special duty, which these
words seem most naturally and immediately to impose upon the Magistrate, (and
let that be the third observation) is diligence, and patience, and care to
hear, and examine, and enquire into the truth of things; and into the equity of
men's causes. As the Physician before he prescribe receipt or diet to his
patient, will first feel the pulse, and view the urine, and observe the temper
and changes in the body, and be inquisitive how the disease began, and when,
and what fits it has, and where and in what manner inform himself every other
way as fully as he can in the true state of the body, that so he may proportion
the remedies accordingly without error: so ought every Magistrate in causes of
Justice, before he pronounce sentence or give his determination, whether in
matters Omnia judicia aut distrabendarum controversiarum, aut puniendorum
maleficiorum caus^ repe^ta sunt. Cic. pro Cecina.
judicial or criminal; to hear both parties with equal patience, to examine
witnesses and other evidences advisedly and thoroughly, to consider and wisely
lay together all allegations and circumstances, to put in quaeres and doubts
upon the by, and use all possible expedient means for the boulting out of the
truth; that so he may do that which is

A duty not without both Precept and Precedent in holy Scripture. Moses
prescribes it in Deuteronomy. 17. in the case of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17.2. etc. See also
Deuteronomy. 13.14.
If there be found among you one that has done thus or thus, etc. And it be
told thee, and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold it to
be true, and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel, Then
thou shall bring forth that man, etc. The offender must be stoned to death; and
no eye pity him: but it must be done orderly, and in a legal course; not upon
a bare hearsay, but upon diligent examination and inquisition, evidence given
in, as may render the fact certain, so far as such cases ordinarily are capable
of (...). Arist. 1. Ethic. 1.
certainty. And the like is again ordered in Deuteronomy. 19. in the case of false
witness, Deuteronomy. 19.17, etc.
Both the men between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Judges,
and the Judges shall make diligent inquisition, etc. And in Judge. 19. in the
wronged Levites case, whose Concubine was abused unto death at Gibeah; the
Tribes of Israel stirred up one another to do justice upon the inhabitants
thereof; and the method they proposed was this, first to Judge. 19.20.
consider and consult of it, and then to give their opinions. But the most
famous example Solomon in 3 Kings 3. in the difficult case of the 3 King. 3.16
-- 28.
two Mothers. Either of them challenged the living child with a like
eagerness; either of them accused other of the same wrong, and with the same
allegations: neither was there witness or other evidence on either part to
give light unto the matter: yet Solomon by that wisdom which he had obtained
from God found a means to search out the truth cut the child into halfes, and
give either of them one half; at the mentioning whereof the compassion of the
right mother betrayed the falsehood of her clamorous competitor. And we read in
the Apocryphal Story of Susanna, how Daniel by Dan. 13.61.
examining the two Elders severally and apart, found them to differ in one
circumstance of their relation, and thereby discovered the whole accusation to
be false. Judges for this reason were anciently called Cognitores, and in
approved Authors Si judicas, cognosce. Sen. in Med. 2.
Cognoscere is as much as to do the office of a Judge: to teach Judges that
one chief point of their know the truth. For if of private men, and in things
of ordinary discourse, that of Solomon be true, Prove. 18.13. See Syrac. 11. 7,
8.
He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame unto
him; certainly much more is it true of public Magistrates, and in matters of
Justice and Judgment: by how much both the men are of better note, and the
things of greater moment. But in difficult and intricate businesses, covered
with darkness and obscurity, and perplexed with many windings and turnings,
and cunning and crafty conveyances, to find a fair issue out, and to spy
light at a narrow hole, and by wisdom and diligence rip up a foul matter, and
search a cause to the bottom, and make a discovery of all: is a thing worthy
the labor, and a thing that will add to the honor, I say not only of
inferior Governors, but even of the supreme Magistrate, the King. Prove. 25.2.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the honor of Kings is to
search out the matter.

First, that Democritus said, the truth lies Cic. 1 Acad. quaest. in fine.
Involuta veritas in alto latet. Sen. 7. de benefic. 1.
in profundo, and in abdito, dark and deep as in the bottom of a pit; and it
will ask some time, yea and cunning too, to find it out and bring it to light.
Secondly, that through favor, faction, envy, greediness, ambition, innocence
it self is often laden with false accusations. 3 Kings 21.13.
Naboth, Jer. 37.13.
Jeremy, Acts 24.5. and 25.7.
Saint Paul, and others; and you may see by too much experience in these
wretched times, how many men of fair and honest conversation have been accused
and troubled without cause: which if the Magistrate by diligent inquisition do
not either prevent or help to Thirdly, that informations are for the most part
partial, every man making the best of his own tale: and he cannot but often
(...). Menand. apud Stob. Sermon. 44.
err in judgment, that is easily the first tale, and does not suspend till he
have heard both parties alike. Herein 2 Samuel 16.34
David failed, when upon Ziba's false information he passed a hasty and
injurious decree against Mephibosheth. Solomon says, Prove. 18.17.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous; but then his neighbor
comes and searches him Prove. 18. as we say commonly, One tale is good, till
another be told. Fourthly, that if in all other things hastiness and
precipitancy be hurtful, then especially matters of justice would not be
huddled up hand over-head, but handled with mature Take heed what you do, 2
Chr. 19.5.
deliberation, and just diligent disquisition. Senec. lib. 2. de ira cap. 23.
Cunctari judicantem decet; imo oportet, says Seneca: he that is to judge, it
is fit he should, nay it is necessary he should proceed with convenient
leisure. Who judges otherwise, and without this due search, he does not judge,
but guess. The good Magistrate had need of patience to hear, and of diligence
to search, and of prudence to search out, whatsoever may make for the discovery
The cause which I knew not I searched out. That is the Magistrates third Duty.
There yet remains a fourth in these words, I brake the jaws of the wicked,
and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.

Wherein Job alludeth to ravenous and salvage beasts; beasts that lie in wait
for the smaller Cattle, and when they once catch them in their paws, fasten
their teeth upon them, and tear them in pieces and devour them. Such Lions,
and Wolfs, and Bears, and Tigers, are the greedy Qui pote plus urget: pisces ut
saepe minutos Magnu' come, ut aves enecat accipiter. Varro in Margopoli --
factus praeda majori minor. Sen. in Hippol. act. 2.
great ones of this world, who are ever ravening after the estates and the
livelihoods of their meaner snatching, and biting, and devouring, and at length
eating them up and consuming them. Job here speaks of Dentes and Molares;
Teeth and Iaws: and he means the same thing by both, Power abused to
oppression. But if any will be so curiously subtle, as to distinguish them,
thus he may do it. Dentes, they are the long (...) of (...) acuere. --
sharp teeth, the fore-teeth; Psalm. 37.4. (...). Arist. ^ Phys. tex. 76.
Dentes eorum arma and sagit^ae, says David, Their teeth are spears and
arrows: Molares a molendo, so called from grinding; they are the great double
teeth, the jaw-teeth. Those are the Biters, these the Grinders: these and those
together, Oppressors of all sorts. Usurers, and prouling Officers, slye
Merchants, and errant Informers, and such kind of Extortioners as sell time,
and truck for expedition, and snatch and catch at petty advantages; these use
their teeth most, these are Biters. The first, I know not whether or no the
worst sort of them, in the holy Hebrew tongue has his name from biting. (...)
Naschak, that is to bite; and (...) Neschek, that is Usury. Besides these
Biters, there are Grinders too; men whose teeth are Lapid^s Molures, as the
over and the nether millstone: Depopulators, and racking Landlords, and such
great ones, as by heavy pressures and burdens, and sore bargains break the
backs of those they deal Esaias 3.15.
grind the faces of the poor, as small as dust and powder; and when they have
done, at length Psalm. 14.4.
eat them up one after another, as it were bread: as the Holy Ghost has
painted them out under those very phrases. Now how the Magistrate should deal
with these grinders and biters, Job here teaches him: he should break their
jaws, and pluck the spoile^ out of their teeth; that is, quell and crush the
mighty Oppressor, and Eripite nos ex faucibus eorum, quorum crudelitas --
Crass. apud Ci^. 1. de Oratore.
deliver the Oppressed from his injuries. For to break the jaw, or the
cheekbone, or the teeth, is in Scripture Phrase as much as to abate the pride,
and suppress the power, and curb the insolency of those that use their might
to overbeare right. So David says in the third Psalm, that God had saved him
by Psalm. 3.7.
smiting his enemies upon the cheek-bone, and breaking the teeth of the
ungodly. And in Psalm 58. he desires God to Psalm. 58.6. See also Prove. 30.14.
and Joel 1.6.
break the teeth of the wicked in their mouths, and to break out the great
teeth of those young Lions. In which place it is observable, that, as Job here,
he speaks both of Dentes and Molares, teeth and great teeth: and those wicked
great ones, according Job also here alludeth, he expressly compares unto young
Lions; lusty and strong, and greedy after the prey.

Now to the doing of this, to the breaking of the jaws of the wicked, plucking
the spoil out of his teeth; there is required a stout heart, and an undaunted
See Syrac. 4.9.
Courage, not fearing the faces of men, should their faces be as the faces of
Lions, and their visages never so terrible. And this is the good Magistrates
last Duty in my Text; without fear to execute justice boldly upon the stoutest
offender, and so to curb the power of great and wicked men, that the poor may
live in peace, and keep their own by them. It was one Iethro's Character of a
good Magistrate in Exodus 18. that he should be Exodus 18.21.
a man of courage. And it was not for nothing that every 3 Kin. 10.20.
step up Solomon's Throne for judgment was supported with Lions: to teach Kings
and all Magistrates, that a Lion-like courage and resolution is necessary for
all those that sit upon the Throne or Bench for Justice and for Judgment. When
1 Samuel 17.34, etc.
David kept his Fathers sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, and took a
Lamb out of the flock; he went out after the Lion and smote him, and took the
Lamb out of his Mouth, and when the Lion rose against him, he took him by the
beard, and smote the Bear also. Every Magistrate is a kind of Esaias 44.28.
(...), saepe apud Homer.
shepherd: and the people they are his flock. He must do that then in the
behalf of his flock, that David did. Those that begin to make a spoil, though
but of the poorest Lamb of the flock, be they as terrible as the Lion and the
Bear, he must after them, and smite them, and pluck the spoil out of their
teeth: and though they show their spleen, and turn again at it, yet he must
not shrink for that; but rather take fresh courage, and to them again, and
take them by the beard, and shake them, and never leave them till broken their
jaws, and in spite of their teeth made them past biting or grinding again in
have. He is a bare John 10.12.
hireling, and not worthy the name of a shepherd, who when he sees the Wolf
coming thrusts his head in a bush, and leaves the poor Cattle to the
spoil. The good Magistrate must put on his resolution: to go on in this
course, and without fear do justice, upon whosoever dares do injustice, and
to suppress oppression even in the greatest.

A resolution necessary; whether we consider the Law, the Magistrate, the
Offender. Necessary, First, in respect of the Laws: which, as all experience
shows, are far better unmade, then unkept. Horat. 3. Od. 24.
Quid vanae sine moribus Leges proficiunt? The life of the Law is the
Execution; without which the Law is but a dead letter: of less use and regard
then scarcrowes are in the corn fields; whereof the birds are a little afraid
at the first, but anon after a little use they grow so bold with them, as to
sit upon their heads and defile them. We see the experience hereof but too
much, in the too much suffered insolency of two sorts of people, (then against
whom never were Laws either better made, or worse executed) Rogues, and
Recusants. Now we know the Laws are general in their intents, and include as
well the great as the small. The Magistrate therefore who is (...). Arist 5.
Ethic. 7.
Lex loquens, and whose duty it is to see the laws executed, must proceed as
generally, and punish transgressors of the Laws, the great as well as the
small. It is an old complaint, yet grows out of date but slowly; that Laws
are like Anacharsis, apud Plutarch in Solone: non-nulli Zaleuco tribuunt.
Cobwebs, wherein the smaller flies are caught, but great ones Laws should not
be such, good Laws are not such, of themselves; they do or should intend an
Inde latae leges, ne fortior omnia posset. Ovid. 3. Fast.
universal reformation: it is the abuse of bad men, together with the
baseness or cowardice of sordid or sluggish Magistrates, that makes them
such. And I verily persuade my self, there is no one thing that makes good
laws so much contemned, even by mean ones too at the last, as the not
executing them upon the great ones in the mean time. Let a Magistrate but take
to himself that courage which he should do, and now and then make a great man
an example of Justice; he shall find that a few such life into the Laws, and
strike more awe into the people, then the punishment of an hundred underlings
and inferior persons.

Again, in respect of the Magistrate himself this courage and resolution is
necessary; for the maintenance of that dignity and respect fearing the faces of
men. Imagine you saw a goodly tall fellow, tricked up with feathers and
ribbands, and a glittering sword in his hand, enter the lists like a Champion,
and challenge all comers: by and by teeth and stare upon him; whereat my gay
Champion first trembles, and anon for very fear lets his sword fall, and
shrinketh himself into the crowd. Think what a ridiculous sight this would be:
and just such another thing as this, is a fearful Magistrate. Considera qualia
de te praest^s, qui tanta authorita^e subveberit. Cassiod. 6. Epist. 15.
robes, the marks and ensigns of his power. God has armed him with a Romans
13.1.
sword; indeed as well to put courage into his heart, as awe into the peoples.
And thus adorned and armed, he stands in the eye of the world, and as it were
upon the stage; and raises an expectation of himself, as if sure this man
would do something: his very appearance threatens destruction to whosoever
dares come within his reach. Now if after all this braving, he should be
out-dared with the big looks and bug-words of those that could do him no
harm: how justly should he draw upon himself scorn and contempt, Horat. de
art. Poct.
parturiunt Prove. 17.16.
Wherefore is there a price, says Solomon of the sluggard, in the hands of a
fool to buy wisdom, and he has no heart? So, wherefore is there a Sword, may
we say of the fearful Magistrate, in the hands of a Coward to do justice, and
he has no heart? You that are Magistrates, remember the promise God has made
you, and the Title he has given you. You have an honorable promise; [ 2 Chro.
19.6
GOD will be with you in the cause and in the judgment, 2 Chronicles 19.] If
God be with you, what need you fear who shall be against you? You have an
honorable Title too [ Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, Psalm 82.] Gods, why should you fear the faces of
men? This is Gods fashion: he 1 Pet. 5.5.
gives grace to the humble, but he resists the proud; he Luke 1.52.
exalts the meek and lowly, but he puts the mighty out of their seats. If
you will deal answerably to that high name he has put upon you, and be indeed
as Gods; follow the example of God: lift up the poor oppressed out of the
mire, and tumble down the confidence of the mighty and proud oppressor; when
you Psalm. 75.2.4.
receive the Congregation, judge uprightly, and fear not to say to the wicked,
be they never so great, Lift not up your horn. So shall you vindicate your
contempt: so shall you preserve your persons and places from being baffelled
and blurted by every lewd companion.

Courage in the Magistrate, against these great ones especially, is thirdly
necessary in respect of the Offenders. These wicked ones of whom Job speaks,
the longer teeth they have, the deeper they bite; and the stronger jaws they
have, the sorer they grind; and the greater power they have, the more mischief
they do. And therefore these great ones of all other would be well hampered;
and have their teeth filed, their jaws broken, their power curbed. I say not
the poor and the Courage; and a little Courage will serve to bring under those
that are under already. So that if mean men escape unpunished when they
transgress, it is oftener for want care or conscience in the Magistrate, then
of Courage. But here is the true trial of your Courage, when you are to deal
with these great ones: men not inferior to your selves, perhaps your equals,
yea, and it may be too, your Magistracy set aside, men much greater than your
selves: men great in place, great in wealth, in great favor, that have great
friends; but withal that do great harm. Let it be your honor, that you
dare be just, when these dare be unjust; and when they dare smite others Esaias
58.4.
with the fist of violence, that you dare smite them with Romans 13.4.
the sword of justice; use your power, when they dare abuse theirs. All
Transgressors should be looked unto; but more, the greater, and the greatest,
most: as a Sheepherd should watch his Sheep even from Flies and Maukes; but
much more from Foxes; most of all from Wolves. Sure, he is a sorry Sheepherd,
that is busy to kill Flies and Maukes in his Sheep, but lets the Wolf
worry at pleasure: Why one Wolf will do more mischief in a night, than a
thousand of them in a twelve-moneth. And as sure, he is a sorry Magistrate,
that stocketh, and whippeth, and hangs poor Sneaks when they offend (though
great thieves do what they list, and dares not meddle with them: like Saul,
who when God commanded him to destroy all the Amalekites both man and beast,
slew indeed the rascality of both, but spared the Sam. 15.3 -- 9.
greatest of the men, and the fattest of the cattle, and slew them not. The
good Magistrate should rather, with Job here, break the jaws of the wicked,
and in spite of his heart, pluck the spoil out of his teeth.

Thus have you heard the four duties or properties of a grounds reasons of most
of them, opened. They are, 1. a love and zeal to justice, 2. Compassion to the
poor and distressed, 3. Pains and Patience in examination of causes, 4.
Stoutnesse and Courage in execution of justice. The uses and inferences of all
these yet remain to be handled now in the last place, and altogether. All
which for order and brevities sake, we will reduce unto three heads:
accordingly as from each of the four mentioned Duties, or Properties, or Rules
(call them which you will) there arise Inferences of three sorts. First, of
Direction; for the choice and four properties. ^econdly, of Reproof, for a just
rebuke of such Magistrates four Duties. Thirdly, of Exhortation; four Rules.
Wherein what I shall speak of Magistrates, ought also to be extended and
applied (the due proportion ever observed) to all kinds of officers whatsoever,
Justice. And first for Directions.

Saint Paul says, Romans 13.1.
The powers that are, are ordained of God: and Peter calls the Magistracy an
1 Pet. 2.13.
humane ordinance. Certainly the holy Spirit of God, which speaks in these
two great Apostles, is not contrary to it self. The truth is, the substance of
the power of every Magistrate is the Ordinance of God; and that is Saint Paul's
meaning: but the Specification of the circumstances thereto belonging, as in
regard of places, persons, titles, continuance, jurisdiction, subordination,
and the rest, Peter terms it) an humane ordinance, introduced by Custom, or
positive Law. And therefore some kinds of Magistracy are higher, some lower,
some annual or for a set time, some during life; some after one manner, some
after another: according to the several Laws or Customs whereon they are
grounded. As in other circumstances, so in this concerning the deputation of
the Magistrates person, there is great difference: some having their power by
Succession, others by Nomination, and other some by Election. As amongst us,
the supreme Magistrate, the King, has his Power by succession; nomination, or
special appointment, either immediately, or mediately from the King; as most
of our Judges and Justices: some again by the elections and voices of the
multitude; as most Officers and Governors in our Cities, Corporations, or
Colleges. The Directions which I would infer from my Text, cannot reach the
first kind; because such Magistrates are born to us not chosen by us. They do
concern in some sort, the second; but most nearly the third kind, viz. Those
that are chosen by suffrages and voices: and therefore unto this third kind
only voices are our own, that therefore we may bestow them as we list: neither
must we suffer our selves in a matter of this nature to be carried by favor,
faction, spite, hope, fear, importunity, or any other corrupt and partial
respect, from those Rules, which ought to level our choice. But we must
confer our voices, and our best furtherance otherwise, upon those whom, all
things duly considered, we conceive to be the fittest: and the greater the
place is, and the more the power is we give unto them and from our selves; the
greater voycing to be. It is true indeed, when we have used all our best care,
and proceeded with the greatest caution we can; we may be deceived, and make an
unworthy choice. For we cannot judge of men's fitness by any demonstrative
certainty: all we can do is to go upon probabilities, a conjecturall certainty,
full of uncertainty. Men -- fere maxima (...) morem hunc homines habent: quod
sibi volunt Dum id impetrant, boni sunt; sed id ubi jam penes sese habent, Ex
bonis pessimi and fraudulentissi^i sunt. Plaut^ in Capt. 2.1. Omnes candidatos,
bonos viros dicimus. Senec. Epist. 3.
ambitious and in appetite, till they have obtained their desires, use to
dissemble those vices which might make a stop in their preferments; which,
having once gotten what they fished for, they bewray with greater freedom: and
they use likewise to make a show of that zeal and forwardness in them to do
good, which afterward comes to just nothing. Absalom to steal away the hearts
of the people, (though he were even then most unnaturally unjust in his
purposes, against a father, and such a father; yet he) made show of much
compassion to the injured, and of a desire to do justice. 2 Samuel 15.4
O, says he, that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man that has
any suite or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice. And yet I
doubt not, but if things had so come to pass, he would have been as bad as the
worst. When the Roman Soldiers had in a tumult proclaimed Galba Emperor, they
thought they had done a good days work; every man promised himself so much
good of the new Emperor: But when he was in, he proved no better than those
that had been before him. One gives this censure of him, Tacit. lib. 1. Histor.
Omnium he had been a man in every man's judgment worthy to have been Emperor,
if he had not been Emperor, and so showed himself unworthy. (...)* dictum
Biantis apud Arist. 5. Ethic. 3.
Magistratus indicat virum, is a common saying, and a true. We may guess upon
likelyhoods what they will be, when we choose them: but the thing it self after
they are chosen (...). Plutarch. in Cicerone.
shows the certainty what they are. But this uncertainty should be so far
from making us careless in our choice; that it should rather add so much the
more to our care, to put things so hazardous as near as we can out of hazard.

Rules, that must direct them to govern, must direct us also to choose. And
namely an eye would be had to the four properties specified in my Text. The
first, a Zeal of Justice, and a Delight therein. See thou a man careless of
the common good; one that palpably prefers his own before the public weal;
one that loves his -- nec vulgi cura tyranni, Dum sua sit modo tuta salus.
Valor. Flacc. 5. Argonaut.
ease so well, that he cares not which way things go, backward or forward, so
he may sit still, and not be troubled; one that would divide honorem ab onere,
be proud of the honor and title, and the envy and burden that attends
robes will do well upon him. A Iusticeship, or other office would sit upon such
a man's back as handsomely as 1 Samuel 17.39
Saul's armor did upon David's: unweildy, and sagging about his shoulders; so as
he could not tell how to stir and turn himself under it. He is a fit man to
make a Magistrate of, that will put on The second property is Compassion on the
poor. See thou a man destitute of counsel and understanding; a man of
forlorn hopes or estate, and in whom there is no help; or one that having
either counsel or help in him, is yet a churl of either; but especially one
that is sore in his bargains, cruel in his dealings, hard to his Tenants, or
an Oppressor in any kind? Take none of him. Sooner commit a flock of Sheep to
a O praeclarum custodem, ovium, ut aiunt, lu^um* custosne urbis, an direptor
and vexa^or esset Antonius. Cic. Philipp. 3.
Wolf; than a Magistracy or office of justice to an (...). Iamblich. apud Stob.
Sermon. 14.
Oppressor. Such a man is more likely to put out the eyes of him eyes to the
blind; and to break the bones of the strong, then to be legs to the lame; and
to turn the fatherless a begging, then to be a Father to the poor. The third
property is Diligence to search out the truth. See thou a man hasty, and
rash, and heady in his own businesses; a man impatient of delay or pains; one
that cannot Prove. 29.11.
conceal what is meet, till it be seasonable to utter it, but pours out all
his heart at once, and before the time; one that is easily possessed with what is
first told him, or being once possessed will not with any reason be persuaded to
the contrary; one that lends ear so much to some particular friend or
follower, as to believe information from him, not any but from him; one that,
dispatch, loves to make an end of a business before it be ripe; suspect him.
He will scarce have the Conscience: or if that, yet not the wit, or not the
patience, to search out the cause which he knows not. The last Property is,
Courage to execute. See first; of a degeneres animos timor arguit. Virgil. 4.
Aeneid.
timorous nature, and cowardly disposition? or secondly, of a wavering and
fickle mind: as we say of children; won with an apple, and lost with a nut?
or thirdly, that is apt to be wrought upon, or molded into any form, with
fair words, friendly invitations, or complementall glozes? or fourthly, that
depends fifthly; a taker, and one that may be dealt withal? (for that is now
the periphrasis of bribery) or sixthly; guilty of the same transgressions he
should punish, or of other as foul? Never a man of these is for the turn: not
one of these will venture to break the jaws or tuskes of an oppressing Tygre
or Boar, and to pluck the spoil out of his teeth. The timorous man is afraid
of every shadow, and if he do but hear of teeth, he thinks it is good
sleeping in a whole skin, and so keeps aloof off for fear of biting. James
1.8.
The double minded man, as Saint James says, is unstable in all his ways: he
begins to do jaw can be half broken, he is not the man he was, he is sorry
for what is done, and instead of breaking the rest, falls a binding up that
which he has broken, and so seeks to salve up the matter as well as he can,
and no hurt done. The vain man, that will be flattered, so he get fair words
himself, he cares not who gets foul blows: and so the beast will but now
and then give him a lick with the tongue, he lets him use his teeth upon
others at his pleasure. The depending creature is charmed with a letter or
message from his Lord, or his honorable friend; which to him is as good as a
Supersede as, or Prohibition. The taker has his fingers so oyled, that his
hand slippeth off when he should pluck away the spoil, and so he leaves it
undone. The guilty man by no means likes this breaking of jaws: he thinks
it may be his own case another day.

You see, when you are to choose Magistrates, here is refuse enough, Psalm. 14.3.
There is none that does good, no not one. We must not be so dainty in our
choice then, as to find one in every respect such as has been charactred. We
live not -- dicit enim tanquam in Platonis (...), non tanquam in Romuli faece,
sententiam. de Catone, Cic. 2. ad Artic. 1.
in Republica Platonis, but in faece seculi; and it is well, if we can find one
in some good mediocrity so qualified. Amid the common corruptions of mankind,
he is to be accounted a tolerably good man, that is not intolerably bad: and
among a Magistrate; not that is free from them all, but that has the -- Vit is
n^mo sine nascitur: optimus ille est, Qui minimis urgetur. Hor. 1. sermon. Sat. 3.
fewest and least. And we make a happy choice, if from among those we have to
choose of, we take such a one as is likely to prove in some reasonable
mediocrity zealous of justice, sensible of the wrongs of poor men, careful to
search out the truth of causes, and resolute to execute what he knows is just.

That for Direction. I am next to infer from the four duties in my reproof, and
withal, a complaint of the common iniquity of these times; wherein men in the
Magistracy and in offices of Justice are duties. And first, as for zeal to
justice: alas that there were not too much cause zeal both to Religion and
Justice; the two main pillars and supporters of Church and State. And it
seems to be with us in these regards, as with decaying Merchants almost
become desperate; who when Creditors call fast upon them, being hopeless of
paying all, grow careless of all, and pay none: so abuses and disorders
increase so fast among us; reform all, our Magistrates begin to neglect all,
and in a manner reform nothing. How few are there of them that sit in the seat
of justice, whose consciences can prompt them a comfortable answer to that
Question of David, Psalm. 58. Psalm. 58.1.
Are your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation? Rather are they not
almost all of Gallio's temper, Act. 18. who, though there were a foul outrage
committed even under his nose, and in the sight of the yet the Text says, Acts
18.17.
he cared for none of those things? as if they had their names given them by an
Antiphrasis: like Diogenes his man; Manes a manendo, because he would be now
and then running away; so these Justices a justitia, because they neither do
nor care to do Justice. Peradventure here and there one or two in a whole side
of a Country to be found, that make a conscience of their duty more then the
rest, and are forward to do the best good they can: Gods blessing rest upon
their heads for it. But what comes of it? The rest, glad of their
forwardness, make only this use of it to themselves; even to slip their own
necks out of the yoke, and leave all the burden upon them: and so at length
even tire out them too, by making common packhorses of them. A little it may be
is done by the rest, for fashion, but to little purpose; sometimes more to show
their Iusticeship, then to do justice: and a little more it may be is wrung
from them by importunity; as the poor Luc. 18.4, 5.
widow in the parable by her clamorousnesse wrung a piece of justice with much
ado from the Judge that neither feared God, nor regarded man. Alas, Beloved, if
all were right within, if there were generally that zeal that should be in
Magistrates: good Laws would not thus languish as they do for want of
execution; there would not be that Popish Recusants, that license of Rogues and
wanderers, that prouling of Officers, that enhaunsing of fees, that delay of
suits, that countenancing of abuses, those carkases of depopulated towns,
infinite other mischiefs; which are ( the sins shall I say, or the plagues? it
is hard to say whether more, they are indeed both) the sins and the plagues of
this land. And as for Compassion to the distressed; poverty and sin; when the
greater ones of the earth should most of all enlarge their bowels, and reach
out the hand to relieve the extreme necessity of great men, yea and men of
justice, are as throng as ever in pulling down houses, and setting up hedges;
in unpeopling towns, and creating beggars; in racking the backs, and grinding
the faces of the poor; how dwells the love of GOD, how dwells the spirit of
compassion in these men? Are these eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and
fathers to the poor, as Job was? I know your hearts cannot but rise in
detestation of these things, at the very mentioning of them. But what would you
say, if as it was said to Ezekiel, so I should bid you Ezech. 8.6, 13, 15.
turn again, and behold yet greater and yet greater abominations; oppressions
of the poor by them and their instruments, who stand bound in all conscience,
and in regard of their places, to protect them from the injuries and
oppressions of others? But I forbear to do that; and choose rather out of one
passage in the Prophet Amos, to give you some short intimation both of the Amos
5. v. 12, 13. I know your manifold transgressions, and your Amos 5.1^, 13.
fortia peccata vulg. ibid.
mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside
the poor in the gate from their right: Therefore the prudent shall keep silence
in that time; for it is an evil time. And as for searching out the truth in
which is the third Duty: First, those Sycophants deserve a rebuke, who by false
accusations, and cunningly devised tales, ( Pindar. Olymp. 1.
(...)) of purpose involve the truth of things to set a fair color upon a bad
matter, or to take away the righteousness of the innocent from him. And Courts
of justice? Informing, and promoting, and pettifogging make-bates. Now it were
a lamentable thing if these men should be known, and yet suffered: but what if
countenanced, and encouraged, and underhand maintained by the Magistrates of
those Courts, of purpose to bring Moulter to their own Mills? Secondly, since
Magistrates must be content (for they are but men, and cannot be every where at
once) in many things to see with other men's eyes, and to hear with other men's
ears, and to proceed upon information: those men deserve a rebuke, who ripen
causes for judgment, and to facilitate the Magistrates care and pains for
inquisition; do yet either for fear, or favor, or negligence, or a fee, keep
back true and necessary informations, or else for spite or gain clogge the
Courts with false or trifling ones. But most of all the Magistrates themselves
deserve a rebuke, if either they be hasty to acquit a man upon his own bare
denial or protestation (for si inficiari sufficient, ecqui^ erit nocens? as the
Delphidius Orator contra Numerium; apud Ammian. Marcell. l. 18.
Orator pleaded before Julian the Emperor; if a denial may serve the turn,
none shall be guilty,) or if hasty to condemn a accusation (for si accusasse
sufficient, ecquis erit innocens? as the Emperor excellently replied upon that
Orator; if an accusation may serve the turn, none shall be innocent;) or if
they suffer themselves to be possessed with prejudice, and not keep one ear
open (as they write of Alexander the Great) for the contrary party, that they
may stand indifferent till the truth be thoroughly canvassed; or if to keep
causes long in their hands, they either delay to search the truth out, that
they may know it, or to decide the cause according to the truth, when they have
found it. And as for Courage to execute which is the last Duty: what need we
trouble our selves to seek out the causes, when we see the effects so daily and
cowardice or inconstancy, that he keeps off; or that a fair word whistleth
him off; or that a great man's letter staveth him off; or that his own guilty
conscience doggeth him off, or that his hands are manacled with a bribe, that
he cannot fasten; or whatsoever other matter the Magistrate too often lets
the wicked carry away the spoil, without breaking a jaw of him, or so much as
offering to pick his teeth. It was not well in David's time, (and yet David a
Godly King) when complainingly he asked the Question, Psalm. 94.16.
Who will stand up with me against the evil doers? It was not well in Solomon's
time, (and yet Solomon a peaceable King) when; Eccles. 4.1.
considering the Oppressions that were done under the Sun, he saw that on the
side of the oppressors there was power; but as for the oppressed, they had no
comforter. We live under the happy government of a godly and peaceable King;
Gods holy name be blessed for it: and

the third and last inference, a word of Exhortation; and it shall be but a
word. You whom God has called to any honor or office appertaining to justice;
as you tender the glory of God, and the good of the Commonwealth; as you
tender the honor of the King, and the prosperity of the Kingdom; as you
tender the peace and tranquillity of your selves and neighbors; as you tender
the comfort of your own consciences, and the salvation of your own souls: set
your selves thoroughly and cheerfully duties which belong unto you in your
several stations and callings, and to advance to the utmost of your power the
due administration and execution of Justice. Do not not decline those burdens
which cleave to the honors you sustain. Do not post off those businesses from
your selves to others, which you should rather do then they, or at least may as
well do as they. Stand up with the zeal of Psalm. 106.30.
Phinees, and by executing judgment, help to turn away those heavy plagues,
which God has already begun to bring upon us; and to prevent those yet heavier
ones, which having so rightly deserved, Put on Righteousness as a Garment; and
cloathe your selves with Judgment, Among so many Oppressions, as in these evil
days are done under the Sun; to whom should the fatherless, and the widow,
and the wronged complain but to you, whence seek for relief but from you? Be
not you wanting to their necessities. Let your eyes be open unto their
miseries, and your ears open unto cries, and your hands open unto their wants.
Give friendly Counsel to those that stand need of your Direction: afford
convenient help to those that stand need of your assistance: carry a Fatherly
affection to all those that stand need of any comfort, protection, or relief
from you. Be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: and be you instead of
fathers to the poor. But yet do not countenance, no not Exodus 23.3.
a poor man in his cause, farther than he has equity on his side. Remember
(...).

Nervus est sapientiae, non cito credere. dictum Epicharmi, apud Cic. 1. ad
Attic. 16.

(...). Eurip. in Helen. The simple believe every word. Prove. 14.15.


wisdom, not to be too credulous of every suggestion and information. But do
your best to spy out the chinks, and starting holes, and secret conveyances
and packings of cunning and crafty companions: and when you have found them
out, bring them to light, and do exemplary justice upon them. Sell not your
ears to your servants: nor tie your selves to the informations of some one, or
a few, or of him that comes first; but let every party have a fair and an
equal hearing. Examine proofs: Consider circumstances: be content to hear simple
men (...). Arist. 2. Elench. 10.
tell their tales in such language as they have: think no pains, no patience
too much to sift out the truth. Neither by inconsiderate haste any man's right:
nor weary him out of it by torturing delays. The cause which you know not, use
all diligence, and convenient both care and speed, to search it out. But ever
withal remember your standing is slippery; and you shall have many and sore
assaults, and very shrewd temptations: so that unless you arm your selves with
invincible resolution, you are gone. The wicked ones of this world will conjure
you by your old friendship and acquaintance, and by all the bonds of
neighborhood and kindness: bribe your Wives and Children and Servants to
corrupt you; procure great men's Letters or favorites as engines to move you;
convey a bribe into your own bosoms, but under a handsomer name, and in some
other shape, so cunningly and secretly sometimes, that your selves shall not
know it to be a bribe when you receive it. Harden holy obstinacy, against these
and all other like temptations. Count him an enemy, that will allege
friendship to pervert justice. When you sit in the place of justice, think you
are not now Qui indait personam judicis, ^xuit amici. Cicer.
Husbands, or Parents, or Neighbors; but Judges. Contemn the frowns and the
favors, and the letters of great ones: in comparison of that trust, which
greater ones than they, the King and State, and a yet greater than they, the
great God of heaven and earth, has reposed in you and expects from you.
Rejecit alto dona nocentium vultu. Horat 4. Od. 9.
indignation, if he begin: and if he continue, spit defiance in his face, who
ere he be, that shall think you so base as to sell your Libertatem arguendi
amittit, qui ab eo acc^pit qui ideo dat ne corrigatur. Ambr. in 1 Cor. c. 19.
freedom for a bribe. Gird your sword upon your thigh; and (keeping your
selves ever within the compass of your Commissions and Callings, as the Sun in
the Zodiac) go through stitch, right on in the course of Justice, as the Sun
in the firmament with unresisted violence; and as a Giant that rejoices to run
his race, and who can stop him? Bear not the Romans 13.4.
sword in vain: but let your right hand teach you terrible things. Defend the
poor and fatherless; and deliver the oppressed from them that are mightier then
he: Smite do wrong, that they rise not again: Break the jaws of the wicked, and
pluck the spoil out of his teeth. Thus if you do, the wicked shall fear you,
the good shall bless you, the poor shall pray for you, posterity shall praise
you, your own hearts shall cheer you, and the great God of Heaven shall reward
you. This that you may do in some good measure, the same God of Heaven enable
you: and give you and every of us grace in our his glory, and to endeavor the
discharge of a good conscience. To which God blessed for ever, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one eternal, invisible and only wise God,
be ascribed all the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

Lincoln, 7 March 1624. at the William Lister Esquire then high Sheriff of the
County.
EXODUS 23. ver. 1. -- 3. 1. Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine
hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither shall thou speak in a
cause, to decline after many to wrest judgment.

3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.


THere is no one thing, ( Religion ever excepted,) that secureth and adorneth
the State, than Justice Columna, and Corona Reipublicae, as a Prop to make it
subsist firm in it self; and as a Crown, to render it glorious in the eyes of
others. As the Cement in a building, that Ius and aequitas vincula civitatum.
Cic. Parad. 4.
holds all together, so is Justice to the public Body: as whereunto it owes
a great part both of its strength, (for by it the Prove. 16.12.
throne is established, in the sixteenth) and of its height too; for it Prove.
14.34.
exalts a Nation, in the 14th. of the Proverbs. As then in a Building, when
for want of good looking to, the getting wet dissolveth, and the walls V^nt^osi
p^ri^t^s. P. Bles. Ep 85.
belly out; the house cannot but settle apace, and without speedy repaires fall
to the ground: so there is not a more certain symptom of a declining, and
decaying, and tottering State, than is the general (...). Soph.. in Ajac. ubi
non est pudor, Nec cura juris, Sanctitas, Pictas, Fides; Instabile regnum ^st.
Sen. in Thyest. act. 2.
dissolution of manners for want of the due execution and administration of
Justice.

The more cause have we, that are Gods Ministers, by frequent out of sometimes,
but especially upon such seasonable opportunities as this, to be instant with
all them that have any thing to do in matters of Justice, but especially with
you, who are Romans 13.4.
Gods Ministers too (though in another kind) you who are in Commission to sit
upon the Bench of judicature, either for Sentence or Assistance: to do your God
and King service, to do your Country and Calling honor, to do your selves and
others right, by advancing to the utmost of your powers the due course of
Justice. Wherein as I verily think none dare Irasci mihi nemo poterit, nisi qui
ante de se volu^rit confiteri. Cie. pro lege Manil. Frequenter culpa pupuli
redundat in principem, quasi de majorum negligentia obveniant errata mino^um.
Pet. Blesens. Ep. 95.
but the guilty, so I am well assured none can justly, mislike in us the choice
either of our Argument that we beat upon these things; Method, that we begin
first with you. For, as we cannot be persuaded on the one side, but that we are
bound for the discharge of our duties, to put you in mind of yours: so we
cannot be persuaded on the other side, but that if there were generally in the
greater ones that care and conscience and zeal there ought to be of the common
good, a thousand corruptions rife among inferiors would be, if not wholly
reformed, at leastwise practiced with less connivence from you, confidence in
them, grievance to others.

But right and reason will, that Gal. 6.5.
every man bear his own burden. transferring your faults upon others: so far
be it from us to impute their faults to you, otherwise then as by not doing
your best to Qui non vetat peccare cu^ potest, jubet. Senec. in Troad. In cu^us
manu est ut prohi^^^t, jubet agi, si non prohib^t admitti. Sa^vian. 7. de
provid.
hinder them, you make them yours. For Justice we know is an Engine, that
turns upon many hinges. And to the exercise of judicature, besides the
Sentence, which is properly yours, there are diverse other things required;
Informations, and Testimonies, and Arguings, and Inquests, and sundry
Formalities, which I am neither able to name, nor yet covetous to learn:
wherein you are to rest much upon the faithfulness of other men. In any of
whom if there be, as sometimes there will be, foul and unfaithful dealing,
such as you spy, or cannot help; wrong sentence may proceed from out your
lips, (...). Arist. 8. Top. 111.
without your fault. As in a curious Watch or Clock that moves upon many
wheels, the finger may point a wrong hour, though the wheel that next moves
it be most exactly true; if but some little pin, or notch or spring be out of
order in or about any (...). apud Stob. Ser. 44.
Non fieri potest, quin Principes etiam valde boni iniqua faciant; was then and
ever since, and yet is, and ever will be most true. For say a Judge be never so
honestly minded, never so zealous of the truth, never so careful to do right:
yet if there be a spiteful Accuser that will suggest any thing, or an
audacious Witness that will swear any thing, or a crafty Pleader that will
maintain any thing, or a tame Jury that will swallow any thing, or a craving
Clerk or Officer that for a bribe will foist in any thing; the Judge who is
tied (as it is meet he should) to proceed secundum allegata and probata, cannot
Ipsos justi^iarios, quos vulgariter Errantes, vel Itinerantes dicimus, dum
errata hominum diligenter explorant, frequenter errare contingit. Excessus
namque hominum absconduntur, etc. Pet. Bles. Epist. 25.
with his best care perverted, innocence oppressed, and guilty ones justified.

Out of which consideration, I the rather desired for this Assise-Assembly, to
choose a Text as near as I could of equal latitude with the Assise-Businesse.
For which purpose I could not readily think of any other portion of Scripture,
so proper and full to meet with all sorts of persons and all sorts of abuses,
as these three verses are. Is there either Calumny in the Accuser, or Perjury
in the Witness, or Supinity in the Iurer, or Sophistry in the Pleader, or
Partiality in any Officer; or any close corruption any where lurking amid those
many a judicial proceeding? the offender at the tribunal of that unpartiall
Judge that keeps a privy Sessions in each man's breast.

The words are so laid down distinctly in five Rules or Prec^pts, or negative)
in so many Prohibitions, that I may spare the labor of making other division
of them. All that I shall need to do about them, will be to set out the
several portions in such fort as that every man who has any part or
fellowship in this business may have his due share in them. Art thou first an
Accuser in any a judicial controversy; or bound over a criminal cause, or as
a voluntary informer upon some penal Statute? here is something for thee, Thou
shall not raise a false report. Art thou secondly a Witness: either Process
to give public testimony upon oath; or come of good or ill will, privately to
speak a good word for, or to cast out a shrewd word against any person? here is
something for thee too; Put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous
witness. Art thou thirdly returned to serve as a sworn man, in a matter of
grand Thou shall not follow Come thou hither fourthly to advocate the cause
of thy Client, who flies to thy learning, experience, state and suit to thy
care and trust? here is something for thee too; Neither shall thou speak in a
cause to decline after many to wrest judgment. Art thou lastly in any Office
of trust, or place of service in or about the Courts, so as it may sometimes
fall within thy power or a favor, or a spite? here is something for thee too,
Thou shall not countenance (no not) a poor man in his cause. The two first in
the first, the two next in the second, this last in the third verse.

In which distribution of the offices of justice in my Text, let none below the
bench, that therefore there is nothing left for them that sit upon it. Rather
as in dividing the land of Canaan, Levi, who had Number. 18.20, 21. Deuteronomy. 18.1,
etc.
no distinct plot by himself, having yet (by reason of the Deuteronomy. 33.10.
universal use of his office) in every Tribe something, had in the whole, all
things considered, See Numb. 25.2 -- 83. and Jos. 21.1, etc.
far greater proporrion, then any other Tribe had: So in this Scripture, the
Judge has by so much a larger portion then any of the rest, by how much it is
more diffused. Not concluded within the narrow bounds of any one; but, as the
blood in the body, temperately spread throughout all the parts and members
thereof. Which comes to pass not so much from the immediate construction of
the words (though there have not wanted Lyran hic.
Expositors to fit the words to such construction:) as from that general
inspection, and (if I may so speak) superintendency, which the Judge or
Magistrate ought to have over the carriage of all those other inferior ones. A
great part of duty it is, to observe how the rest do theirs: and to find them
out, and check and punish them as they deserve, when they transgress. So that
with your patience (Honorable, Worshipful, and dearly Beloved) I have
allowance from my Text (if the time would as well allow it) to speak unto you
of five things. Whereof the first concerns the Accuser; the second, the
Witness; the third, the Iurer; the fourth, the Lawyer; and the fifth, the
Officer: and every one of them the Magistrate, Judge, and Iusticer. But having
no purpose to exceed the hour, (as I must needs do if I should speak to all
these to any purpose;) whilst I speak to the first only, I shall desire the
rest to

To our first Rule then, which concerns the Accuser and the Judge; Thou shall
not raise a false report, The Original (...)
verb signifies to take up; as if we should read it, H.A. hic.
Thou shall not take up a false report. And it is a word of larger
comprehension, then most Translatours have expressed it. The full meaning is,
Old English translation hic.
Thou shall not have to do with any false report: neither by Cons^nti^ndo vel
loquendo. Gloss. interlin. hic. Ni falsi rumo^is author, vel adjutor esto. J^n.
in Annot.
raising it, as the Author, nor by spreading it, as the Reporter, nor by
receiving an Approver. But the first fault is in the Raiser: and therefore our
translations have done well to retain that rather in the Text; yet allowing the
Receiver a place in the Margent. Now false reports may be raised of our
brethren by unjust slanders, detractions, backbitings, whisperings, as well out
of the course of judgment, as in it. this Rule reaches even to those
extrajudiciall Calumnies also. But for that I am not now to speak of
extrajudiciall Calumny so much, as of that quae versatur in foro and in
judiciis, those false suggestions and informations which are given into the
Courts, as more proper both to the scope of my Text, and the occasion of this
present meeting: Conceive the words for the present as spoken especially, or at
leastwise as not improperly appliable, to the Accuser. But the Accuser taken
Accusatorem pro omni actore and petitore appello. Cic. in partit. Orat.
at large, for any person that impleadeth another in jure publico vel privato,
in causes either civil or criminal, and these again either capital or penal. No
not the Accused or Defendant excepted: who although he cannot be called in
strict propriety of speech Accuser; yet if when he is justly accused, he seek
to defend himself by false, unjust, or impertinent allegations, he is in our
present intendment to be taken as an Accuser, or as the Raiser and Taker up of
a false report.

But when is a Report false? or what is it to raise such a report? falsehood in
a threefold notion; namely, as it is opposed, not only unto Truth first, but
secondly also unto Ingenuity, and thirdly unto Equity also: accordingly false
reports may be raised three ways. The first and grossest way is, when we --
struunt de proprio calumni as innocentiae. Bern lib. 1. de Consid. prope finem.
feign and devise something of our own truth: creating (as it were) a tale ex
nihilo. As it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 35.11.
They laid to my charge things that I never did: and as Nehemiah sent word to
Sanballat, Nehem. 6.8.
There are no such things as thou say, but thou feignest them of thine own
heart. Cic. act. 2. in Verr. lib. 3.
Crimen domesticum, and vernaculum; a mere device: such as was that of Iezebels
instruments against 3 Reg. 21.10.
Naboth, which cost him his life; and that of Zibah against 2 Samuel 16.3.
Mephibosheth, which had almost cost him all he had. This first kind of Report
is false; as devoyd of Truth.

The second way, (which was so frequently used among the Roman that Non utar
ista accusatoria consuetudine, etc. Cie* Act. 2. in Verr. lib. 5.
Custom had made it not only excusable, but -- quae quoniam accusatorio more
and jure sunt facta, reprehendere non possumus. Cic. p^o Flacco.
allowable; and is at this day of too frequent use both in private and public
calumniations) is, when upon some small ground of truth, we run descant at
pleasure in our own informations, interweaving many untruths among; or
perverting the speeches and actions of our adversaries, to make their matters
ill, when they are not; or otherwise aggravating them to make them seem worse
than they are. As tidings came to David, when Amnon only was slain, that 2 Samuel
13.30
Absalom had killed all the Kings sons. It is an easy and a common thing, by
misconstruction to They daily wrest my words* Psalm* 56.5. -- Nihil est Qui^
male narrando possit depravarier. Terent. in Phorm.
deprave whatsoever is most innocently done or spoken. The Ammonitish Courtiers
dealt so with David, when he sent 2 Samuel 10.2.
Ambassadors to Hanun in kindness, they informed the King as if he had sent
Spies to discover the strength of the City and Land. And the Neh. 6.6, 7. and
Ezra 4.12.
Jews enemies dealt so with those that of devotion repaired the Temple and the
Wall of Jerusalem, advertising the State, as if their purpose had been to
fortify themselves for a Rebellion. Yea and the malicious Jews dealt so with
Christ himself; taking hold of some words of his, about the destroying and
building of the Temple, which he understood of the Ioh. 2.10.21.
temple of his body, and so Mat. 26.61.
wresting them to the fabric of the Material Temple, as to make them serve to
give color to one of the strongest accusations they had against him. This
second kind of Report is false, as devoid of Ingenuity.

third way is, when taking advantage of the Law, we prosecute the extremity
thereof against our brother, who perhaps has done something contrary to the
letter of the Law, but not violated the intent of the Lawgiver, or offended
either against common Equity, (...). Epicte^. apud Stob. Sermon. 143. nosdegem
bonam ^ mala nulla alli a nisi naturali norma. dividere possumus. Cic. lib. 1
de legib. Quod fit injuste, nec jure fieri pit^st. Non enim jura dicenda sunt,
vel putanda, iniqua hominum constitu^^. Aug. l. 9. de Civit. 21
measure of just Laws, or against the common good, which is in some sort the
Atque ipsa utilitas justi. prope (...) and aequi. Horat. 1. sermon. 3 -- ex aequo
and bonojus const^t, quod ad veritatem and util^tatem commun^m videtur
pertinere. Cic. ad Herenn. lib. 2.
measure of Equity. In that multitude of Laws, which for the repressing of
disorders, and for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity among men, must
needs be in every well-governed Commonwealth, it cannot be avoided, but that
honest men, especially if they have much dealings in the world, may have
sometimes just and necessary cause to do that, which in regard of the thing
done may bring them within the compass of some Statute or branch of a statute;
yet such as, circumstances duly considered, no wise and indifferent man but
would well approve of. Now, if in rigor should be used, Laws intended for the
benefit, should by such hard construction become the bane of humane society. As
Solomon says, Prove. 30.33.
Qui torquet nasum, elicit sanguinem; He that wringeth the nose too hard,
forces blood. Guilty this way are not only those contentious spirits, whereof
there are too many in the world, with whom there is no more ado, but a Word
and an Action, a Trespass and a Process: But most of our common Informers
withal, Sycoph^nts you may call them (for that was their old name) like Verres
his Canes v^naleci. Cic. in Vetrinis-s^epe.
bloodhounds in Tully, that lie in the wind for game, and if they can but trip
any man upon any breach of a penal Statute, there teeth, and tugge him into
the Courts without help* unless he will dare offam Cerbero, (for that is it
they look for) give them a sop, and then they are charmed for that time.
Zacheus, besides that he was a Publicane, was it seems such a kind of
Informer, (...), is the word Luke 19. If I have played the Sycophant with any
man, if I have wronged any man by forged cavillation, or wrung any thing from
him by false accusation. A report of this third kind is false as devoid of
equity.

Luke 19 8. Si qu^d^^^i per calumniam ^ripui. apud. Tert. 4. cont. Ma^c. 37.
But it may be thought I injure these men, in making them raisers of false
reports; and am my self a false accuser of them, whilst I seek false accusers
of others: when as they dare appeal to the world, they report not any thing
but what is most true, and what prove so to be. At once to answer them, and
clear my self; know that in Gods estimation, and to common intendment in the
language of Scripture, it is all one to speak an untruth, truth in undue time,
and place, and manner, and with undue circumstances. One instance shall make
all this most clear. Doeg the Edomite, one of the 1 Samuel 21.7.
servants of the house of Saul, saw when David went into the house of Ahimelech
the Priest, and how Ahimelech there entertained him, and what kindness he did
for him: of all which he 1 Samuel 22.9, etc.
afterward gave Saul particular information, in every point according to what
he had seen. Wherein, though he spoke no more than what was true, and what he
had seen with his own eyes: yet because he did it with an intent to bring
mischief upon Ahimelech, who had done nothing but what well became an honest
man to do, David lies, and tells him he had a false tongue of his own for it,
Psalm. 53. [ Psalm. 52.2- 4.
Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
rasour: Thou have loved unrighteousness more then goodness, and to talk of
lies more then righteousness: thou have loved all words that may do hurt, O
thou false tongue.] Conclude hence; he that tells the truth where it may do
hurt, but especially if he tell it with that purpose and to that end that it
may do hurt, he has a false tongue, and he tells a false lie, and he must
pardon us if we take him for no better than the raiser of a false report.

We see what it is to raise a false report: let us now see what a fault first
Accuser that ever was in the world, was a false Accuser: and that was the
Devil. Who as he began betimes, for he was a John 8.44.
liar from the beginning: so he began aloft; for the first false report he
raised, was of the most High. Unjustly accusing God himself unto our mother Eve
in a Genesis 3.1, 4, 5
few words of no fewer than three great crimes at once, Falsehood, Tyranny, and
Envy. He was then a slanderous accuser of his Maker; and he has continued ever
since a malicious accuser of his Apoc. 19.6, 10.
Brethren: Satan, (...), etc. he has his name from it in most languages.
Slanderers, and Backbiters, and false Accusers may here hence learn to take
knowledge of the rock whence pedigree. We may not deny them the ancienty of
their descent; though they have small cause to boast of it; semen serpentis,
the spawn of the old Serpent; John 8.44.
children of their father the Devil. And they do not shame the store they come
of; for the works of their Father they readily do. That Hellish Aphorism they
so faithfully practice, is one of his Principles: it was he first instilled it
into them, Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit, Jer. 18.18.
Smite with the tongue, and be sure to smite home; and then be sure either the
grief, or the blemish of the stroke, will stick by it.

A Devilish practice, hateful both to God and Man. And that most the sin, or
the injury, or the mischief of it: the Sin in the Doer, the Injury to the
Sufferer, the Mischief to the Commonwealth. Every false report raised in
judgment, besides that it is a lie; and every lie is a sin against the truth,
Wisd. 1.11.
slaying the soul of him that makes it, and Apoc. 22.15
excluding him from heaven, and binding him over unto Apoc. 22.8.
the second death: it is also a pernicious lie, lies; and so a sin both against
Charity and Justice. Which who so commits, let him never look to Psalm. 15.1,
3.
dwell in the Tabernacle of God, or to rest upon his holy Mountain: GOD having
threatened, Ps. 50. to take special knowledge of this sin; and though he seem
for a time to dissemble it, yet at lest to reprove the bold offender to his
face. Psalm. 50.19. -- 21.
[ Thou satest and spakest against thy brother: yea and have slandered thine
own mothers son. These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest wickedly, that I was even such an one as thy self; but I will
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.]

the Injury done hereby to the grieved party, it is incomparable. house broken,
or his purse taken from him by the high way, or sustain any wrong or loss in
his person, goods, or state otherwise, by fraud, or violence, or casualty: he
may possibly either by good fortune hear of his own again and recover it, or he
may have restitution and satisfaction made him by those that wronged him, or by
his good industry and providence he may live to see that loss repaired, and be
in as good state as before. But he that has his Name, and Credit, and
Reputation causlesly called into question, sustaineth a loss by so much
greater then any theft, by how much Prove. 21.1.
a good name is better than great riches. A man may out-weare other outlive
them: but a defamed person no acquittall from the Judge, no satisfaction from
the Accuser, no following endeavors in himself can so restore in integrum, but
that when the wound is healed, he shall yet carry the marks and the scarres of
it to his dying day.

Great also are the mischiefs that hence redound to the commonwealth.
innocence can protect an honest quiet man, but every busy base fellow that
owes him a spite shall be able to fetch him into the Courts, draw him from the
necessary charge of his family and duties of his calling, to an unnecessary
expense of money and time, torture delays, and expose him to the pillage of
every hungry Officer. It is one of the grievances God had against Jerusalem,
and as he calls them abominations, for which he threatens to judge her,
Ezekiel. 22. Viri detractores in te. Ezekiel. 22.9.
In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.

Assizes, or hereafter may be, to be Plaintiffs, Accusers, Informers, or any
way Parties in any Court of Justice, this or other, Civil or Ecclesiastical:
that you suffer not the guilt of this prohibition to cleave unto your
Consciences. If you shall hereafter be raisers of false reports, Ignorance
either Facti or Iuris; as having been instructed both what it is, and how great
a fault it is to raise a false report. Resolve therefore, if you be free, never
to enter into action or suite, wherein you cannot proceed with comfort, nor
come off without injustice: or if already engaged, to make as good and speedy
an end as you can of a bad matter, and to desist from farther prosecution. Let
that golden rule, (commended by the wisest (...). apud. Stob. Sermon. 2. Idque
per praecoaem, cum aliquem emendaret, dici jubebat, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris. Quam sententiam usque adeo dilexit, ut and in Palatio, and
in publicis operibus praescribi juberet. de Alex. Severo Lamprid. in Alex.
heathens as a fundamental Principle of moral and civil Justice; yea and
proposed by our blessed Savior himself as a full abridgement of the Mat. 7.12.
Law and Prophets,) be ever in your eye, and ever before your thoughts, to
measure out all your actions, and accusations, and proceedings thereby: even to
do so to other men, and no otherwise, then as you could be content, or in right
reason should be content, they and yours, if their case were yours. Could any
of you take it well at your neighbors hand, should he seek your life or
livelihood by suggesting against you things which you never had so much as the
thought to do? or bring you into a peck of troubles, by wresting your words and
actions wherein you meant nothing but well, to a dangerous construction: or
follow the Law upon you, as if he would not leave you worth a groate, for every
petty trespass, scarce worth half the money? or fetch you over the hippe upon
a branch of some blind, uncouth, and pretermitted Statute? He that should deal
thus with you and yours. I know what would be said and thought: Griper,; all
this and much more would be too little for him. Well, I say no more but this,
Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. Do as you would be done to. There is your
general Rule.

But for more particular direction, if any man desire it; since in every evil,
one good step to soundness is to have discovered the right cause sycophancy
and false accusation, then for every man carefully to avoid the inducing causes
thereof, and the occasions of those causes. There are (God knows) in this
present wicked world, to every kind of evil, inducements but too too many. To
this false accusation therefore it is not unlikely, but there may be more: yet
we may observe that there are four things, which are the most ordinary and
frequent causes thereof; viz. Malice, Obsequiousness, Coverture, and
Covetousness.

The first is Malice. Which in some men (if I may be allowed to men, being
indeed rather Monsters) is universal. They love no body: glad when they can do
any man any mischief in any matter: never at so good quiet, as when they are
most unquiet. It seems David met with some such; men that were Ps. 120.6, 7.
enemies to peace: when he spoke to them of peace, they made themselves ready
to battle. Take one of meat and drink to him, which to a well-minded Christian
is as Gall and Wormwood, to be in continual suits. Virg. Eclog. 3.
Et si non aliqud nocuisset, mortuus esset: he could not have kept himself in
breath, but by keeping Terms; nor have lived to this hour, if he had not been
in Law. Such cankered dispositions as these, without the more than ordinary
mercy of God, there is little hope to reclaim: unless very want, when they
have spent and undone themselves with wrangling malice reigns not so
universally, yet are they so far carried with private spleen and hatred
against some particular men for some personal respect or other, as to seek
their undoing by all means they can. Out of which hatred and envy they raise
false reports of them: that being in their judgments (as it is indeed,) the
most speedy, and the most speeding way, to Quare solent inimici mentiri? ut
potentiam cujusque m^nuant de quo mentiuntur. Aug. in Ps. 65.
do mischief with safety. This made the Presidents and Princes of Persia to
Dan. 6.3, 5.
seek an accusation against Daniel; whom they envied because preferred him
above them. And in all ages of the world wicked and profane men have been
busy to suggest the worst they could, against those that have been faithful
in their callings; especially in the callings of the Magistracy or Ministry:
that very faithfulness of theirs being to the other a sufficient ground of
malice. To remedy this, take the Apostles rule, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.15.
Look diligently lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled. Submit your selves to the word and will of God in the
Ministry; submit your seles to the power and ordinance of God in the
Magistracy; submit your selves to the good pleasure and providence of God in
disposing of malice or envy to any of your brethren, to raise false reports of
them.

second Inducement is Obsequiousness. When either out of a base fear of
displeasing some that have power to do us a displeasure, or out of a baser
Ambition to scrue our selves into the service or favor of those that may
advance us; we are content, though we owe them no private grudge otherwise, yet
to become officious accusers of those they hate, but would not be seen so to
do: so making our selves as it were baudes unto their lust, and open
instruments of their malice. Out of that base fear, the 3 King. 21.11
Elders of Iesreel, upon the Queens Letter, whom they durst not displease,
caused an accusation to be framed against innocent Naboth. And out of this base
Ambition, 2 Samuel 22.9.
Doeg to pick a thank with his Master, and to endeare himself farther into his
good opinion, told tales of David and Ahimelech. To remedy this, remember the
service and offices you owe to the greatest Masters upon earth, have their
bounds set them which they may not pass. (...). Pericles apud Agell. 1. Noct.
3.
Usque ad aras: the Altar-stone that is the Meere-stone; and Justice has her
Altars too, as well as Religion hers. Go as far then as you can in offices of
love and service to your friends and betters, salvis pietate and justitia: but
not a step farther for a world. If you seek to Gal. 1.10.
please men beyond this, you cannot be the servants of God.

Coverture is the third Inducement. And that is, when either to our own cause
the better we seek to bring envy and prejudice upon our adversaries, by making
his seem worse: or when being guilty, we think to Sce^re velandum est seclus*
Sen. in Hippol. Act 2.
cover our own crimes, and to prevent the accusations of others by getting the
start of them, and accusing them first. As Genesis 39.17.
Potiphars wife accused Joseph, and the Dan. 13.
Elders Susannah, of such crimes, as they were innocent of, and themselves
guilty. An old trick, by which C. Verres like a cunning Colt often help
himself at a pinch, when he was Praetor of Sicily; as Cic. in. Verr. passim.
Cicero declares against him by many instances, and at large. For sithence the
Laws in most cases rather favor the Plaintiff; because it is presumed men
should not complain without grievance: we may think perhaps to get this
advantage to our selves, and so rather choose to be Plaintiffes then
Defendants, because (as Solomon says) Prove. 18.7.
He that is first in his own tale seems righteous. To remedy this; Do nothing
but what is just, and justifiable: be sure your matters be good and right: they
will then bear out themselves well enough, without standing need to such damned
shifts for support.

But the fourth thing is that, which causes more mischief in this kind, then
all the rest. That which the Apostle calls 1 Timothy 6.10. -- scelerum m^trem.
Claud. 2. de laud. Stillic. Inde fer^ scelerum caus^^ -- Juven. Sat. 14.
the root of all and which were it not, there could not be the hundredth part of
those suites, and troubles, and wrongs; which now there are, done under the
Sun: Even the greedy worm of Covetousness, and the thirst filthy lucre. For
though men be wicked enough, and prone to mischief of themselves but too much:
yet are there even in corrupt nature such impressions of the common principles
of justice and equity, that men would not often do great wrongs Maximam partem
ad injuriam facienda^ aggrediuntur nonnulli* ut adipiscantur ea qu^
concupiver^nt: In quo vitio latissime patet ava^^^^o. Cic. ^^. 1. de offic. Sic
vita bominum est, ut ad maleficium nemo conetur sinespe atque emolumento
accedere. Gic. pro Sex. Roscio- part vilissima rer^^, Certamen movistis opes.
Lucan. lib. 3. (...). Diphilus apud Stob. sermon. 8.
gratis, and for nothing. If Zibah slander his Master falsely and
treacherously; it is in a hope of getting the living from him. And it was
Naboths Vineyard, not blasphemy, that made him guilty. Those sinners that
conspired against the innocent, Pro. 1. [ Pro. 1.12, 13.
Come let us lay wait for blood, let us ^^rke privily for the innocent without
a cause: Let us swallow them up, etc.] They had their end in it: and what that
was the next following words discover, We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil. And most of our prouling Informers, like
those old Sycophants in Athens, or the Quadruplatores in Rome; do they aim
think you so much at the execution of good Laws, the punishment of offenders,
and the reformation of abuses, as at the prey, and the booty, and to get a
piece of money to themselves? For let the offense be what it will, deal but
with them: and then no more speech of Laws or Abuses, but all is hushed up in a
calm silence, and no harm done. To remedy this; as John Baptist said to the
Soldiers in Luke 3. Luke 3.14.
Accuse no man falsely ((...), is the word there too) and be content with your
wages: content your selves with your own estates, and covet not Exodus 20.1^.
his Ox or his Ass, his land or his money, or any thing that is his. Reckon
nothing your own, that is not yours by fair and just means: nor think that can
prosper with you and yours, that was wrung from another by Cavi^ or Calumny.

I have now done with you that are Accusers: whose care must be, the
Text-reading, not to raise a false report. But the Margent remembers me, there
are others whom this prohibition concerns besides you, or rather above you;
whose case it must be not to receive a false report. A thing so weighty, and
withal so pertinent to the general argument of this Scripture, that some
Translations have passed it in the Text. And the Original word comprehends
it. For albeit the Raiser indeed be the first taker up (...). Septuag. Non
suscipies vocem mendacit. Vulg. edit. Thou shall not receive a false report.
Genev. -- hunc sensum sequitur Chaldaeus, Vatabl.
yet the Receiver takes it up too, at the second hand. As it is commonly said
of stolen goods, There would be no thieves, if there were no receivers; and
therefore some Laws have made the (...). Phocyl.
Receiver equal thief with the Stealer, (...): so certainly there would be
fewer false reports raised in judgment, if they were more sparingly received.
And therefore in this case also the Receiver must go pari passu with the
Raiser: who, if he give way or countenance to a false report when he may refuse
or hinder it, by being an Accessory makes himself a Party; and becomes Non
solum ille reus est qui falsu^ de aliquo profert; sed and is qui cito aurem
criminibuc praebet. Isid. l. 3. de summo bono.
guilty of the same sins, the same wrongs, the same mischiefs with the first
offender, the false Accuser. David as he inveigeth against Doeg in the Psalm. 52.
Psalm for telling: so he 1 Samuel 24.9.
elsewhere expostulateth with Saul for hearing unjust reports of him. The
Raiser and Receiver are both possessed with the same evil spirit: they have
(...). Thucyd. apud. Stob. Sermon. 40.
Devil, the same Familiar; only here is the difference, The Raiser has this
Familiar in his tongue, the Receiver in his ear. Whosoever then sits in the
place of Magistracy and public judicature in foro externo, or is by virtue of
his calling otherwise invested with any jurisdiction or power to hear and
examine the accusations of others: I know not how he shall be able to discharge
himself in foro interno from a kind of Champerty (if my ignorance make me not
abuse the word) or at leastwise from misprision of Calumny and unjust
accusations; if he be not reasonably careful of three things.

First, let him beware how he takes private informations. Men are partial;
and will not tell their own tales but with favor, and unto advantage. And it
is so with most men; the Prove. 18.17. Est vitium, cujus si te immunem sentis,
inter omnes quos novi, ex his qui Cathedras ascendunt, sedebis me judice
sclitarius. -- Facilitas ^redulitatis haec est: cujus callidissimae vulpeculae
Magnorum neminem comperi satis cavisse versutias. Bern. 2. de consid. in finc.
first tale possesses them so, as they hear the next with prejudice: than
which there is not a -- ind^ eis ipsis pro nihilo irae multae, inde innocentium
frequens addictio, inde pr^^judicia in absentes. Bernard. ibid.
sorer enemy to right and indifferent judgment. A point so material, that some
Expositors make it a thing principally intended in this first branch of my
Text, Lyr. hic.
Ut non audiatur una pars sine alia, says Lyra. Suitors will be impudent, to
forestall the public hearing by private informations: even to the Judge
himself, if the access be easy; or at leastwise (which indeed makes less
noise, but is nothing less pernicious) to his servant or favorite that has
his ear, if servant or favorite. He therefore that would resolve not to
receive a false report, and be sure to hold his private; (for a thousand to one
that is a false one) or, where he cannot well avoid it, to be ready to receive
the information of the adverse part withal; either (...). Demosth. de cor.
both or neither, but indeed rather neither: to keep himself by all means equal
and entire for a public hearing. Thus much he may assure himself; there is no
man offers to possess him with a cause beforehand, be it right, be it
wrong; who does not either think him unjust, or would have him so.

Secondly, let him have the conscience first, and then the patience too the The
righteous consi^ereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked regards not to
know it. Prove. 29.7.
conscience, certainly he will have the patience) to make search into the truth
of things: and not be dainty of his pains herein, though matters be intricate,
and the labor like to be long and irksome, to find out if it be possible the
bottom of a business, and where indeed the fault lies first or most. It was a
great oversight in a good King, for 2 Samuel 16.4.
David to give away Mephibosheths living from him to his Accuser, and that upon
the bare credit of his accusation. It had been more for his honor, to have
done Job 29.16.
as Job did before him, to have searched out the cause he knew not; and as his
son 3 King. 3.23
Solomon did after him in the cause of the two Mothers. Solomon well Prove. 25.
that it was Prove. 25.2.
the honor of Kings to search out a matter. God as he has vouchsafed Princes
and Magistrates his own Psalm. 82.6.
name: so he has vouchsafed them his own example in this point. An example in
the story of the Law, Genesis 18. where he did not presently give judgment
against Genesis 1^.20, 21. quo exemplo moniti, ne ad proferendam sententiam -- aut
tem^re indiligenterque indiscussa quaeque quoquo modo judicemus: sed exemplo
Domini descendamus, videamus, and justo examine criminosos diligenter
perscrutemur. Council. Trid. c. 22.
Sodom upon the cry of their sins, that was come up before him: but he would
go down first and see whether they had done altogether according to that cry;
and if not, that he might know it. An example also in the Gospel-story, Luc.
16. under the parable of the rich man: whose first work, when his Steward was
accused to him for embezeling his goods, was Luke 16.2.
examine his accounts. What through Malice, Obsequiousness, Coverture, and
Covetousness, counterfeit reports are daily raised: and there is much cunning
used by those that raise them, much odd shuffling and packing, and combining
to give them the color and face of perfect truth. As then a plain
Countryman, that would not willingly be cousened in his pay, to take a slip
for a current piece, or brass for silver, leisurely turns over every piece
he receives; and if he suspect any one more than the rest, vieweth it, and
ringeth it, and smells to it, and bends it, and rubbeth it, so making up of
all his senses as it were one natural touchstone, whereby to try it: such
jealousy should the Magistrate use, and such industry, especially where there
appears cause of suspicion, by all means to sift and to bolt out the truth,
if he would not be cheated with a false report instead of a true.

Thirdly, let him take heed he do not give countenance or encouragement,
contentious persons, known Sycophants, and common Informers. If there should be
no Accusers to make complaints, Offenders would be no offenders, for want of
due Correction; and Laws would be no Laws, for want of due Execution. Informers
then are Accusatores multos esse in civitate utile est, ut metu contineatur
audacia: veruntamen hoc ita est utile, ut non plane illudamur ab accusatoribus.
Ibid.
necessary in a Commonwealth, as Dogs are about your houses and yards. If any
man mislike the comparison, let him know it is Nihil mali est canes ibi
quamplurimos esse, ubi permulti observandi, multaque servanda sunt. Cic. pro
Sex. Roscio.
Cicero's simily, and not mine. It is not amiss, says that great and wise
Orator, there should be some store of Dogs about the house, where many goods
are laid up to be safe kept, and many false knaves haunt to do mischief; to
guard those, and to watch these the better. But if those Canes aluntur in
Capitolio, ut significent si fures venerint -- Quod si luce quoque canes
latrent, cum Deos salutatu^ aliqui venerint: opinor iis crura suffringantur,
etc. Ibid.
Dogs should make at the throat of every man that comes near the house, at
honest rate them off, and if that will not serve the turn, well favouredly beat
them off, yea, and (if after all that they still continue mankeen) knock out
their teeth, or break their legs, to prevent a worse mischief. Magistrates are
petty Gods, God has lent them his name, Psalm. 82.6.
Dixi Dii, I have said ye are Gods, Ps. 82. and false Accusers are petty
Devils; the Devil has borrowed their name, Apoc. 12.9, 10. D^ ipso etiam
nomine Diaboli delatorem. Tertul. de anima. c. 35.
Satan (...) the accuser of his brethren. For a Ruler then or Magistrate to
countenance a Sycophant, what is it else, but as it were to pervert the course
of nature, and to make God take the Devils the common cry? People, as they are
suspicious, will be talking parlously and after their manner: Sure, say they,
the Magistrates are sharers with these fellows in the adventure; these are but
their setters, to bring them in gain, their instruments and Emissaries to toll
grist to their mills for the increasing of their moulter. He then that in the
place of Magistracy would decline both the fault and suspicion of such unworthy
Collusion: it stands him upon with all his best endeavors by chaining and
muzling these beasts to prevent them from biting where they should not; and, if
they have fastened already, Job) Job 29.17.
To pluck the prey from between their teeth, and by exercising just severity
upon them to break their jaws for doing farther harm.

subordinate Magistrates power, which must be bounded by his Commission and by
the Laws, may extend this way. Yet some few things there are, which I cannot
but propose, as likely good helps in all reason and in themselves, for the
discountenancing of false Accusers, and the lessening both of their number and
insolency. Let every Magistrate take it into his proper consideration; whether
his Commission and the Laws give him power to use them all, or no, and how far.

first; for the avoiding of Malicious suites, and that men should not be
brought into trouble upon slight informations: I find that aamong Cael. ad
Cicer. 8. fam. Epist. 8. vide l. 7. and l. 13. Sect. qui damni ^f. de damno
infect. In omnibus causis, sive -- sancimus non aliter -- N^si prius qui eas
exposcunt, juramentum de calumnia praestiterint, quod non, etc. l. Vnic. Cod.
de jure jurando propter calumn.
Romans the Accuser in most cases might not be admitted to put in his libell,
until he had first taken his corporal oath before the Praetor, that he was
free from all malicious and Calumnious intent. Certain it is, as daily
experience shows, that many men who make no conscience of a lie, do yet take
some Nam sacram^nti timore contentiosa litigantium instantia compescitur.
Ibidem. (...). Sophocl.
bog at an Oath. And it cannot but open a wide gap to the raising and receiving
of false reports, and to many other abuses of very noisome consequence in the
Commonweal; if the Magistrate when he may help it, to enrich himself or his
officers, or for any other indirect end, shall suffer men to be impleaded and
brought into trouble upon Bills and Presentiments

Secondly, since Laws cannot be so conceived, but that through particular men:
and yet for the preventing of more general inconveniences it is necessary
there should be Laws (for better a mischief sometimes, then always an
Inconvenience:) there has been left, for any thing I find to the contrary, in
all well-governed policies, a kind of latitude more or less, and power in the
Magistrates, strictissimi juris, upon fit occasion to qualify and to Soleo
audire in potestate esse judicis mollire sententiam, and mitius vindicare quam
jubeant leges. Aug. Epist. 15^
mitigate something the rigor of the Laws by the Rules of Equity. For I know
not any extremity of Summum jus, summa injuria. Ib. (...). Arist. 5. E^h. ^0.
Wrong beyond the extremity of Right: when Laws intended for fences are made
snares, and are calumniously wrested to oppress that innocence which they
should protect. And this is most properly Existunt etiam saepe injuriae ca^um^
a ^uadam, and nimis callid^, sed malitiosa interpretatione. Cic. l. 1. de
offic. Scriptum sequi, c^lumniatoris esse; boni judicis, voluntat^m scriptoris,
authoritat^mque defendere. Id. pro A. Cecin.
Calumny in the prime notion of the word, for a man upon a mere trick or
quillet from the Aucupia verborum, and literarum t^ndiculae. Cic. pro A. Cecinn.
letters and syllables of the Law, or other writing, or evidence, pressed with
advantage, to bring his action or lay his accusation against another man; who
yet bona fide, and in Equity and Conscience, has the Magistrate of Justice
shall use his full power, by interpreting the Law in rigor where he should
not, to second the boldness of a calumnious Accuser: or if he shall not use
his full power, by affording his lawful favor in due time and place, to
succor the innocence of the so accused: he shall thereby but give
encouragement to the Raisers, and he must look to answer for it one day, as the
Receiver of a false Report.

Thirdly, since that Justice which especially supporteth the Commonweal,
consists in nothing more then in the right distribution of rewards and
punishments: many Lawgivers have been careful, by proposing rewards, to
encourage men to give in true and needful informations, and on the contrary to
suppress those that are false or idle by proposing punishments. For the
Informers office, though it be necessary, yet it is in truth a very thanklesse
office: and men would be loath, without special grievance, to undergo the
hatred and envy, which commonly attends such as are officious that profit
mixed withal to sweeten that hatred, and to countervaile that envy. For which
cause in most Penal Statutes, a moity, or a third, or Quartam accusatoribus
secundum necessitudin^m l^gis. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal.
fourth (which was the usual proportion in Rome, whence the name of
Quadruplatores, accusatores, seu d^latores criminum Publicoru^, sub poena
quadrupli^sive quod ipsi ^x damnatorum bonis quos accusaverant, quartam partem
cons^quebantur. Ascon. in Ver. See Fest. in Quadruplatore; Turneb. 3. Adver. 9.
Lips. in Lib. 4. Ann. Taciti. Bisciol. 14. subses. 15.
quadruplatores came) or some other greater or lesser part of the fine,
penalty, or forfeiture expressed in the Law, is by the said Law allowed to the
Informer, by way of recompense for the service he has done the State by his
information. And if he be faithful and conscionable in his office, good reason
he should have it. For he that has an Office in any Lawful calling (and the
Informers calling is such; howsoever through the iniquity of those
Quadruplator, ut breviter describam, capitalis est. Est enim imorobus and
pestifere vis. Cic. lib. 2. ad Heren.
ill name:) but he that has such an office; as it is meet he should attend it,
so it is meet it should maintain him, for 1 Cor. 9.7.
Who goes to warfare at any time of his own cost? But if such an Informer
shall indict one man for an offense, pretending it to be done to the great hurt
of the Commonweal, and yet for favor, fear, or a fee balk Aequitas in
paribus causis paria jura d^siderat. Cic. in Top. Quis hoc statuit, quod aequum
sit in Quintium, id iniquum esse in Nevium? Id. pro. Quin.
another man whom he knows to have committed the same offense, or a greater;
or if having entered his complaint in the open Court, he shall afterward let
the suite fall, and take up the matter in a private Chamber: this is
Praevaricatio est accusatoris corruptela abreo. Cic. in pa^tit. orat --
Praevaricatorem cum ^sse ^stendimus qui colludit cum reo, and translatit^e
munere accusandi desungitur. Mar. in lib. 1. ff. ad Sen atusc. Turpil.
Collusion; and so far forth a false report, as every thing may be called false
partial, and should be entire. And the Magistrate, if he have power to
chastise such an Informer, some semblance whereof there was in that V. Plin. 3.
Epist. 9. lib. 1. ff. ad Senatus. V. Turpil. Rosin. 9. Antiqu. Romans 25.
Iudicium Praevaricationis in Rome, he shall do the Commonwealth good service,
and himself much honor, now and then to use it.

Fourthly, since nothing is so powerful to repress audacious Accusers,
Punishment is; it is observable what care and caution was used among the Romans
whilst that State flourished, to deter men from unjust Calumniations. In
private and civil Controversies, for trial of right between party and party,
they had their V. Ascon. in Ve^tin. 3.
Sponsiones: which was a sum of money in some proportionable rate to the
value of the thing in Question; which the Plaintiff entered bond to pay to the
Defendant in case he should not be able to prove his Action; the Defendant also
making the like sponsion and entering the like bond, in case he should be cast.
But in public and criminal matters, whether Capital or Penal, if for want
of due proof on the Accusers accused were quit in judgment; there went a trial
upon the Accuser, at the suite of the Accused, which they called Iudicium
Calumniae: v. l. 1. Sect. 2, etc. ff. ad Senatusc. Turpil. Rosin. 9. Antiqu.
Romans 25.
wherein they examined the original ground and foundation of the Accusation.
Which if it appeared to have proceeded from some just error or mistake bona
fide, it excused him: but if should appear the accusation to have proceeded
from some left handed respect, as Malice, Envy, Gain, etc. he was then
condemned of Calumny. And his ordirnary punishment then was, whereunto he had
virtually bound himself by subscribing his libel, Poena talionis, the same kind
of punishment whatsoever it was, which by the Laws had been due to the party
accused, if the libell had been proved against him. Yea and for his farther
shame it was provided by Lege Rommia v. l. 1. sec. 2. ff. ad Senatusc. Turpil.
and Gothifred. in ann^t. ibi; Rosin. 8. Antiqu. Romans part. 2. cap. 22.

-- literam illam ita v^h^menter ad caput affigent, etc. Cicer. pro Rex. Rosc.


one Law, that he should be burnt in the forehead with the Letter K. to
proclaim him a Calumniator to the world: that, in old Orthography, being the
first letter of the word Kalumnia. The same letter would serve the turn very
well with us also, though we use it to signify another thing; and yet not care
and severity in them could not prevent it, but that still unjust actions would
be brought, and false accusations raised, what a world of unconscionable suits
and wrongful informations may we think there would be, if contentious
Plaintiffs and calumnious Sycophants, when they have failed their proof, should
yet get off easily, and escape out of the Courts without Censure or Punishment,
or at the most but with some light check; and the poor injured innocent the the
utmost farthing? I say not of what is due, but of what shall be demanded by
every man that has but a piece of an office about the Courts. It is a strong
heartning to Accusers, and multiplieth false reports beyond belief; when they
that are wrongfully accused, though the cause go with them, shall yet have the
worst of the day: and shall have cause to answer the congratulations of their
friends, as (...). Plutarch. in Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus did his after he had gotten two famous victories over the Romans, that
if they should get a few more such victories, it would be to their utter
undoing. If the Magistrate had power to make the wronged party full
restitution, costs and damages to a halfpenny; nay if he had power to allow
him double or treble out of his unjust adversaries estate: it were all little
enough, and but too little. Zacheus took himself bound to do more: when for
this very sin of false accusation he imposed upon himself, as a kind of
satisfactory penance, Luke 19.8.
a fourfold restitution, Luc. 19. Here was a right Quadruplator indeed; and in
the best sense: you shall not lightly read of such another.

Lastly, men have not Lucian in Hermo^.
fenestrata pectora, that we can see them thoroughly and within: yet there want
not means of probable discovery. gestures, by their speeches, by their
companions. But Magistrates and great ones, who live more in the eye of the
world, and are ever as it were upon the stage, and so do personati incedere,
walk under a continual disguise in respect of their outward deportment; are
not so well discoverable by those means. They are best known by their Sira^.
10.2.
servants retinue, by their favorites and officers, by those they keep about
them, or employ under them. If these be plain and downright, if these be just
and upright, if these be free and conscionable: Sycophants will pluck in their
horns, and be out of heart and hope to find the Masters of such servants facile
to give way to their false Calumniations. But if these be insolent and hungry
companions, if these be impudent and shameless exactors: it is presently (...).
Isocr. apud Stob. sermon. 44. Si innocents existimari volumus, non solu^ nos
abstinentes, sed etia^ nostros comites praestare d^b^mus. Cic. 2. in. Verr. 2.
thought they are then but brokers for the Master; and there is no question
then made, but that false reports will be received as fast as they can be
raised, and entertained with both arms. We have learned from Prove. 29.12.
Solomon. Pro. 29. if a Ruler hearken to lies, then all his servants are
wicked: They durst not be so openly wicked, if they were not first sure of him.
It was but a Nemo unquam tam reus, tam nocens adducetur, qui ista defensione
non possit uti. Cic. 2. in Verr. 2.
sorry one, when it was at best, but is now withal grown a stale excuse; for
great ones to impute their own wilful oversights to the fault or negligence of
their servants. Caius Verres, (whom I cannot but now and then mention, because
there is scarce to be found such another complete Exemplar of a wicked
Magistrate;) would usually Aiunt ^um queri solere nonnunquam, se^m serum, quod
non suis sed suo^um com^um p^c^atis and criminibus pr^matur. Cic. Ibid.
complain, that he was unjustly oppressed, not with his own, but with the
crimes of his followers. But why then did he keep such a kennel of sharks about
him? why did he not either speedily reform discard them? It were indeed an
unrighteous thing to condemn the Master for the Servants fault; and an
uncharitable inference, because the servant is naught, to conclude straight the
Master is little better. For a just Master may have an unconscionable Servant;
and if he have a In tanta ^elicitate nemo potest esse in magna familia, qui
neminem neque servum neque libertum improbum hab^a^. Cic. pro. Sex. Rosc^o.
numerous Family, and keep many, it is a rare thing if he have not some bad: as
in a great herd there will be some rascal Deer. But then it is but one or a
few; and they play their prises closely, without their Masters privity; and
they are not a little sollicitous to carry matters so fairly outward, that
their Master shall be the Dedecus ille d^^us sc^^t ultimu^. Juvenal. Satyr. 10.
last man shall hear of their false dealing, and when he hears of the
generality they are such; when they are openly and impudently such; when every
body sees, and says, the Master cannot choose but know they are such: it
cannot be thought, but the Master is well enough content they should be such.
Neh 5.15.
Even their servants bear rule over the people, says good Nehemiah of the
Governors that were before him: but so did not I, because of the fear of God,
Neh. 5. What? did not Nehemiah bear rule over the people? yes, that he did:
there is nothing surer. His meaning then must be, ( so did not I; that is,) I
did not suffer my servants so to do as they did theirs: implying, that the
servants of the former governors oppressed the people, it was their Masters
doing, at leastwise their Masters suffering* [Even their servants bare rule
over the people: but so did not I because of the fear of God.] The Magistrate
therefore that would speedily smoke away these Gnats that swarm about the
Courts of justice, and will be buzze false reports thereinto: he shall do well
to begin his reformation at home; and if he have a servant that hears not
well deservedly, to pack him away out of hand, and to get an honester in his
room. Say he be of never so serviceable qualities, and useful abilities
otherwise, so as the Master might almost as well spare his right eye, or his
right hand, as forgo his service: yet in this case he must not spare him. Our
Saviors speech is peremptory Mat. 5.29, 30
Erue, Abscinde, Projice; if either eye or hand cause or tempt thee to offend,
pull out that eye, cut off that hand, cast them both from thee with
indignation: rather want both, then suffer corruption David's resolution was
excellent in Psalm. 101. and worthy thy imitation. Psalm. 101.5, etc.
Who so privily slandereth his* neighbor, him will I destroy: whosoever has a
proud look, and high stomach, I will not suffer him. Mine eyes look to such as
be faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me: whosoever leads a godly
life he shall be my servant. There shall no deceitful person dwell in my
house: he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. He that will thus
resolve, and thus do, it may be presumed he will not knowingly give either way
to a false report, or countenance to the reporter. And so much for our first
Rule; Thou shall not raise a false report.

the Witness, and the Iurer, and to the Pleader, and to the Officer, from the
other four Rules in my text, as punctually and particularly as to the Accuser
from this first; for I therefore made choice of a Text that takes them all in,
that I might speak to them all alike. But if I should enlarge my self upon the
rest, as I have done in this; my meditations would swell to the proportion
rather of a Treatise then a Sermon: and what patience were able to sit them
out? Therefore I must not do it. And indeed, if what I have spoken to this
first point were duly considered, and conscionably practiced; I should the
less need to do it. For it is the that lays the first stone: the rest do but
build upon his foundation. And if there were no false reports raised or
received: there would be the less use of, and the less work for, false and
suborned Witnesses; ignorant or packt Iuries; crafty and sly Pleaders; cogging
and extorting Officers. But unto these I have no more to say at this time; but
only to desire each of them to lay that portion of my Text to their hearts,
which in the first division was allotted them as their proper share: and
withal to make application ( mutatis mutandis) unto themselves, of whatsoever
has been presently spoken to the Accuser, and to the Magistrate from this
first rule. Whereof, Application, and relief of all our memories) the sum in
brief is thus. First, concerning the Accuser, (and that is every party in a
cause or trial,) he must take heed he do not raise a false report: which is
done, first, by forging a mere untruth; and secondly, by perverting or
aggravating a truth; and thirdly, by taking advantage of strict Law against
Equity. Any of which who ever does; he first commits a heinous sin himself,
and secondly wrongeth his neighbor, and thirdly brings a great deal of
mischief to the Commonweal. All which evils are best avoided: first, by
considering how we would others should deal with us, and resolving so to deal
with them; and secondly by avoiding, as all other inducements and occasions, so
especially those four things, which ordinarily engage men in unjust quarrels;
Malice, Obsequiousness, Coverture, and Greediness. Next, concerning the Judge,
or Magistrate; he must take heed he do not receive a false report. Which he
shall hardly avoid, unless he beware, first, of taking private informations;
secondly, of passing over causes slightly without mature thirdly, of
countenancing Accusers more than is meet. For whose discountenancing and
deterring, he may consider, whether or no these five may not be good helps: so
far as it lies in his power, and the Laws will permit, first; to reject
informations tendered without Oath; secondly, to give such interpretations as
may stand with Equity as well as Law; thirdly, to chastise Informers that use
partiality or collusion; fourthly, to allow the wronged party a liberal
satisfaction from his adversary; fifthly, to carry a sharp eye, and a strait
hand, over his own Servants, Followers, and Officers. Now what remains, but
that the several premises earnestly recommended consideration, and conscionable
practice of every one of you whom they may concern; and all your persons and
affairs both in the present weighty businesses, and ever hereafter, to the good
guidance and providence of Almighty God: we should humbly beseech him of his
gracious goodness to give a blessing to that which has been spoken agreeably
to his word, that it may bring forth in us the fruits of Godliness, Charity,
and Justice; to the glory of his grace, the good of our brethren, and the
comfort of our own souls; even for his blessed Son's sake, our blessed Savior
Jesus Christ. To whom with, etc.

Lincoln, 4. Aug. 1625. at the request of the High Sheriff aforesaid, WILLIAM
LISTER Esquire.
PSALM 106.30. Then stood up Phinehes, and executed judgment: and the plague
was stayed.


THe abridgement is short, which some have made of the whole Book of Psalms,
but into two words, Sect. 1.
Hosannah, and Hallelujah: most of the Psalms spending themselves, The
Argument cited out of Guevara.
as in their proper arguments, either in Supplication, praying unto God for his
blessings, and that is Hosannah; or in Thanksgiving, blessing God for his
goodness, and that is Hallelujah. This Psalm is of the later sort. The word
Hallelujah, both prefixed in the title, and repeated in the close of it,
sufficiently gives it to be a Psalm of Thanksgiving: as are also the five
Psalms together, as they agree in the same general argument, the magnifying of
Gods holy name: so they differ every one from other in choice of those special
and topicall arguments, whereby the praises of God are set forth therein. In
the rest, the Psalmist draws his argument from other considerations: in this,
from the consideration of removal of those judgments he had in his just wrath
brought upon his own people Israel for their sins, upon their repentance.

For this purpose there are sundry instances given in the Psalm, taken out of
the Histories of former times: Sect. 2.
out of which there is framed as it were a Catalogue, and matter of this Psalm.
though not of all, yet of sundry the most famous rebellions of that people
against their God, and of Gods both justice and mercy abundantly manifested in
his proceedings with them thereupon. In all which we may observe the passages
betwixt God and them, in the ordinary course of things, ever to have stood he
preventeth them with undeserved favors: they unmindfull of his benefits,
provoke him by their rebellions: he in his just wrath chastises them with
heavy plagues: they humbled under the rod, seek to him for ease: he upon
their submission withdraws his judgments from them. The Psalmist has
wtapped all these five together in Verse. 43, 44. Many times did he deliver
them: but they provoked him with their counsels, and were brought low for their
iniquity: the three first. Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he
heard their cry: the other two.

Sect. 3.
The particular rebellions of the people in this Psalm instanced in, many; The
Coherence, scope,
some before, and some after the verse of my Text. For brevity sake, those that
are in the following verses I wholly omit; and but name the rest. Which are,
their wretched infidelity and cowardice upon the first approach of danger at the
Red Sea, verse 7. tempting of God in the desert, when lothing Manna they lusted
verse 13. Their seditious conspiracy under Corah and his Moses, verse 16. Their
gross Idolatry at Horeb in making and worshipping the golden Calfe, verse 19.
Their distrustful at their portion, in thinking scorn of the promised pleasant
Land, verse 24. Their fornicating both bodily with the spiritually with the
Idols of Moab and of Midian, verse 28. To the prosecution of which last
mentioned story, the words of my Text do appertain. The origin story it self,
whereto this part of the Psalm refers, is written at full by Moses in Numb.
25. and here by David but Breviter totu^ di^it: quia non hic nescientes docet,
sed commemorat scientes. Aug. hic.
briefly touched, as the present purpose and occasion led him. Yet so, as that
the most observable passages of the History are here remembered: in three verses
three special things, The Sin, the Plague, the Deliverance. The Sin, with
the Aggravation thereof, v. 28. [ They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor,
and ate the Sacrifices of the dead.] The Plague with the Efficient cause
thereof, Impulsive and Principal, verse 29. [ Thus they provoked him to anger
with their inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them.] The Deliverance,
with the special means and Instrument thereof, is this 30. verse. [Then stood
up Phinehes, and executed judgment, and the plague was stayed.]

three things especially considerable. The Person; Sect. 4.
the Action of that Person; and the success of that Action. and Division of
the Text.
The Person, Phinehes. His Action twofold: the one preparatory, he stood up;
the other completory, he executed judgment. The Success, and issue of both;
the plague was stayed. The person holy, the action zealous, the success happy.
Of each of these I shall endeavor to speak something, applyably to the present
condition of these heavy times, and the present occasion of this frequent
assembly. But because the argument of the whole verse is a Deliverance, and
that Deliverance supposes a plague, and every plague supposes a sin: I must
take leave the Particulars now proposed from the Text, first a little to unfold
the original story; that so we may have some more distinct knowledge both what
Isreal's sin was, and how they were plagued, and upon what occasion and by
what means Phinehes wrought their deliverance.

When Israel, Sect. 5.
traveling from the Land of bondage to the Land of Promise through the
wilderness, Balac^ plot;
were now come as far as Number. 22.1.
the plains of Moab, and there encamped: Balac the then King of Moab, not
Ibid. 2.3.
daring to encounter with that people, before whom Sihon K. of the Amorites,
and Og K. of Basan. Numb. 21.
two of his greatest neighbor Princes had lately fallen; Ascitos seniores
Madiani, qui proxi mi regno ejus erant, and amici, consuluit quid facto opus
esset. Hist Scholast. in Number. c. 32.
consulted with the Midianites, Number. 22.5. -- 7.
Balaam a famous Sorcerer in those times and quarters, to lend them his
assistance: plotting with all their might, and his art, by all possible means
to withdraw Gods protection from them; wherein they thought (and they thought
right) the strength and safety of that people lay. But there is no Counsel
against the Lord; nor Number. 23.23.
enchantment against his people. Where he will bless, (and he will bless
where he is faithfully obeyed and depended upon;) neither power nor policy can
prevail for a Curse. Balaam the wicked wretch, though he 2 Pet. 2.15.
loved the ways of unrighteousness a Curse with his lips against Israel, but
in stead of cursing them, Number. 23.11. and 24.10.
blessed them altogether.

But angry at Israel, whom, Sect. 6.
when feign he would he could not curse; yea and angry at God himself, and
Balaams policy against Israel.
who by restraining his tongue had voided his hopes, and Number. 14.11.
withheld him from pay, and honor: the wretched covetous Hypocrite, as if he
would at once be avenged both of him and them, imagines a mischievous device
against them full of cursed villainy. He gives the Moabites and the Midianites
Number. 31.16. Revel. 2.14. See also Joseph 4 Antiquit. Jud. 5.
counsel to smother their hatred with pretensions of peace, and by sending the
fairest of their daughters among them, to enveigle them beauty, and to entice
them first to corporal, and after, by that, to spiritual whoredom: That so
Israel, shrinking frow the Love and Fear and Obedience of their God, might
forfeit the interest they had in his protection; and by sin bring themselves
under that wrath and curse of God, which neither those great Princes by their
Power, nor their wisest Counselors by their Policy, Sect. 7.
with the success thereof; both in their Sin.
nor Balaam himself by his Sorcery, could bring upon them.

This damned counsel was followed but too soon, and prospered but too well.
The daughters of Moab come into the Tents of Israel; and by their blandishments
put out the eyes, and steal away the hearts of Gods people: whom, besotted once
with lust, it was then no hard matter to lead whither they listed, and by
wanton insinuations to draw them to sit with them in the Temples, and to
accompany them at the Numb. 25.
feasts, and to eat with them of the sacrifices, yea and to bow the knees with
them to the honor of their Idols. Insomuch as Israel Psalm. 106.28
joined themselves to Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of that dead and
abominable Idol at the least (for all Idols are such) if not, as most have
thought, a quem Graecia Priapum dixit. Hist. Scolast. in Number. c. 34. and alii
securi Hieronym. in c. 9. Osee; and 1. cont. Io. 12. See Vatabl. in Number. 25.3.
Seldom Synt. 1. d: DIS Sir. c. 5. Iael. Bisciol. 3. hor. subces. 20.
beastly and obscene Idol withal. That was their sin.

And now may Balak save his money, and Balaam spare his pains: there is no
need of hiring, or being hired to curse Whoremongers and Idolaters. Sect. 8.
These are two plaguey sins: and such as will bring a curse upon a people
without the help of a Conjurer. And Punishment.
When that God, who is a Exodus 20.5.
jealous God, and jealous of nothing more then his Esa. 41.8.
honor, shall see that people, whom he had made Deuteronomy. 7.6.
choice of from among all the nations of the earth to be his own peculiar
people, and betrothed to himself Ezekiel. 16.8.
Covenant, to Ibid 38.
break the Covenant of Wedlock with him, and to strumpet it with the daughters
and Idols of Moab: what can be expected other, then that his jealousy should
be turned into fury; and that his fierce wrath should Psalm. 106.29.
break in upon them as a deluge, and overwhelme them with a sudden destruction?
His patience so far tempted, and with such an unworthy provocation, can suffer
no longer: But at his command Number. 25.4, 5^
Moses strikes the Rulers; and at Moses his command, the under-rulers must
strike each in their several regiments, those that had offended; and he
himself also strikes with his own hand, by a plague destroying of them in one
1 Cor. 10.8, 9. the other thousand (Number. 25 9) it seems were those that were
hanged up by Moses, and slain by the Rulers.
three and twenty thousand.

If that Plague had lasted many days, Israel had not lasted many days. But
the people by their plague made sensible of their sin, humbled themselves (as
it should seem, Sect. 9.
the very first day of the plague) in a solemn and Number. 25.6.
general assembly, Zimri's provocation.
weeping and mourning both for Sin and Plague, Before the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. And they were now in the heat of their holy
sorrow and devotions; when lo Ibid. 14.
Zimri, a Prince of a chief house in one of their Tribes, in the heat of his
Pride and lust, comes openly in the Ibid. 6.
face of Moses and all the Congregation, and brings Cosbi the daughter of one
of the Compare Nu^. 25.15. with Number. 31 8.
five Kings of Midian into his Tent, there to commit filthiness with her.

Doubtless Moses the Captain, and Eleazar the Priest, and all Israel that saw
this shameless prank of that lewd couple, Sect. 10. and his execution.
saw it with grief enough. But Phinehes enraged with a Pious indignation to see
God, and the Magistrate, and the Congregation, at such a heavy time, and in
such open manner, and for that very sin for which they then lay under Gods
hand; thought there was something more to be done then bare weeping: and
therefore his blood warmed with an holy zeal, he Number. 25.7, 8*
starteth up forthwith, makes to the Tent where these two great personages
were, and as they were in the act of their filthiness, speedeth them both at
once, and nayleth them to the place with his Javeline. And the next thing we
hear, is, God well pleased with the Ibid. 11.
zeal of his servant, and the execution of those malefactors, is appeased
toward his people, and withdraws hand and his plague from them. And of that
deliverance my Text speaks; ( Then stood up Phinehes, and executed judgment,
and so the Plague was stayed.)

The Person, the instrument to work this deliverance for Israel, Sect. 11.
was Phinehes. He was the son of Eleazar, The Person of Phinehes considered.
who was then High Priest in immediate succession to his father Aaron, not long
before deceased: and did himself afterward succeed in the High Priesthood unto
Eleazar his Father. A wise, a godly, and a zealous man: employed afterward by
the State of Israel in the greatest affairs, both of Number. 31 6.
War and Jos. 22.13, 31, 32.
Ambassie. But it was this Heroical act of his, in doing execution upon those
two great audacious offenders, which got him the first, and the greatest, and
the lastingst renown. Of which Act more anon, when we come to it. In his
Person, we will consider only what his calling and condition was; and what
congruity there might be between what he was, and what he did. He was of the
Tribe of Levi: and that whole Tribe was set apart for the Number. 1.19, etc.
service of the Tabernacle. And he was of the sons of Aaron, and so (...), of
the Family and Lineage of the High Priests: and the Priests office was to offer
sacrifices and to burn incense, and to pray and make atonement for the People.
Neither Levite nor Priest had to intermeddle with matters Judicature, unless
in some few causes, and those for the most part concerning matters either
merely, or mixtly Ecclesiastical: but neither to give sentence, nor to do
execution, in matters and causes merely Civil, as by any right or virtue of his
Leviticall or Priestly office.

The more unreasonable is the High Priest of Rome, to challenge to himself any
temporal or Civil jurisdiction, Sect. 21.
The spiritual power does not include the Temporal.
as virtually annexed to his spiritual Power, or necessarily derived thence.
Templum and Praetorium, the Chair and the Throne, the Altar and the Bench, the
Sheephook and the Scepter, the Keys and the Sword; though they may the same
person, yet the Powers remain perpetually distinct and independent, and such
as do not of necessity infer the one the other. Our Saviors Luke 21.26.
Vos autem non sic has fully decided the Controversy; and for ever cut off
all claim of temporal jurisdiction, as by any virtue annexed to the Keys. If
the Bishops of Rome could have contented themselves to have enjoyed those
Temporalties, wherewith the bounty of Christian Emperors Sea (whether well, or
ill, whether too much, or no, I now inquire not,) but if they could have been
content to have holden them upon the same terms they first had them, without
seeking to change the old tenure; and to have acknowledged them, as many of
their fellow-Bishops do, to have issued not at all by necessary derivation from
their spiritual Power, but merely and altogether from the Nec in quenquam
Presbyt^rum, Episcopum, sive Papam convenit co^ctivam in hoc seculo
jurisdiction^m sibi h^bere; ni si ea^e^ sibi per hum^num legislator^m concessa
fu^rt, in cajus potestate est hanc ab ipsis semper revocare. Marsil. Patav. 2.
defens. pacis. 5.
free and voluntary indult of temporal Princes: the Christian Church had not
had so just cause of complaint against the unsufferable tyrannies and
usurpations of the Papacy; nor had the Christian world been embroyled in so
many unchristian and bloody quarrels, the Canonists, and they of the
Congregation of the Oratory, like downright flatterers, give the Pope the
Temporal Monarchy of the world, absolutely and Papa jure divino est direct
dominus O bis. Pesant de i^m^nit. Eccles. p. 45. id^ defendunt Baronius, Bosii
d^o, Zecchus, C^rerius al^i.
directly, as adhering inseparably to his Sea, and as a branch of that Charter
which Christ gave to Peter, when he made him Head of the Church, for himself
and his successors for ever. The Jesuits more subtle than they, not daring to
deny the Pope any part of that Power, which any other profession of men have
dared to give him, and yet unable to assert such a vast power from those
inconveniences which follow upon the Canonists opinion; have found out a the
Popes hands the exercise of as much temporal power as they bluntly and
grossly give him, and that to all effects and purposes as full and in as ample
manner as they: yet by a more learned and refined flattery, as resulting from
his spiritual Power, not directly and per se, but See Bellarm. 5 de Romans
Pontif. 6.
obliquely and indirectly and in ordine ad spiritualia. The Man himself, though
he pretend to be supreme infallible judge of all Controversies yet hears
both, parties, and takes advantage of what either give him, as best sorteth
with his present occasions, and suffers them to fall foul each upon other,
these accounting them gross flatterers, and they again these adversus impios
Politicos. Cater. de potest. in titulo libri.
wicked ^oliticians: but dares not for his life determine whether side is in
the right; lest, if he should be put to make good his determination by
sufficient proof, both should appear to be in the wrong and he lose all;
which, whilst they quarrel, he still holds. It is a certain thing; The
spiritual Power conferred in Holy Orders does not include the Power of
Temporal jurisdiction. If Phinehes here execute judgment upon a Prince of
Israel; Sect. 13*
it is indeed a good fruit of his zeal, nor yet exclude it.
but no proper act of his Priesthood.

Let it go for a non sequitur then, as it is no better; because Phinehes, a
Priest, or Priests son, executed judgment, that therefore the Priestly
includes a Iudicatory Power. Yet from such an act, done by such a Person, at
least thus much will follow, that the Priesthood does not exclude the exercise
of Judicature; and that there is no such repugnancy and inconsistency between
the Temporal and Spiritual Powers, but that they may without incongruity
concur and the same person. When I find anciently, that not only among the i
e. Regis quidem haec munia esse jussit, ^rimum, ut s^crorum and sacrificioru^
principatum haber^t. Dionys. Halicar. lib. 2. See also Cic. 1. de divin. (...).
de Aegyptiis. Plutarch. lib. de I^. and Osir.
Heathens, but even among Gods own people, the same man might be a King and a
Priest, ( Virgil. 3. Aeneid.
Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos,) as Melchisedec was both a Genesis 14.17.
Priest of the most High God, and King of Salem: when I see it consented by
all, that so long as the Church was Patriarchall, the Priestly and the
Iudicatory Power were both settled upon one and the same Person, the Person of
the Sacerdot^um fuit annexum primogeniturae usque ad legem datam per Mosca.
Lyran. in Genesis 14.18. See also Lyran. ^n Number. 3.12. and 8.16, etc.
firstborn: when I read of Eli the Priest of the sons of Aaron 1 Samuel 4.18.
judging Israel 40. years, and of Samuel, certainly a Levite (though not, as
Aug. 17. de civit. 4 and in Psalm. 98. Sulpit. Sever. lib. 1 Hist. sacra.
some have thought, Levita Samuel no^ Sacerdos, non Pontifex fuit Hieron. lib.
cont. Jovin. v. Drus. not. ad Sulpi^. Hist. p. 154.
a Priest) both going circuit, as a 1 Samuel 7.16.
Judge itinerant in Israel, and doing execution too with his own hands upon 1 Samuel 15.33.
Agag; and of 1 Chronicles. 26.29.32.
Chenaniah and his sons, Izharites, and Hashabiah and his brethren
Hebronites, and others of the families of Levi, appointed by King David to be
Judges and Officers, not only in all the business over the Lord, but also for
In omni negotio divino and humano. Vatab in 1. Parab. 26.
outward business over Israel, and in things that concerned the service of the
King: when I observe in the Church-stories of all ages, ever since the world
had Christian Princes, how Ecclesiastical persons have been employed by their
Sovereigns in their weightiest consultations and affairs of State; I cannot but
wonder at the inconsiderate rashness of some forward the Prelacy of our
Church, and have studied to approve themselves eloquent in no other argument so
much, as in inveighing against the Courts, and the Power, and the Jurisdiction,
and the Temporalties of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons. I speak it
not to justify the abuses of men, but to maintain the lawfulness of the
thing. If therefore any Ecclesiastical person seek any Temporal office or
power by indirect, ambitious, and preposterous courses: if he exercise it
otherwise then well; insolently, cruelly, corruptly, partially; claim it by any
other then the right title, the free bounty and grace of the supreme
Magistrate; let him bear his own burden; I know not any honest Minister that
will plead for him. But since there is no incapacity in a Clergyman, by reason
of his spiritual Calling, but he may exercise temporal Power, if he be called
to it by his Prince, as well as he may enjoy temporal Land if he be heir to
it from his Father: I see not but it behoveh us all, if we be good Subjects and
sober Christians, to pray that such as have the power of Judicature more or
less in any kind or degree committed unto them, may exercise that power
wherewith they are entrusted, zeal and prudence and equity, rather than out of
envy at the preferment of a Churchman take upon us little less than to
quarrel the discretion of our Sovereigns. Phinehes, though he could not
challenge to execute judgment by virtue of his Priesthood; Sect. 14.
yet his priesthood disabled him not from executing judgment. Phinehes his
fact examined.


That for the Person. Follows his Action: and that twofold: He stood up, He
executed judgment. Of the former first; which, though an Action, yet is indeed
a Gesture properly, and not an Action. But, being no necessity to bind me to
strict propriety of speech, be it Action, or Gesture, or what else you will
call it; the circumstance and phrase, since it seems to import some material
thing, may not be passed over without some consideration. [ Then stood up
Phinehes.] Which clause may denote unto us, either that extraordinary spirit
whereby Phinehes was moved to do judgment upon those shameless offenders; or
that forwardness of zeal, in the heat whereof he did it; or both. Phinehes was
indeed the High Priests son, as we heard; but yet a private man and no
ordinary Magistrate: and private man to do to draw the sword of justice, or but
to sentence a malefactor to dye? Or, say he had been a Magistrate; he ought yet
to have proceeded in a legal and judicial course, to have convented the
parties, and when they had been convicted in a fair trial and by sufficient
witness, then to have adjudged them according to the Law; and not to have come
suddenly upon them (...), as they were acting their villainy, and thrust them
through uncondemned. I have Sermon. 2. ad Cler. Sect. 30.
elsewhere delivered it as a collection not altogether improbable from the
circumstances of the original story, that Phinehes had warrant for this
execution from the Moses the supreme Magistrate, and namely by virtue of that
Proclamation, whereby he authorized the Numb. 25.5.
Under-Rulers to slay every one his men that were joined unto Baal-Peor, Number.
25.5. And I since find that conjecture confirmed by the judgment of some
learned men: insomuch as an eminent Writer in our Church says, that Hall 7.
Contempl. 4.
By virtue of that Commission every Israelite was made a Magistrate for this
execution. But looking more nearly into the Text, and considering that the
Commission Moses there gave, was first only to the Rulers, and so could be no
warrant for Phinehes, unless he were such a Ruler, which appears not; and
secondly, concerned their several governments, and so was too short to reach
Zimri, who being himself a Prince, and that of another Tribe too, the Tribe of
Number. 25.5.
Simeon, could not be under the government of Phinehes, who was of the Tribe of
Levi: how probable soever that other collection may be, yet I hold it the safer
resolution which is commonly given by Divines for the justification of this
fact of Phinehes, that he had an extraordinary motion and a peculiar secret
instinct of the Spirit of God, powerfully working in him, and prompting him to
this Heroical Act.

Certainly, God will not approve that work which himself has wrought. Sect. 15.
But to this Action of Phinehes God has given large approbation, and just^fied.
both by staying the plague thereupon, and by rewarding Phinehes with an Number.
25.12, 13.
everlasting Priesthood therefore, and by giving express testimony of his zeal
and righteousness therein: as it is said in the next verse after my Text, [
Psalm. 106.31.
And it was accounted to ] Which words in the judgment of learned Expositors,
are not to be understood barely of the righteousness of Faith, as it is said
of Abraham, that Genesis 15.6. applied by Saint Paul. Romans 4.3.
he believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness (as if the zeal
of Phinehes in this act had been a good evidence of that faith in Gods
promises, whereby he was justified, and his Person accepted with God;) though
that also: but they do withal import the justification of the Action, at least
thus far, that howsoever measured by the common rules of life it might seem an
unjust action; and a rash attempt at the least, if not an heinous murder, as
being done by a private man without the warrant authority; yet was it indeed,
not only in regard of the intent a zealous action,, as done for the honor of
God, but also for the ground and warrant of it, as done by the special secret
direction of Gods holy Spirit, a just and a righteous action. Possibly this
very word of standing up imports that extraordinary spirit. For of those
Worthies, whom God at several times endowed with Heroical spirits, to attempt
some special work for the delivery of his Church, the Scriptures use to speak
in words and phrases much like this. It is often said in the book of Judges,
that God Iud. 3.9, 15. etc. and 2.16.18.
raised up such and such to judge Israel, and that Deborah and Iair* and others
Iud* 5.7, and 10.1, 3, etc.
rose up Iud. 3.10.
The spirit of God came upon them, as is said of Othoniel, Judge. 3. and by a
secret, but powerful instinct, put them upon those brave and noble attempts,
they undertook and effected for the good of his Church. Raised by the impulsion
of that powerful spirit, which Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sancti gratia.
Ambr. 2. in Luc. 3.
admits no slow debatements, Phinehes stands up: and feeling himself
called not to deliberate, but act; without casting of scruples, or fore-casting
of dangers, or expecting commission from men when he had his warrant sealed
within, he takes his weapon, dispatching his errand, and leaves the event to
the providence of God.

Phinehes spirit, presume to imitate his fact. Those Opera liberi spiritus,
Sect. 16.
as Divines call them, as they proceeded from an extraordinary spirit, yet not
to be imitated,
so they were done for special purposes: but were never intended, either by
God that inspired them, or by those Worthies that did them, for ordinary or
general examples. The error is dangerous, from the privileged examples of
some few exempted ones to take liberty to transgress the common rules of Life
and of Laws. It is most true indeed, the Spirit of God is a free Spirit, and
not tied to strictness of rule, nor limited by any bounds of Laws. But yet
that free spirit regular course of life, and bounded thee with Laws: which if
thou shall transgress, no pretension of the Spirit can either excuse thee from
sin, or exempt thee from punishment. It is not now every way, as it was
before the coming of Christ, and the sealing up of the Scripture Canon: God
having now settled a perpetual form of government in his Church; and given us a
perfect and constant rule, whereby to walk, even his holy word. And we are not
expect, nor boastingly to pretend a private spirit, to lead us against, or
beyond, or but beside the common rule: nay we are commanded to try all
pretensions of private spirits by that common rule. Esaias 8.20.
Ad legem and ad testimonium, to the Law, and to the Testimony: at this Test
examine and 1 John 4.1.
Try the spirits whether they are of God, or no. If any thing within us, if any
thing without us exalt it self against the obedience of this rule; it is no
sweet impulsion of the holy spirit of God, but a strong delusion of the lying
spirit of Satan.

But is not all that is written, written for our Example? or why Phinehes act
recorded and commended, Sect. 17.
if it may not be followed? but with limitation
First, indeed Saint Paul says, Romans 15.4.
All that is written is written for our learning: but Learning is one thing,
and Example is another; learn something from that which we may not follow.
Examples for 1 Cor. 10.11.
Admonition, as well as for Imitation. Malefactors at the place of execution,
when they wish the bystanders to take example by them, bequeath them not the
Imitation of their courses, what to do; but Admonition from their punishments,
what to shun: Yea thirdly, even the commended actions exemplary in the very
substance of the action affections, that give life and luster thereunto. And so
this act of Phinehes is imitable: Not that either any private man should dare
by his example to usurp the Magistrates office, and to do justice upon
Malefactors without a Calling; or that any Magistrate should dare by his
Example, to cut off graceless offenders without a due judicial course: but
that every man who is by virtue of his Calling endued with lawful authority to
execute justice upon transgressors, should set himself to it with that
stoutnesse and courage and zeal, which was in Phinehes.

If you will needs then imitate Phinehes, imitate him in that for commended and
rewarded by God, Sect. 18.
and for which he is renowned amongst men: unto his zeal;
and that is not barely the action, the thing done; but the Affection, the zeal
wherewith it was done. For that zeal God commends him, Numb. 25. verse 11. [
Number. 25.11.
Phinehes the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away
my wrath from the children of Israel, whilst he was zealous for my sake among
them.] And for that zeal God rewards him, Ibid. verse 13. [ Ibid. 13.
He shall have and his seed after him the Covenant of an everlasting
Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God.] And for that zeal did
Posterity praise him: the wise Sirac. 45.23.
son of Sirac, Eccl. 45. and good old 1 Mac. 2.54.
Mattathias Macc. 2. And may not this phrase of speech, He stood up and
executed judgment, very well imply that forwardness and heat of zeal? To my
seeming it may. For whereas Moses and all the Congregation sat weeping (a As
Neh. 1.4. Job 2.13. Psalm. 137.1. Esaias 47.1, 8.
gesture often accompanying sorrow,) or perhaps yet more to express their
sorrow, lay grovelling upon the Earth, mourning and sorrowing for their sin,
and for the Plague: it could not be but the bold lewdness of Zimri in bringing
his strumpet with such impudence before their noses, must needs add much to
the grief, and bring fresh vexation to the souls of all that were righteous
among them. But the rest continued, though with double grief, yet in the same
course of humiliation, and in the same posture of body, as before. Only
Phinehes, burning with an holy indignation, thought it was now no time to sit
still, and weept but rowzing up himself and his spirits with zeal as hot as
fire, Verbum ipsum soliditatem mentis ostendit. Cassiodorus; Constanter.
Lyranus* Constantia mentis and audacia operis. Ludolfus hic. He had zeal in the
fear of the Lord, and stood up with good courage of heart. Sirac. 45.23.
he stood up from the place where he was, and made haste to execute judgment.

Here is a rich example for all you to imitate, whom it does concern: Judge of
this Circuit; of whose zeal to do justice and judgment I am by so much the
better persuaded, by how much the eminency of your place, and the weight of
your charge, and the expectation of the people does with greater importunity
Masora populus semper a summo exigit. Senec. in Octav. Act. 2.
exact it at your hands: But I speak withal, and most especially to all you,
that are in Commission of the Peace, and whose daily and continual care it
should be; to see the wholesome laws of the Realm duly and seasonably
executed. Yea, and to all you also that have any office appertaining to
justice, or any business about these Courts; so as it may lie in Justice in
Civil, or of judgment in Criminal causes. Sect. 19.
Look upon the zeal of Phinehes: observe what approbation it had from God;
Manifested by executing Judgment.
what a blessing it procured to his seed after him; what glorious renown it
has won him with all after-ages; what ease it did, and what good it wrought
for the present state: and think if it be not worthy your imitation. Gal. 4.18.
It is good, says the Apostle, to be zealously affected always in a good
thing, And is it not a good thing to do justice, and to execute judgment? nay,
Religion excepted (and the care of that is a branch of justice too) do you know
any better thing? any thing you God, more serviceable to the State, more
comfortable to your own souls? If you be called to the Magistracy; it is 3
King. 9.
your own business, as the proper work of your calling: and men account him no
wiser then he should be, that sluggeth in his own business, or goes
heartlesly about it. It is the Kings business, who has entrusted you with it:
and he is scarce a good subject that slacketh the Kings business, or does it
to the halves. Nay, it is Chro. 19.6.
the Lords business; for [ Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with
you in the cause and in the judgment:] and Jer. 48.10.
Cursed is he that does the Lords business negligently. That you may therefore
do (all under one) your own business, and the Kings business, and the Lords
business, with that zeal and forwardness which becomes you in so weighty an
affair; lay this pattern before your eyes and hearts! See what Phinehes did:
and thereby both examine what hitherto you have done, and learn what henceforth
you should do.

Sect. 20.
First; Phinehes does not post off the matter to others: the fervency of his
zeal made him willing to be himself the Actor. 1 Personally;
He harbored cool thoughts as too many Magistrates do. [Here is a shameful
crime committed, by a shameless person, and in a shameless manner: pity such
an audacious offender should go unpunished. My heart rises against him; and
much ado I have to refrain from being my self his executioner, rather then he
should carry it away thus. But why should I derive the envy of the fact upon my
self, and but gain the imputation of a busy officious fellow, in being more
forward then others? A thousand more saw it as well as I; whom it concerns as
nearly as it does me: and if none of them will stir in it, why should I?
Doubtless my uncle Moses, and my father Eleazar, in place of authority will
not let it pass so; but will call him to account for it, and give him condign
punishment. If I should do it, it would be thought but the attempt of a rash
young fellow. It will be better discretion therefore to forbear, and to give my
betters leave to go before me.] Such pretentions as these would have kept off
Phinehes from this noble exploit, if he had been of the temper of some of ours:
who owe it to nothing so much as their lukewarmnesse, that they have at least
some reputation of being moderate and discreet men. But true zeal is more
forward then mannerly: and will not lose the opportunity of doing what it
ought, for waiting till others begin. Alas, if every man should be so
squeamish, as many are; nothing at all would be done. And therefore the good
Magistrate must consider, not what others do, but what both he and they are in
conscience bound to do: and though there should be many more joined with him in
the same common care, and with equal power, yet he must resolve to take that
common affair no otherwise into his special care, then if he were left alone
therein, and the whole burden lay upon his shoulders. As when sundry persons
are so bound in one common bond for the payment of one entire conjunctim and
divisim, every one per se in toto and in solidum, that every particular person
by himself is as well liable to the payment of the whole, as they altogether
are. Admit loose or idle people (for who can hold their tongues?) shall for thy
diligence say, thou art an hard and austere man, or busiest thy self more then
thou have thank for thy labor. First, that man never cared to do Eccles. 11.4.
He that observes the wind, says Solomon, shall not sow; and the words
(especially of idle people) are no better. Secondly, He makes an ill purchase,
that forgoeth the duty, to gain a little popularity: the breath of the Thirdly,
execution of Justice loses in the breadth, he commonly gains it all and more
in the weight, and in the length of his Credit. A kind quiet Man; that carries
it for the present, and in the voice of the multitude: but it is more solid,
and lasting praise, to be reputed in the opinion of the better and the wiser
sort, a Just man, and a good Patriot, or Commonwealths-man. Fourthly, if all
should condemn thee for that wherein thou have done but Regium est, cum recte
feceris, audire male.
well, thy comfort is, thine own conscience shall bestead thee more then a
thousand witnesses, and stand for thee against ten thousand tongues, at that
last day, when 1 Cor. 4.5.
the hearts of all men shall be made manifest, and every man that has deserved
well shall have praise of God, and not of man.

Secondly, Sect. 21.
Phinehes as he did not post off this execution to other men, 2 Speedily;
so he did not put it off to another day. Phinehes might have religious work,
humbling our selves in a public, solemn, and frequent assembly before the face
of God, to appease his just wrath against us for our sins: Virgil. Eclog. 9.
Et quod nunc instat agamus. It would be unseasonable leaving this work now:
another time may serve as well to inflict deserved punishment upon that wicked
miscreant.] But zeal will admit no Qui tarde fecit, diu noluit. Senec. 1. de
benef. 1.
put-offs; it is all upon the spur, till it be doing what it conceives fit to
be done. There are no passions of the mind so impetuous, and so impatient of
delay as Odit verus am^r, nec patitur moras. Senec. in Herc. fur. act. 2.
Love and Dum poenas odio per vim festinat inulte. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
Anger: and Nunc ira, amorque causam junxe re: quid sequetur? Senec. in Med.
act. 4.
these two are the prime ingredients of true zeal. If any man should have
interposed for Zimri, and taken upon him Phinehes for his reprivall: I verily
think, in that heat he might sooner have provoked his own, then have prorogued
Zimries execution. Delays in any thing that is good, are ill: and in the best
things, worst. As Wax when it is chafed, and Iron when it is hot, will take
impressions: but if the Seal or Stamp be not speedily put to, the heat abateth,
and they return to their former hardness: so the best affections of the best
men, if they be not taken in the heat, abate, and lessen, and dye. In the
administration then of Justice, and the execution of Judgment, where there is
Zeal, there will be Expedition: and the best way to preserve Zeal where it is,
is Expedition. I am not able to say where the want is, or where specially; but
certainly a great want there is generally in this Kingdom of Zeal to Justice,
in some that should have it, if that complaint be as just, as it is common
among men that have had suits in the Courts, that they have been Saepe causas
tantum d^fferunt,, quod litigantibus plus quam totum auferunt, quia major est
expensaru^ sumptus quam sententiae fructus. Innocent.
wronged with far less damage then they have been righted: there have been so
many Bern. lib. 1. de consid.
frustratoriae and venatoriae dilationes (as Saint Bernard in his time called
them) so many lingering and costly delays used. And for Executing judgment
upon Malefactors; if Phinehes had suffered Zimri to have lived but a day
longer, for any thing we know the plague might have lasted to morrow have been
as yesterday with them, and lessened the peoples number twenty three thousand
more? especially their former crying sins having received a new accession of
a double guilt, the guilt of Zimries fact, and the guilt of their connivence.
No rack should make me confess that man to be truly zealous of judgment, who
when he has power to cut him short, shall but so much as reprive a foul and
notorious Malefactor; or grant him any respite or liberty to make his friends,
Solomon has told us, and we find it but too true, Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

Thirdly; Phinehes was nothing retarded in his resolution by forecasting what
ill will he might purchase, Sect. 22.
or into what dangers he might cast himself by executing judgment upon two
such great personages. 3. Resolutely
The times were such, as wherein sin had gotten head, and was countenanced both
with might and multitude: Zimri was a mighty man, a Number. 25.14.
Prince of a chief house; and he that should dare to Tribe of Simeon. It
seems he was confident that his might and popularity in his own Tribe would
privilege him from the enquiry of the Magistrate; how durst he else have so
braved Moses, and the whole Congregation? And the woman also was the daughter
of one of the Number. 25.15. compared with Number. 31.8.
Five Kings of Midian: and could Phinehes think that the death of two such
great persons could go unrevenged? All this Phinehes either forecasteth not, or
regards not. His eye was so fixed upon the glory of God, that it did not so
much as reflect upon his own safety: and his thoughts strongly possessed with
zeal of the common had not any leisure to think of private dangers. Zeal is
ever Amor timere neminem verus potest. Senec. in Med. act. 3. (...)
courageous; and therefore Iethro thought none worthy to be Magistrates, but
such as were viros virtutis. Exodus 8.21. Iustum esse facile est cui vacat
pectus metu. Senec. in Oct. Act. 2.
Men of courage: And he has neither Courage nor Zeal in him befitting a
Magistrate, that is afraid to do justice upon a great offender. Prove. ^2.13 and
26.13.
The sluggard says there is a Lion in the way: and then he steppeth backward
and keeps aloof off. But the worthy Magistrate would meet with such a Lion to
choose; that he might win awe to Gods Ordinance, and make the way passable for
others, by tearing such a beast in pieces: and would no more fear to make a
Worshipful thief, or a Right worshipful murderer (if such a Circuit) an
example of Justice, then to twitch up a poor sheepstealer. Great ones will soon
presume of impunity, and mean ones too by their example in time learn to kick
at authority; if Magistrates be not forward to maintain the dignity of their
places, by executing good Laws without favor or fear. Hitherto of the spirit
and zeal of Phinehes; by occasion of this his former Action or gesture of
standing up: There yet remain to be considered the other action, and the
success of it; He executed judgment, and the plague was stayed. Both which,
because I would not be long, I will join together in the handling; when I
shall have first a little cleared the

The Hebrew (...) here used is a word that has three different significations:
Sect. 23.
to Judge, to Pray, to Appease. And interpreters have taken liberty to make
choice of any of the three in translating this place. Executing of judgment
The Greek renders it [(...)] and the vulgar which for the most part follows
the Septuagint, [Placavit:] as if we should read it thus, Then stood up
Phinehes, and made an atonement, or appeased God. And the thing is true, God
himself testifying of Phinehes, Numb. 25. that Number. 25.11.
By being zealous for God he had turned away his wrath, and Ibid. 13.
Made atonement for the children of Israel. The Chaldee interprets it by
Vetsalle; and the ordinary English translation of the Psalms usually read in
our Churches accordingly, [ Then stood up Phinehes, and prayed.] But Hierome
and Vatablus and the best translators render it according to the most proper
signification of the word, and most fully Dijudicavit, He executed judgment.]
Verily prayer is a special means to appease Gods wrath, and to remove his
Plagues; and prayer is as the salt of the Sacrifice, sanctifying and seasoning
every Action we undertake: and I doubt not but Phinehes, when he lift up his
hand to execute judgment upon Zimri and Cosbi, did withal lift up his heart
to God to bless that action, and to turn it to good. In which respects,
(especially if the word withal will bear it, as it seems it will,) some men
should have done well not to have shown so much willingness to quarrel at the
Church-translations in our Service Book, by being clamorous against this very
place as a gross corruption, and sufficient to justify their refusal of
subscription to the Book.

But I will not now trouble either you or my self, with farther curiosity in
examining Translations: because howsoever other Translations, that render it
praying, or appeasing, may be allowed either as tolerably good, or at least
excusably ill; yet this that renders it by Executing Judgment is certainly the
best, whether we consider the course of the Story it self, or the propriety of
the word in the Original, or the intent* of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture.
Action of Phinehes in doing judgment upon such a pair of great and bold
offenders was so well pleasing unto God, that his wrath was turned away from
Israel, and the plague which had broken in upon them in a sudden and fearful
manner, was immediately stayed thereupon.

Oh how acceptable a sacrifice to God, Sect. 24.
above the blood of Bulls and of Goats, appeased the wrath of God;
is the death of a Malefactor slaughtered by the hand of Justice! When the
Magistrate, who is Romans 13.4.
(...), the Minister and Priest of God for this very thing, puts his knife
to the throat of the beast, and with the fire of an holy zeal for GOD and
against sin in Holocaustum for a whole burnt-offering, and for a
peace offering, unto the Lord. Samuel says, that 1 Samuel 15.22.
to obey is better than sacrifice: and Solomon, that Prove. 21.3.
to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.
Obedience, that is the prime, and the best sacrifice: and the second best is
the punishment of Disobedience. There is no readier way to appease GODS wrath
against sin, then is the rooting out of sinners: nor can his deputies by any
just judgments so effectually, as by faithful executing of Justice and
judgment themselves.

Sect. 25.
When Phinehes did this act, the public body of Israel was in a weak state, and
stayed the Plague.
and stood in need of a present and sharp remedy. In some former distempers of
the State, it may be they had found some ease by diet in Psalm. 35.13.
humbling their souls by fasting; or by an issue at the tongue or eye, in an
humble confession of their sins, and in weeping and mourning for them with
tears of repentance. And they did well now to make trial of those remedies
again, wherein they had found so much help in former times: especially the
remedies being proper for the malady, and such as often may do good, but never
can do harm. But alas, fasting, and weeping and mourning before the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation had not strength enough against those more
prevalent corruptions, wherewith the State of Israel was then pestered. This
Phinehes saw; who well perceived, that (as in a dangerous pleurisy the party
cannot live unless he bleed; so) if there were any good to be done upon Israel
in this their little less than desperate estate, a vein must be opened, and
some of the rank blood let out for the preservation of the rest of the body.
This course therefore he tries: and languishing Israel finds present ease in
it. As soon as the blood ran, instantly the grief ceased: He executed
judgment, and the plague was stayed.

Sect. 26.
As God brought upon that people for their sins a fearful destruction:
Englands Plague.
so he has in his just wrath sent his destroying Angel against us for ours.
The sins that brought that Plague upon them were Whoredom and Idolatry. I
cannot say the very same sins have caused ours. For although the execution of
good Laws against both incontinent and idolatrous persons, has been of late
years, and yet is (we all know) to say no more, slack Idolatry nor Whoredom
are at that height of shameless impudency and impunity among us, that they
dare brave our Moseses, and outface whole Congregations, as it was in Israel.
But still this is sure, no plague but for sin: nor national Plagues, but for
National sins. So that albeit none of us may dare to take upon us to be so
far of Gods counsel, as to say for what very sins most this plague is sent
among us: yet none of us can be ignorant, but that besides those secret
personal corruptions which are in every one of us, and whereunto every man's
own heart is privy, there are national sins, whereof the people of this Land
are generally guilty, abundantly sufficient to justify GOD in his dealings
toward us, and to Psalm. 51.4.
clear him when he is judged. Our wretched unthankfulness unto GOD for the
long continuance of his Gospel, and our peace: our carnal confidence and
security in the wooden and watery walls: our riot and excess (the noted proper
sin of this Nation) and much intemperate abuse of the good creatures of GOD
in our meats and drinks and disperts, and other provisions and comforts of
this life: our incompassion to our brethren miserably wasted with War and
Famine in other parts of the world: our heavy Oppression of our brethren at
home, in racking the rents, and cracking the backs, and Esaias. 3.15.
Grinding the faces of the poor: our cheap and irreverent regard unto Gods holy
ordinances of his Word, and Sacraments, and Sabbaths, and Ministers: our
wantonness and Toyishnesse of understanding, in Christian Faith, and troubling
the peace of the Church with a thousand niceties and novelties and unnecessary
wranglings in matters of Religion: and (to reckon no more) that universal
Corruption which is in those which (because they should be such) we call the
Courts of Justice, by sale of offices, enhauncing of fees, devising new
subtilties both for delay and evasion, trucking for expedition, making trappes
of petty penal Statutes, and but Cobwebs of the most weighty and material
Laws. I doubt not but by the mercy of God many of his servants in this Land
are free from some, and some from all of these common the best of us all, not a
man of us all, but are guilty of all or some of them, at least thus far, that
we have not mourned for the corruptions of the times so feelingly, nor
endeavored the reformation of them to our power so faithfully, as we might and
ought to have done.

By these and other sins we have provoked Gods heavy judgment against us,
and the Plague is grievously broken in upon us: Sect. 27.
to be stayed, by adding to our humiliations
and now it would be good for us to know, by what means we might best appease
his wrath, and stay this Plague. Public Humiliations proper Remedies against
Public judgments: Joel. 2.12, 15, etc. and Number. 25.6.
To turn unto the Lord our God with all our heart, and with Fasting, and with
Weeping, and with Mourning, to sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn assembly,
and gather the people and Elders together; and weep before the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation; and to let the Priests the Ministers of the
Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar* and to pray the Lord to spare his
people, and not be angry with them for ever. Never did people thus humble
themselves with true lowly penitent and obedient hearts, who found comfort by
it in the mean time, and in the end benefit. And blessed be God who has put
it into the heart of our Moses, with the consent of the Elders of our Israel,
by his royal example first, and then by his Proclamation for a weekly fast,
with a form of divine Service, and other directions; published 1625.
royal command, to lay upon us a double necessity of this so religious and
profitable a course.

Savior told the young man in the Gospel, who Law, Mark. 10.21.
Unum tibi deest, One thing is wanting: so when we have done our best and
utmost, fasted and wept and prayed as constantly and frequently and fervently
as we can; unless you the Magistrates and Officers of justice be good unto us,
one thing will be wanting still; One maine ingredient of singular virtue,
without which the whole receipt besides, as precious and sovereign as it is,
may be taken, and yet fail the cure. And that is, the severe and fearelesse and
impartial Execution of judgment. Till we see a care in the Gods on earth
faithfully to execute theirs; our the God of Heaven will in mercy remove his
judgments. If God send a 2 Samuel 21.1. etc.
famine into the land; let holy David do what he can otherwise, it will
continue year after year: so long as judgment is not done upon the bloody
house of Saul, for his cruelty in slaying the Gibeonites, God will not be Ibid.
verse. 14.
entreated for the land. One known Achan, that has got a wedge of gold by
sacrilege or injustice, if suffered, is able to Josh. 7.25, 26.
trouble a whole Israel: and the Lord will I will not be with you any more,
except you destroy the accursed from among you. v. 12
Not turn from the fierceness of his anger, till he have deserved judgment
done upon him. If Number. 25.3, 4.
Israel; he will not be appeased by any means, until Moses take the heads of
the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun. If the Land be
defiled with blood, it is in vain to think of any other course, when God
himself has pronounced it impossible that the Land should be Number. 35.33.
Purged from the blood that is shed in it, otherwise then by the blood of him
that shed it.

Up then with the zeal of Phinehes, up for the love of Gird your swords upon
your thigh, and with your javelins in your hand pursue the Idolater, and the
Adulterer, and the Murderer, and the Oppressor, and every known offender into
his Tent, and nail him to the Earth, that he never rise again to do more
mischief. Let it appear what (...). Lysias apud Stob. Sermon. 44.
love you bear to the State, by your hatred to them: and show your pity to us,
by showing none to them. The destroying Angel of God attends upon you for his
dispatch: if you would but set in stoutly, he would soon sloth, or fear, or
any partial or corrupt respect whatsoever make you cruel to the good, in
sparing the bad? or why should you suffer your selves, for want of courage and
zeal to execute judgment, to lose either the opportunity, or the glory, of
being wrath, and to stay his plagues?

But, for that matters appertaining to Justice and Judgment must pass through
many hands before they come to yours; Sect. 30.
and there may be so much juggling used in conveighing them from hand to hand,
With particular applications to
that they may be represented unto you many times in much different forms from
what they were in truth and at the first: That your care and zeal to execute
Justice and Judgment faithfully according to your knowledge, may Phinehes
found; I desire that every of them also as well as you would receive the word
of Exhortation, each in his place and office to set himself uprightly and
unpartially as in the sight of God to advance to the utmost of his power the
due course and administration of Justice. And for this purpose, by occasion of
this Scripture, which points us to the End of these Assemblies; I shall crave
leave to reflect upon another, which gives us sundry particular directions
conducing to that End. And it is that whereinto we made some entrance the last
Assizes, and would have now proceeded farther, had not the heavy hand of God
upon us in this his grievous visitation led me to make choice rather of this
Text, as the more seasonable. That other is written in Exodus 23. the three
first verses. [ Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine hand with
the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. Thou shall not follow a multitude to
do evil: neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.] five
special Rules, shared out among five sorts of persons; the Accuser, the
Witness, the Iurer, the Pleader, the Officer. I will but give each of them
some brief intimation of their duty, from their several proper rules; and
conclude.

If thou come hither then as a Plantiffe, Sect. 31.
or other Party in a civil cause, the Accuser;
or to give voluntary Information upon a Statute, or to prosecute against a
Malefactor, or any way in the nature of an Accuser: Let neither the hope of
gain or of any other advantage to thy self, not secret malice or envy third
party, sway thee beyond the bounds of truth and equity, no not a little; either
to devise an untruth against thy neighbor of thine own head, or by an hard
construction to deprave the harmless actions or speeches of others, or to
make them worse than they aggravations; or to take advantage of letters and
syllables to entrap innocence without a fault. When thou art to open thy mouth
against thy brother, set the first Rule of that Text as a watch before the door
of thy lips, Thou shall not raise a false report.

Sect. 32.
If thou come hither, secondly, to be used as a Witness; the Witness.
perhaps S^e Cic. pro Flac. although Turneb. 13. advers. 14. interpret the
Proverb otherwise; Graeca fide, id est optima.
Graeca fide, like a downright Knight of the post, that makes of an -- quibus
jusjurandum jocus est, testimonium ludus: laus, merces, gratia, gratulatio
proposita est -- Cic. pro Flac.
oath a jest, and a pastime of a deposition; or dealt withal by a bribe, or
Landlord or great Neighbor, or egged on with thine own spleen or malice, to
swear and forswear as these shall prompt thee; or to (...). dictum solenne
Graecorum.
enterchange deposition with thy friend as they used to do in Greece, Hodie
mihi, cras tibi, (swear thou for me to day, I Will swear for thee to morrow;) or
tempted with any corrupt respect whatsoever, by thy word or oath to strengthen
a false and unrighteous report. When thou come to lay thy hand upon the
book, lay the second Rule in that Text to thy heart, Put not thy hand with the
wicked to be an Though hand join in Prove. 19.5. and 9.
hand The false witness shall not be unpunished.

If thou come hither, thirdly, to serve for the King upon the Grand Inquest,
Sect. 33. the Iurer.
or between party and party, in any cause whatsoever (like those -- deinde
Praetores urbani, qui jurati debent optimum quemque in selectos judices
refer. Cic. p^o Cluent. Unum ex selectis judicibus objiciebat. Horat. 1.
Sermon. sat. 4.
selecti judices among the Romans, whom the Praetor for the year being was to
nominate, and that upon oath, out of the most able and serviceable men in his
judgment, both for estate, understanding, and integrity;) or to serve upon the
perhaps at thine own suit to get something toward bearing charges for thy
journey; or yoaked with a crafty or a wilful foreman that is made beforehand,
and a mess of tame after-men withal that dare not think of being wiser than
their leader; or unwilling to stickle against a major part, whether they go
right or wrong; or resolved already upon the Verdict, no matter what the
Evidence be: Consider what is the weight and religion of an Oath. Remember that
he sins not less that sins with company. Whatsover the evidence shall
lead thee. The third Rule in that Text must be thy rule, Thou shall not follow
a multitude to do evil. They are silly, that in point either of Religion or
Justice, would teach us to measure either Truth, or Right, by multitudes.

If thou come hither, fourthly, as to thine harvest, Sect. 34.
to reap some fruit of thy long and expencefull study in the Laws, the
Pleader;
and to assist thy Client and his cause with thy Counsel, Learning, and
Eloquence: think not, because thou speak for thy Fee, that therefore thy
tongue is not thine own, but thou must speak what thy Client will have thee
speak, be it true or the liberty of the Court, and perhaps the favor of the
Judge, that therefore thy tongue is thine own, and thou may speak thy
pleasure to the prejudice of the Adversaries person or cause: Seek not
preposterously to win the name of a good Lawyer, by wresting and perverting
good Laws: or the opinion of the best Counselor, by giving the worst and the
shrewdest Counsel. Count it not as Protagoras did, the glory of thy
profession, by subtilty of wit and volubility of tongue to (...). A Gol. 5.
Noct. At. 5.
make the but like a Vir bonus dicendi peritus. Cicero.
good man, as well as good Orator, use the power of thy tongue and wit to
shame impudence, and protect innocence, to crush oppressors, and succor the
afflicted, to advance Justice and Equity, and to help them to right that suffer
wrong. Let it be as a ruled case to thee in all thy pleadings, not to speak in
any cause to wrest judgment.

If lastly, thou art in any place or office of service, or trust, or command,
or attendance about the Courts: Sect. 35.
courtesy, or a foe a spite. the officer,
Do not show a cast of thy office, for the promise or hope of a reward, in
helping a great offender out of the Briars. Compel not men that have been long
weather-beaten in the Maine, and are now arrived at the Haven of their
business, to wither for their pasports, until they have offered some
sacrifice to that great Diana, Expedition. Let no fear, or hope, or bribe, or
letter, or envy, or favor, no not charity it self the Person to disregard the
Cause. If you would be charitable to the poor, give them from your own, but
do not carve them from another trencher. To relieve a poor man in his wants,
is the proper office of Charity: but Justice must have no eyes to see, nor
bowels to yearne at the wants of any man. rich or poor that brings his
cause hither; Currat lex, Let him find such as he brings; Let him have as
his cause deserves. The last of those Rules must be thine, Thou shall not
countenance, no not a poor man in his cause.

If any of these to whom I have now spoken, Accusers, Witnesses, Sect. 36.
and the Judge.
Iurers, Pleaders, Officers, shall transgress these rules to the perverting of
Justice: our refuge must be next under God to you that are the Magistrates of
Justice, and sit upon the Bench of Judicature. At your gravity and authority
sanctuary, against them that pursue us wrongfully, as at the horns of the
Altar. It is your Duty, (or if it be, as to most men it is, a more pleasing
thing, to be remembered of their Power 'th^^ of their Duty) it is in your power,
if not to reform all the abuses and corruptions of these persons; yet to curb
their open insolences, and to contain them at least within modest bounds. Nay,
since I have begun to magnify your power: let me speak it with all the due
reverence to God and the King, there is no power so great, over which (in a
qualified sense) you have not a greater power. It is in your power, to Psalm.
75.2, 3.
bear up the pillars of the State when the land is even dissolved, and the
pillars thereof grown weak: for that is done by judging the Congregation
according to right, Psalm. 75. In yours; to make this yet flourishing Country
and Kingdom glorious or despicable: for Prove. 14.34.
righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, Prove.
14. In yours; to settle the Throne upon the King, and to entaile it by a kind
of perpetuity unto the right heir for many succeeding generations: for Prove.
16.12.
The Throne is established by 16. In yours; to discharge Gods punishing Angel,
who now destroys us with a grievous destruction, and by unsheathing your
Sword to make him sheath his: as here in my Text, Phinehes stood up, and
executed judgment, and the plague ceased. In yours; though you be but Gods on
Earth, and in these Courts, mortal and petty Gods, yet to send prohibitions
into the Court of Heaven, and there to stop the judgments of the great and
Eternal GOD before they come forth; yea and when the decree is gone forth, to
stay execution. In a word, as it was said to Jeremy, but in another sense, you
are Jer. 1.10.
Set over Nations and over Kingdoms to root out, and to destroy, to build, and
to plant. Only then be entreated, to use that power God has given you, unto
edification, and not unto destruction. And now I have done my message. God
grant unto all of us, that by our hearty sorrow and repentance for our sins
past, by resolutions of future amendment, and by setting our selves faithfully
and uprightly in our several places and callings to do God and the King and
our Country service, in beating down sin, and rooting out sinners; we may by
his good grace and mercy obtain pardon of our sins, and deliverance from his
wrath, and be preserved by his power through faith unto salvation. Now to God
the Father, the Son, etc.

THE FIRST Grantham Linc. October. 3. 1620.
3 Kings 21.29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his
sons days will I bring the evil upon his


THe History of this whole Chapter affords matter of much Variety and Use:. 1.
but no passage in it so much either of Wonder or Comfort, The Coherence.
as this in the close of the whole both Story and Chapter. That there should be
Mighty-ones sick, with longing after their meaner neighbors Vineyards; That
there should be crafty heads to contrive for greedy Great-ones what they
unjustly desire; That there should be officious Instruments to do a piece of
legal injustice, upon a Great man's letter; That there should be knights of the
Post to depose any thing though never so false, in any cause though never so
bad, against any man though never so innocent; That an honest man cannot be
secure of his life, so long as he has any thing else Sic r^us ille fere est,
de quo victoria lucro Esse potest -- Ovid de nuce.
worth the forepart of the Chapter of all this, in Ver. 4. hic.
Ahab sickning, and Ver. 11.
Iesabel plotting, and the (d) Elders obeying, and the Ver. 13.
VVitnesses accusing, and poor Ver. 13.
Naboth suff^ring. But what is there in all this, singularly either Strange or
Comfortable? All is but Oppression: Active, in the rest; Passive, in Naboth.
And what wonder in either of these? Juven. Satyr. 13.
-- stupet haec, qui jam post terga reliquit Sexaginta annos? himself may pass
for a wonder, if he be of any standing, or experience in the world, that takes
either of these for a wonder. And as for matter of Comfort: there is matter
indeed, but of Detestation in Pity in the other, in neither of Comfort.

To pass by the other Occurrents also in the latter part of the Chapter,. 2.
Argument.
as, That a great Oppressor should hug himself in the cleanly carriage and
fortunate success of his damned plots and witty villainies; That a weak Prophet
should have heart and face enough to proclaim judgment against an Oppressing
King in the prime of his Jollity; That a bloody Tyrant should tremble at the
voice of a poor Prophet; and the rest (some of which we shall have occasion to
take in incidentally in our passage along:) mark we well but this close of the
Chapter in the words of my Text; And Strange, or more Comfortable.

Comfortable: in that Gods mercy is so exceedingly magnified, and such strong
assurance given to the truly penitent of finding gracious acceptance at the
hands of their God, when they find him so apprehensive of but an outward
enforced semblance of contrition from the hands of an Hypocrite. Strange: in
that Gods Mercy is here magnified, even to the hazard of other his divine
perfections; his Holiness, his Truth, his Justice. For each of these is made
in some sort questionable, that so his mercy might stand clear unquestioned. A
rotten-hearted Hypocrite humbles himself repents not truly: and God
accepts him, and rewards him. Here is Gods mercy; in giving respect to one
that ill deserved it: but where is his Holiness the while, (being Hab. 1.13.
a God of pure eyes, that requires Psalm. 51.6.
Truth in the inward parts, and will not behold iniquity;) thus to grace Sin,
and countenance Hypocrisy? A fearful judgment is denounced against Ahabs
house for his Oppression: but upon his humiliation, the sentence, (at least
part of it) is reversed. Here is Mercy still; in revoking a sentence of
destruction: and if somewhat may be said for his Holiness too, because it was
but a temporal and temporary favor; yet where is his Truth the while, (being a
Tit. 1.2.
God that cannot lie, and James 1.17.
With whom is no variableness, neither so much as the bare shadow of turning)
thus to say and unsay, and to alter the thing that is Judgment is deserved by
the Father: upon suspended during his life, and lights upon the Son. Here is
yet more Mercy; in not striking the Guilty: and if somewhat may be said for
Gods truth too, because what was threatened, (though not presently,) is yet 4
Kin. ^0.10.
at last performed; yet where is his Justice the while, (being a 1 Pet. 1.17.
God that without respect of persons renders to every man according to his own
works, and will Exodus 34.7.
Not acquit the guilty, neither condemn the innocent;) thus to sever the Guilt
and the Punishment, and to lay the Judgment which he spares from the Father
upon the Son, from the more wicked Father upon the less wicked Son?

God, to magnify the riches of his Mercy, is content to put his Holiness, and
his Truth, and his Justice to a kind of venture.. 3.
and Division of the Text.
That so his afflicted ones might know, on what object especially to fasten the
eyes of their souls: not on his Holiness, not on his Truth, not on his Justice;
not only, nor chiefly on these, but on his Mercy. He seeks more general glory
in, and would have us take more special knowledge of, and affords us more
singular comfort from his Mercy, than any of the rest: as if he desired we
should esteem him unholy, or untrue, or unjust, or any thing, rather than
unmercifull. Yet is he neither unholy, nor untrue, nor unjust, in any of his
proceedings with the sons of men: but Psalm. 145.17.
Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and true in in all his
words. And in this particular of his proceedings with King Ahab at this time, I
hope by his blessed assistance so to acquit his Holiness and Truth and Justice
from all sinister imputations; as that he may be not only magnified in his
mercy, but justified also in the rest, and Psalm. 51.4.
Clear when he is judged: as we shall be thereunto occasioned now and hereafter
in the handling of this Scripture. Wherein are three main things considerable.
First, the Ground, or rather the occasion of Gods dealing so favorably Ahab;
namely Ahabs humiliation; [Seest thou how Ahab humbles himself before me?
because he humbles himself before me, I will not, etc.] Secondly, the great
Favor showed to Ahab thereupon; the suspension of a Judgment denounced; [ I
will not bring the evil in his days.] Thirdly, the Limitation of that favor;
it is but a suspension for a time, no utter removal of the judgment; But in
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.] Wherein we shall be
occasioned to enquire; how the first of these may stand with Gods holiness; the
second with his Truth; the third with his Justice. And first of Ahabs
humiliation: See thou how Ahab humbles

This Ahab was King of Israel, that is, King over those ten Tribes which
revolted from Rehoboam the Son of Solomon,. 4.
Ahabs person considered;
and clave to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. Search the whole sacred story in the
Books of Kings and Chronicles; and (unless we will be so very charitable, as
notwithstanding many strong presumptions of his See 4. Kin. 10.31.
Hypocrisy, to exempt Iehu the son of Nimshi, and that is but twenty;) we
shall not find in the whole List and Catalogue of the Kings of Israel, one good
one, that clave unto the Lord with an upright heart. Twenty Kings of Israel;
and not one, (or but one,) good: and yet than this Ahab, of the twenty, scarce
one worse. It is said in the sixteenth Chapter of this Book, that 3 Kings 16.30.
Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were
before him, at verse 30. and at verse 33. that Ibid. 33.
He did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger, than all the Kings of
Israel that were before him: and at verse 25. of this Chapter, that Ver. 27. hic
There An Oppressor he was, and a Murderer, and an Idolater, and a Persecuter
of that holy Truth, which God had plentifully revealed by his Prophets, and
powerfully confirmed by Miracles, and mercifully declared by many gracious
deliverances (even to him) in such manner as that he could not but know it to
be the Truth; and therefore an Hypocrite: and in all likelihood, an obstinate
sinner against the holy Ghost, and a Castaway.

This is Ahab: this the man. But what is his carriage? what does he?. 5.
and his carriage, with the Observations thence.
he humbles himself before the Lord. [ See thou how Ahab ] The manner and
occasion of his humbling, is set down a little before; at V. 27. And it came to
pass, when Ahab heard those words (the words of Verse 20.24. hic.
Eliah the Prophet, dealing plainly and roundly with him for his hateful
Oppression and Murder) That he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. And that is the
humbling here spoken and allowed of: and for which God here promises that he
will not bring the evil in his days. Lay all this together; the man and his
ill conditions, and his present carriage, with the occasion and success of it:
and it offers three notable things to consideration. See first, how far an
Hypocrite, a Castaway may the outward performance of holy duties, and
particularly in the practice of Repentance: here is Ahab humbled; such a man,
penitent. See again secondly; how deep Gods word, though in the mouth but of
weak instruments, when he is pleased to give strength unto it, pierces into
the consciences of obstinate sinners, and brings the proudest of them upon
their knees, in despite of their hearts: here is Ahab quelled by Eliah; such a
great one, by such a See yet again thirdly; how prone God is to mercy, and how
ready to apprehend any advantage (as it were) and occasion to Ahab humbled, and
his judgment adjourned; such a real substantial favor, and yet upon such an
empty shadow of Repentance. Of these three at this time in their order: and of
the first, first.

. 6.
An Hypocrite may go very far in the outward performances of holy duties.
Observat. I. How (...) an Hypocrite may go in the performance of holy duties,
For the right conceiving of which assertion; Note first, the common graces of
Illumination, and Edification, and good dexterity for the practicing of some
particular Calling; which gifts, with sundry other like, are oftentimes found
even in such apparently wicked and profane men, as 2 Timothy 3.5.
the form (much less the power) of Godliness: but I speak even of those
Graces, which de tota specie (if they be true and sincere) are the undoubted
blessed fruits of Gods holy renewing Spirit of sanctification, such as are
Repentance, Faith, Hope, Joy, Humility, Patience, Temperance, Meekness, Zeal,
Reformation, etc. in such as these, Hypocrites may go very far, as to the
semblance, and performance. Note secondly, that I speak the inward power and
reality of these graces; for Cast-aways and Hypocrites, not having union with
God by a lively faith in his Son, nor communion with him by the effectual
working of his Spirit, have no part nor fellowship in these things, which are
proper to the chosen and called of God, and peculiar to those that are his Tit.
12.4.
peculiar people: but I speak only of the outward performances, and exercises
of such actions, as may seem to flow from such spiritual graces habitually
rooted in the heart; when as yet they may spring also (and, when they are found
in unregenerate men, do so spring) Nature, perhaps moralized, or otherwise
restrained, but yet unrenewed by saving and sanctifying grace. Note thirdly,
that when Hypocrite may go very far in such outward performances; by the
Hypocrite is meant not only the gross or formal Hypocrite, but every natural
and unregenerate man, (including also the Elect of God before their effectual
calling and conversion,) as also Reprobates and Cast-awayes for the whole time
of their lives: all of which may have such fair semblances of the forenamed
Graces, and of other like them, as not only others (who are to judge the best
by the Law of Charity) but themselves also, through the wretched deceitfulness
of their own wicked and corrupt hearts, may mistake for those very graces they
resemble.

The Parable of the seed sown in the stony ground,. 7.
may serve for a full both declaration and proof hereof: with the application,
which seed is said to have sprouted forth immediately, Mat. 13.5.
Springing up forthwith after it was sown; but yet never came to good, but
speedily withered away: because for want of deepnesse of earth it had not Luke
8.6
moisture enough to feed it to any perfection of growth and ripeness. And that
branch of the Parable our blessed Savior himself in his exposition hearers; as
Mat. 13.20. Mark 4.16.
When they hear the Word immediately receive it with gladness, and who so
forward as they to repent, and believe, and reform their lives? but yet all
that forwardness comes to nothing, they endure but for a short time, Mat.
13.21. and Mar. 4.17.
Because they have no root in themselves, but want the sap and moisture of
Grace to give life and lasting to those beginnings and imperfect offers and
essays of goodness, they made show of. Here are good affections (to see to)
unto the good word of God, they receive it; it works not only upon their
judgments, but it seems also to rejoice, yea after a sort to ravish their
hearts, so as they feel a kind of tickling pleasure and delight in it; which
the Apostle calls Heb. 6.4, 5.
Tasting of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, Hebreus 6. And as they receive the seed joyfully, so it
appears quickly; it springs up anon in the likeness of Repentance, and
Faith, and Obedience, and newness of life. They may be touched with a deep
feeling of their sins; and with heavy hearts, and many tears confess, and
bewail them; and not only promise, but also purpose amendment. They may be
superficially affected with, and find some overly comfort and gracious promises
of mercy and reconciliation and salvation which are contained in the glorious
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and have some degrees of persuasion that those
promises are true, and some flashes of confidence with all of their own
personal interest therein. They may reform themselves in the general course of
their lives in sundry particulars: refraining from some gross disorders, and
avoiding the occasions of them, wherein they have formerly lived and delighted,
and practicing many outward duties of Piety and Charity, conformable to the
letter of the Laws of both Tables: and misliking errors or corruptions of the
times and places wherein they live; and all this to their own and others
thinking, with as great zeal unto Godliness, and as through indignation against
sin, as any others. All this they may do: and yet all the while be rotten at
the heart; wholly carnal and unrenewed; quite empty of sound Faith, and
Repentance, and Obedience, and every good grace; full of damnable Pride and
Hypocrisy; and in the present state of damnation, and, in the purpose of God,
Reprobates and Cast-aways.

. 8.
Examples hereof we have, in 1 Samuel 8.9.
Saul's care for the destroying and proof thereof.
in 4 King. 10.16, 28.
Iehu's zeal in killing Baals Priests; in Mark 6.10.
Herod's hearing of John Baptist gladly, and doing many things thereafter; and,
to omit others, in this wicked King Ahab present fit of Repentance and
Humiliation. At all which, and sundry other like effects, we shall the less
need to marvel; if we shall seriously consider the Causes and Reasons thereof.
I will First, great is the force of Natural conscience, even in the most wicked
men; especially when it is awakened by the hand of God in any heavy
affliction, or by the voice of God threatening it with vengeance.

It pursues the guilty soul* with continual and restless clamours, and he
sees that something he must needs do, if he knew what, to stop the mouth of
Conscience; and so he falls a repenting, and reforming, and resolving of a
new course: which though it be not sincere, and so cannot work a perfect cure
upon a wounded conscience, but that still it rankleth inward; yet it gives
some present ease, and allayeth the anguish of it for the time. Secondly, God
will have the power of his own Ordinance Exodus 14.4.
honor upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians: that his own faithful ones may see
and admire the power of that holy seed, whereby they are begotten again from
the dead; not doubting but that the Gospel will prove Romans 1.16.
The power of God unto salvation to when they behold in it the power of
conviction upon many that believe not. Thirdly, God in his most wise and
providence so orders and disposes not only outward things, but even the
hearts, and wills, and thoughts, and actions of men, permitting his children to
fall backwards into sins, and bringing on his enemies toward goodness, so far
as he thinks good: as for other purposes, so for this end also among the
rest, the man might not be able See Eccl. 9.1.
from those things he sees happen unto other men, or done by them, to judge
infallibly of the state of his brothers soul. God reserving this Royalty unto
himself, to be the only Ier. 11.20. and 17.10.
Searcher of the of others. For these and sundry other Reasons it comes to
pass, that Hypocrites and Cast-aways, do oftentimes go so far as they do, in
the outward performances of holy duties.

Now if men may go thus far, and yet be in the state of damnation: what hope
then (First) of Heaven,. 9.
Inferences thence. 1. of terror against profaneness.
for such profane ungodly wretches, as are so far from having 2 Timothy 3.5.
the power, as that they have not so much as the least show of godliness? What
will become of those that Psalm. 1.1.
Sit them down in the chair of scorners, and despise the good Word of God, and
make a scoff of those Mark. 6.20.
hear it gladly, and Mat. 13.20
receive it with joy, and are content to be ordered by it in many things, shall
yet go to hell? Certainly Ahab and Herod, and such cursed miscreants, shall
rise up in judgment against these men, and condemn them; and they shall have
Mat. 24.51.
Their portion with Hypocrites, shall I say? Alas, woeful is their case, if
their portion fall but there: but let them take heed lest their portion be not
so good as the Hypocrites; and that it be not ten times easier for Ahab and
Herod, and the whole Hypocrites, at the day of judgment, than for them.

Secondly, what a stark shame would it be for us,. 10.
who have received the Romans 8.13.
First fruits of the Spirit, 2. of exhortation, to abound in the fruits of
godliness.
not to bring forth the Gal. 5.22.
fruits of the Spirit in some good abundance, in the frequent and comfortable
and actual exercises of those habitual graces that are in us, of Faith,
Repentance, Love, Reformation, Zeal, and the rest: the counterfeits of these
graces are oftentimes so eminent, even in Hypocrites and Cast-awayes? Shall a
piece of rotten wood, or a Gloworm shine so bright in the dark; and our holy
Lamps, fed with Oil from Heaven, burn so dim? Nay, Mat. 5.16.
Let our Lights also, as well as theirs, shine before men; yea and outshine
theirs too: that men may see our truly good works, as well as their seeming
ones, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Although all be not gold that
glistereth; yet pity it is, that true gold should gather rust, and lose the
luster for want of using; when Brass and Copper, and baser metals are kept
bright with scowring. blear-eyed Leah have cause to rejoice against beautiful
Rachel, or to insult over her barrenness: neither let us who profess our selves
to be Mat. 11.19.
Wisdoms children, suffer our selves to be outstript by Natures brats, in
justifying our Mother. Rather let their splendida peccata provoke us to a godly
jealousy and emulation, and spur us up to the quickening of those Graces God
has given us: that the power of Godliness in us, may be at least as fruitful
in all outward performances, as the show of it is in them.

Thirdly, this should teach us caution in our judging of other men's estates..
11.
We are apt to offend both ways. If we see a gross scandalous sin; 3. of
admonition to forbear judging.
as Drunkenness, Adultery, Oppression, or Perjury; but especially if he live
long therein: by and by he is a Reprobate with us; or at least he is not yet in
the state of Grace. Thus we speak, thus we judge: but we consider not the
whilst, how far and how long God in his holy wisdom may suffer foul temptations
to prevail against his chosen ones. On the other side, if we see a man forward
in the duties of Religion, charitably affected to the poor, just and upright in
his dealings with men, stoutly opposing against common corruptions, suffering
for the profession of the truth: by and by he is a Saint with us; and we stick
not sometimes in our folly to wish that our souls might speed as that man's soul
at a venture. But we consider not the whilst, how far the force of Natural
Conscience, and common Moral Grace (if you will allow me to speak so
improperly) may lead a man onward unto all outward performances, who was yet
never effectually called, nor truly sanctified. And yet, busy fools that we
are, we cannot keep our selves in our own bounds; but we must be meddling with
Gods prerogative, and thrusting our selves in his chair; and be judging of our
brethren, whose hearts we are so far from knowing, as that we are scarce well
acquainted lawful commission have we at all to judge? or what certain evidence
have we, whereby to judge? Infallible signs we cannot have from any outward
things, either of the want, or of the having of grace, in other men: yet of the
two, far more the want, than of the having of grace. Because there may be
such an open course held in evil things, as we may justly doubt whether such a
course can stand with grace or no: whereas there cannot be any course held in
good things outwardly, but such as may stand with Hypocrisy. What are we then
to do? Even this: to use the judgment of Probability, hoping with
cheerfulness that there is grace, where we see comfortable signs of it: and
to use the judgment of Charity, still 1 Cor. 13.7.
hoping the best (though not without some Jude 23.
fear,) that there may be Grace, where we see fearful signs of the want of
it. But for the judgment Infallibility either pro or con, what sinful man
dares challenge that unto himself; unless it be that 2 These. 2.3.
man of sin, who has nestled himself higher than into Peter's Chair, into the
Throne of God, sitting in the Temple of God, and there determining as God, and
with his breath damning and sainting whom he lists? But let him go: and let
this be our direction in this point. Think we comfortably, where we see no
reason to the contrary: hope we charitably, even where we do see some reason to
the contrary. But judge we neither way peremptorily and definitively,
whatsoever probabilities we see either way: since we know not how far a
sanctified believer sin; nor how far a graceless Hypocrite may go in the show
of Godliness. That is the third Use.

The last and main Inference, is for self-tryall.. 12.
For if a man may go thus far, and yet be an Hypocrite, be a Castaway: 4. Of
direction; for the trial of sincerity:
it will concern every one of us, as we desire to have comfortable, both
assurance of present Grace, that we are not hypocrites, and hope of future
Glory, that we are not Cast-awayes; so to be district in making Trial, whether
those Graces that seem to be in us be true, or but counterfeit, and whether the
acts thereof be fruits of sincerity, or but of hypocrisy. Let us not therefore
flatter our selves, or be too jolly upon it, if we find in our selves some
shows of Godliness; but let us rather labor to find out whether there be in
us the power and life of Godliness or no. For there is a kind of
righteousness such as it is, an outward formal righteousness, in Scribes and
Pharisees, and Hypocrites: but that will not serve the turn; Mat. 5.20.
Unless our righteousness exceed theirs, we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Beloved, Hypocrisy is spun of a fine thread, and is not
easily discernable, without very diligent Examination. And things are not to be
measured by the outward show, or by the lump and bulk; hear the word of God
with Joy; do thou bewail thy sins with tears; do thou avoid gross
sins with care; do thou oppose against common corruptions with zeal? These
are indeed comfortable signs, but no infallible evidences of Grace: for what
is there in all this, which Ahab, and Saul, and Herod, and Judas, and other
Hypocrites, either have not, or might not have done? But, if not fruits; by
what other means then may a man come to know the sanctification of his heart,
and the sincerity of these affections? Divines in their Treatises and Writings
have set down sundry notes and marks, whereby to make this trial: but I would
especially commend to your observation, two only out of all that variety, which
two are indeed as good as a thousand; namely, Integrity and Constancy: for
these two are never in the Hypocrite.

. 13.
First, for Integrity. The Hypocrite (we heard) might go far in hearing, by the
marks 1. Of Integrity.
in believing, in sorrowing, in reforming, in suffering; but his affections
Faith, and the conscience of that Obedience he owes to God, but from other
respects,) are partial in all those Duties; and carry him so far only, as
those false grounds, which first gave motion to those affections, lead him, and
no farther. He receives the word with joy* so far as it tickleth the ear with
choicenesse of phrase, and variety of elocution; so far as it sits with his
humor, and keeps fair and far off from meddling with his bosom sin: but
he is not equally delighted with every part, and with every point of Gods word,
and truth. If the right string be touched, if his sweet darling-sinne rubb him
where he is galled, and he kicketh at it. Mark 6.20.17.27.
Herod heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things willingly: but when his
incestuous marriage was meddled withal; then the Luke 13.3^.
Fox was uncased, and the Hypocrite appeared in his own colors, and the
Baptist lost first his liberty, and then after his head for his labor. And the
young man, when Christ told him, what he must do to inherit eternal life, in
the general, Mat. 19.17, 20.
[ Keep the Commandments, etc.] was no doubt, a jolly jocund man, [ All these
have I kept from my youth up:] but when Christ hitteth him home, and presses
upon ibid. ver. 21.
[ One thing is wanting, etc.] this nipped him in the head, and struck cold to
his heart, and (the Text says) Ibid. 22.
He went away sorrowful. And ever mark it, in something or other the Hypocrite
bewrays himself what he is; if not to the observation of others, yet at least
sufficiently for the conviction of his own heart, if he would not be wanting to
himself in the due search and trial of his heart. A man's blood rises, when he
hears a stranger swear an Oath: but if the same man can hear his prentice
lie, and equivocate, and cosen, and never moove at it; let him not be too brag
of his zeal: his coldness here false fire, and a fruit, not of true zeal, but
of Hypocrisy. A Jesuit makes scruple of disclosing an intended treason,
revealed to him in confession; but he makes no bones of laying a powder plot,
or contriving the Murder of an anointed King. A Pharisee is very precise in
Mat. 23.23.
Tithing; but balketh justice and mercy. One straineth at a Ibid. 24.
Gnat, and swalloweth a Camel; makes conscience of some petty sins,
neglecting greater: Another casts out a beam, but feels not a moat; makes
conscience of some greater sins, neglects smaller. Shame of the world, and
the cry of people, makes him forbear some sins; an eye had to his own private
and secret ends, other some; fear of temporal punishment, or (it may be)
eternal, other some; hope of some advantage another way, as in his credit,
profit, etc. other some; the terrors of an affrighted conscience, other some:
but if in the mean time there be no care, nor other sins, where there appears
no hinderance from these or the like respects; all is naught, all is but
counterfeit and damnable hypocrisy. The rule never fails, Op. imperfect. in
Mar. hom. 45.
Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit. True obedience, as it disputes not
the command, but obeys cheerfully; so neither does it divide the command, but
obeys equally. David had wanted one main assurance of the uprightness of his
heart, if he had not had an equal and universal Psa. 119.6.
Respect to all Gods Commandments. That is the first note of Sincerity;
Integrity.

The other is Constancy; continuance, or lasting.. 14.
The seeming of Hypocrites may be as forward, and impetuous for the time, 2. Of
Constancy.
as the true Graces of the sincere believer; nay more forward oftentimes: as in
the Mat. 13.5, 6.
stony ground, the seed sprang up so much the sooner, by how much it had the
less depth of earth. But the very same cause, that made it put up so soon,
made it wither again as soon; even because it wanted deepnesse of earth. So the
Hypocrite, when the fit takes him, he is all on the spur; there is no way
with him, but a new man he will become out of hand, yea that he will; Persius.
Momento turbinis. But he sets on too violently, to hold out long: this
reformation ripeneth too fast, to be right spiritual at hand, but naught at
length, so is the Hypocrite; free and fiery for a spurt, but he jadeth and
tyreth in a journey. But true grace all to the contrary; as it ripeneth for the
most part by leisure, so it ever Qualitatis verae tenor permanet: falsa non
durant. Senec. Epist. 120.
lasts longer: as Philosophers say of Habits, that as they are gotten hardly,
so they are not lost easily. We heard but now, that the Faith, Repentance,
Reformation, Obedience, Joy, sorrow, Zeal, and other the graces and affections
of Hypocrites, had their first motion and issue from false and erroneous
grounds: as Shame, Fear, Hope, and such respects. And it thence comes to
pass, that where these respects cease, which the graces themselves can no more
stand, than a House can stand, when the foundation is taken from under it. The
Boy that goes to his book, no longer than his Master holds the rod over him;
the Masters back once turned, away goes the Book, and he to play: and right so
is it with the Hypocrite. Take away the rod from Pharaoh; and he will be old
Pharaoh still. And Ahab, here in this Chap. thus humbled before God at the
voice of his Prophet; this fit once past, we see in the next Chap. regards
neither God nor Prophet, but through unbelief 3 Kin. 22.27.
disobeyeth God, and imprisoneth the Prophet. Now then, here is a wide
difference between the Hypocrite, and the godly man. The one does all by fits,
and by starts, and by sudden motions and flashes: whereas the other goes on
fairly and soberly in a settled constant regular course of humiliation and
obedience. In Categ. cap. de qualit.
Aristotle has excellently taught us, to distinguish between colors that
arise from passion, and from complexion. The one, he says, is scarce worth the
name Quality or color; because it scarce gives denomination to the subject
wherein it is. If Socrates be of a pale, or an high-colored complexion, to the
question, [ Qualis est Socrates? What a like man is Socrates?] it may be fitly
answered (says Aristotle) that he is a pale man, or that he is an
high-colored man. But when a man of another complexion, is yet pale for fear,
or anger, or red with blushing; we do not use to say, neither can we say
properly, that he is a pale man, or a high-colored man. Accordingly we are to
pronounce of those good things that sometimes appear in Hypocrites. We call
them indeed Graces, and we do well, (because they seem hope that they be such,
as they seem:) but they are in true judgment nothing less than true graces,
neither should they indeed (if we were able to discern the falsenesse of them)
give denomination to those Hypocrites in whom they are found. For why should a
man from a sudden and short fit of Repentance, or Zeal, or Charity, or
Religion, be called a Penitent, or a Zealous, or a Charitable, or a Religious
man; more than a man for once or twice blushing an high-colored man? Then are
Graces true, when they are habitual and constant, and equal to themselves. That
is the second Note; Constancy.

. 15
I will not trouble you with other Notes, besides these. Do but two together;
Both joined together for Trial.
and they will make a perfect good Rule for us to judge our own hearts by, and
to make trial of the sincerity of those good things, that seem to be in us.
Measure them not by the present heat, (for that may be as much, perhaps more,
in an hypocrite, than in a true believer;) but by their Integrity and
Constancy. A man of a cold complexion has as much heat in a sharp fit of an
Ague, as he that is of a hot constitution, and in health; and more too: his
blood is more enflamed, and he burns more. But whether do you think is the
more kindly heat; that which comes Fever, or that which arises from the
condition of a man's Temper? No man makes doubt of it, but this is the more
kindly, though that may be more sensible and intense. Well then; a man finds
himself hot in his body, and fain he would know, whether it be Calor praeter
naturam, or no: whether a kindly and natural heat, or else the forerunner or
symptom Universality, and Constancy. First for Universality; Physicians say of
heat, and sweat, and such like things, Vniversalia salutaria, partialia ex
morbo. If a man be hot in one part, and cold in another; as if the palms of his
hands burn, and the soles of his feet be cold; then all is not right: but if he
be of an indifferent equal heat all over, that is held a good sign of health.
Then for Constancy and Lasting; if the heat come by fits and starts, and
paroxysms, leaping eftsoons and suddenly out of one extreme into another, so
as the party one while gloweth as fire, another while is chill and cold as ice,
and keeps not at any certain stay; that is an ill sign too, and it is to be
feared there is an Ague either bred, or in breeding: but if he continue at some
reasonable certainty, and with in a good mediocrity of heat and cold; it is
thought a good sign of health. As men judge of the state of their bodies; by
the like rule judge thou of the state of thy soul. First, for integrity and
universality. Is thy Repentance, thy Obedience, thy Zeal, thy Hatred of sin,
other graces in thee Universal? equally bent upon all good, equally set against
all evil things? it is a good sign of Grace and Sanctification in the heart.
repentest of one sin, and persistest in another; if thou obeyest one
commandment, and breakest another; if thou art zealous in one point, and cool
in another; if thou hate one vice, and love another: flatter not thy self
too much; thou have reason to suspect all is not sound within. Then for
Continuance and Lasting, I deny not, but in case of prevailing temptations, the
godly may have sometimes uncomfortable and fearful intermissions in the
practice of godliness; which yet make him not altogether Graceless: as a man
may have sometimes little distempers in his body, through mis-dyet or
otherwise, and yet not be heart-sick; or greater too sometimes to make him
sick, and yet be heart-whole. But yet if for the most part, and in the ordinary
constant course of thy life, thou have the practice of repentance and
obedience, and other fruits of grace in some good comfortable measure; it is a
good sign of Grace, and Sanctification in the heart. But if thou have these
things only by fits and starts, and sudden moods; and art sometimes violently
hot upon them, other sometimes again, and oftener, key cold: presume not too
much upon shows, but suspect thy self still of Hypocrisy, and Insincerity;
and never cease by repentance and prayer, and the constant exercise of other
good graces, Physic and Diet thy soul, till thou have by Gods goodness put thy
self into some reasonable assurance, that thou art the true child of God, a
sincere believer, and not an Hypocrite; as Ahab here, notwithstanding all this
his solemn humiliation was. Here is Ahab an Hypocrite; and yet humbled before
the Lord.. 16.


But yet now, this humiliation such as it was, The opening of the second
O^servation.
what should work it in him? That we find declared at verse 27. [ And it came
to ] There came to him a message from God, by the hand of Eliah; and that was
it that humbled him. Alas, what was Eliah to Ahab? a silly plain Prophet to a
mighty King? that he durst thus presume to rush boldly and unsent-for into the
presence of such a potent Monarch, who had no less power, and withal more
color, to take away his life, than Naboth's? and that when he was in the top
of his jollity, solacing himself in the new-taken possession of his new-gotten
Vineyard; and there to his face charge him plainly with, and shake him up
roundly for, and denounce Gods judgments powerfully against, his bloody
abominable oppressions? We would think, a Monarch Idolatry, and accustomed to
blood, and hardened in Sin and Obstinacy, should not have brooked that
insolency from such a one as Eliah was, but have made his life a ransom for
his sauciness. And yet behold, the words of this underling in comparison, how
they fall like thunder upon the great guilty offender, and strike palsy into
his knees, and trembling into his joints, and tumble him from the height of his
jollity, and roll him in sackcloth and ashes, and cast him into a strong fit
of legal humiliation. See thou how Ahab is humbled before me?

. 17.
And here now comes in our second Observation: even, the power over the
Consciences of obstinate sinners; Observat. II. the power of Gods word.
powerful to 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
Cast down strong holds, and every high thought that exalts it self against
God. That which in Heb. 4. (if I mistake not the true understanding of that
place) is spoken of the Essential word of God, the second Person in the
ever-blessed Trinity; is also in some analogy true of the revealed word of
God, the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; that it Heb. 4.12.
is Quick and powerful, and (...).
more cutting than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder
of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow. Jer. 23.29.
Is not my word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like a hammer, 23. Like a
soft fire; to dissolve and melt the hearts of relenting sinners and true
converts: but like a strong hammer; to batter and break in pieces the rocky and
flinty consciences of obstinate and hardened offenders. Examples hereof if you
require: behold in the stories of the Kings, 1 Samuel 15.24.
Saul whining, when Samuel reproves him; in the books of the Prophets, the
John. 3.5.
Ninivites drooping, when Jonas threatens them; in the Acts of the Apostles,
Acts 24.25.
Felix trembling, when Paul discourses before him; in the Martyrologies of the
Church, Tyrants and bloody Persecutors maskered* at the bold confessions of
suffering Christians; in this Chapter, proud Ahab mourning, when Eliah tells
him his sin, and foretells him his punishment.. 18.


with the Causes thereof. 1. in the Instrument,
Effects, which might justly seem strange to us; if the Causes were One Cause,
and the Principal, is in the instrument, the Word: not from any such strength
in it self, for so it is but a dead letter; but because of Gods Ordinance in
it. For in his hands are the hearts and the tongues and the ears both of Kings
and Prophets: and he can easily, when he sees it good, put the spirit of zeal
and of power into the heart of the poorest Prophet, and as easily the spirit of
fear and of terror into the heart of the greatest King. He chooses weak
Instruments, (as here Eliah) and yet furnishes them with power, to effect
great matters: that so the glory might not rest upon the instrument, but
redound wholly to him as to the chief agent 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, says Saint Paul, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. We say, Words
are but wind; and indeed the words of the best Minister are no better, as they
are breathed out and uttered by sinful mortal man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: but yet this wind, as it is brea^hed in, and inspired by the
powerful eternal Spirit of God, is strong enough (by his effectual working
with it) not only to shake the top-branches, but to rend up the very
bottom-root of the tallest Cedar in Lebanon. Psalm. 29.4, 5.
Vox Domini confringens Cedros, Psalm. 29. [ The voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation; ]

Another Cause is in the Object;. 19.
and that is the force of Natural Conscience: 2. in the Object;
which the most presumptuous sinner can never so stifle, though he endeavor
all he can to do it, but that it will be sometimes snubbing, and stinging, and
lashing, and vexing him with ougly representations of his past sins, and
terrible suggestions of future vengeance. And then of all other times is the
force of it most lively; when the voice of God in his word awakeneth it after a
long dead sleep. Then it rises, and Sampson-like rouseth up it self, and
bestirreth it self lustily as a Giant refreshed with wine: and it does he
knows not what, and seeks for ease he knows not where. Then he would give
all Dives his wealth for Luke 16.24.
A drop of water to cool the heat he feels; and with Genesis 25.30, 31.
Esau part with his birthright, for any thing, though it were never so little
or mean, that would give him but the least present refreshing, and preserve him
from fainting. Then sackcloth, and ashes, and fasting, and weeping, and
mourning, and renting the garments, and tearing the hair, and knocking the
breast, and outcries to heaven, and all those other things, which former
security, whilst his conscience lay fast asleep, and at rest, are now in all
haste and greedily entertained, and all too little: if by any means they can
possibly give any ease or asswagement to the present torment he feels in his
soul.

. 20.3.
A third Cause is oftentimes in the Application of the Instrument in the fit
application of the one to the other.
For although Gods Word in the general be Powerful; and the Conscience of it
self be of a stirring Nature: yet then ordinarily does the Word of God work
most powerfully upon the Consciences of obstinate sinners, when it is thoroughly
and closely applied to some special corruption, whereunto the party cannot
plead Not-guilty; when the sin and the judgment are both so driven home,
that the guilty offender can neither avoid the evidence of the one, nor the
fear of the other. A plain instance whereof we have in this present history of
King Ahab. When Eliah first came to him in the Vineyard, he was pert enough,
Verse. 20. hic.
[ Have thou found me, ] But by that the Prophet had done with him; told him of
the sin, which was notorious, Verse. 19.
[ Have thou killed, and taken possession?] foretold him of the judgment,
which was heavy, Ver. 21, etc.
[ I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy Posterity, etc.] the
man was not the man: Eliah left him in a far other tune, than he found him in.
The Prophets words wrought sore upon him, and his Conscience wrought sore
within him; both together wrought him to the humiliation we now speak of: [ It
came to pass, when he heard these words, that he rent his clothes, etc.] If
you desire another instance, turn to Acts 24.25. where there is a right good
one, and Felix the Roman Deputy in Jury Act. 24.25.
Trembled when Paul reasoned of Justice, and of Temperance, and of the
judgment to come. What was that thing, may we think, in St. Paul's reasoning,
which especially made Felix to tremble? It is commonly taken to be the Doctrine
of the last judgment: which is indeed a terrible doctrine, and able (if it be
thoroughly apprehended) to make the stoutest of the sons of men to tremble. But
I take it that is not all. The very thing that made Felix tremble, seems
rather to be, that Paul's discourse fell upon those special vices, wherein he
was notably faulty, and then clapped in close with judgment upon them. For Felix
was noted of cruelty and injustice in the administration of the affairs of
Jury, (howsoever Tertullus like a smooth Orator, to curry favor with him, and
to do Paul a displeasure, did flatteringly Act. 24.2, etc.
commend his government:) and he was noted also of incontinency, both
otherwise, and especially in marrying Drusilla who was another man's wife.
Tacitus speaking of him in the fifth of his history, painteth him out thus;
Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
Per omnem saevitiam and libidinem jus regium servili ingenio exercuit. And for
such a man, as governed with cruelty and rapine, and lived in unchaste wedlock,
to hear one reason powerfully of Justice, and of Chastity, (for so much the
word (...) there used properly imports,) and of Judgment; tremble.. 21.


An inference against those that despise the Word.
Do thou consider this and tremble, whosoever thou art, that in thy thoughts
despisest the holy word of God; accounting of it but humane invention to keep
fools in awe withal: and thou also, whosoever thou art, that undervaluest this
precious treasure, for the meanness or other infirmities of the 2 Cor. 4.7.
earthen vessel wherein it is conveyed, Tell me, do thou not herein struggle
against the testimony and evidence of thine own heart? Does not thine own
Conscience and Experience tell thee, that this Ephesians. 6.17.
Sword of the Spirit has a keen edge, and biteth and pierces where it goes?
Has it not sometimes galled, and rubbed, and lanced, and cut thee to the very
bone; and entered even to the dividing asunder of the joints, and of the marrow?
Has it not sometimes (as it were) by subtle and serpentine insinuations
strangely wound Labyrinthean turnings that are in thine heart, into the very
in-most corner and center thereof; and there ripped up thy bowels and thy
reins, and raked out the filth and corruption that lurked within thee, and set
thy secretest thoughts in order before thy face, in such sort as that thou have
been stricken with astonishment and horror at the discovery? Though perhaps it
have not yet softened and melted thy stony and obdurate heart; yet did thou
never perceive it hammering about it, with sore strokes and knocks, as if it
would break and shiver it into a thousand pieces? Doubtless thou have;
conscience is able to give thy tongue the lie, and to convince thee to thy
face. And if thou have: why then do thou not readily acknowledge the voice
of God in it; having felt in it that lively power and efficacy, which it is not
possible any device of the wit of man should have? Take heed then how thou
do traduce, or despise, or but undervalue that upon any seeming pretense
whatsoever: for which thou have such a strong witness in thine own heart, from
the experience of the unresisted power of it, that it is indeed the word of
God, and not the breath of sinful man. Felix trembled at it, Ahab was humbled
Atheist, the other an Hypocrite: thou art worse than either Atheist, or
Hypocrite, if it work not at least as much upon thee. See thou how Ahab
humbles himself at the voice of the Prophet?

From Ahab's Humiliation, and the Occasion thereof;. 22.
pass we now to consider in the last place, the Success of it. The success
of Ahab's humiliation,
Ahab is humbled at the Prophets denouncing of judgment against him; and God
hence takes occasion to be so gracious to Ahab, as (though not wholly to
remove, yet) to suspend and adjourn the judgment for a time. [ See thou how
Ahab is humbled before me? because he humbles And here must Gods Holiness be
brought unto a trial, before the bar of carnal reason, if by any means it can
justify it self. God hates the works of Hypocrites; he loatheth even Osee 6.6.
sacrifices without mercy; his Esa. 19.16.
soul cannot away with the oblations and New Mons, and solemn Feasts of men
that have their hands full of blood; many prayers, and tender them with
behavior of greatest devotion, stretching out their hands toward heaven, and
Psalm. 35.13.
afflicting their souls with fasting, and hanging down their Esa. 58.5.
heads as Bulrushes, with pensiveness: but even their best sacrifices, and
confessions, and prayers, and humiliations are an Prove. 15 8.
abomination unto him; so far from appeasing his wrath against other sins, as
that they provoke his yet farther displeasure against themselves. Such is the
Holiness of our God; and such the purity of his nature: with which holiness
and purity, how can it stand, to accept and reward (as here he seems to do)
the counterfeit humiliation Hypocrite, as we now suppose Ahab to be?

For the clearing of this difficulty; first, let it be granted; (which I take
to be a certain truth,. 23.
and for any thing I know never yet gainsaid by any; and how it may consist
with the holiness of God.
) that Ahab, not only before, and after, but even in the act and at the instant
of this humiliation, was an Hypocrite. Let it be granted secondly, (which is
the thing urged humiliation of his, being performed but in hypocrisy, was not
acceptable to God, as a good work; but abominable before him, as a foul sin.
But yet withal it must be granted thirdly, that, although Ahab did not well in
not being humbled an upright heart, yet he had done much worse, if he had not
been humbled at all: and that therefore there was, though no true spiritual
goodness, yet some outward moral goodness in Ahab's humiliation; at least so
far forth, as a thing less evil may in comparison of a worser thing be termed
good. And then are we fourthly, that it may stand with Gods holiness, as it
does with his goodness and justice, to reward outward good things with outward
good things; and moral and temporary graces with worldly and temporal
blessings: as here he rewards Ahab's temporary and external humiliation,. 24.
with an outward temporal favor, viz. the adjourning of an outward temporal
judgment. Observe. 3. concerning the reward of common graces;


That which hence we would observe, is, That God rewards sometimes common
graces with common favors, temporary obedience first, from the general course
of Gods justice; and his promise grounded upon that justice, to reward every
man according to his works. To which justice of his, and to which promise of
his it is agreeable, as to recompense Spiritual good things with Eternal, so to
recompense Quibus non erat Deus daturus vitam aeternam, si neque hanc cis
terrenam gloriam concederet, non redderetur merces bonis artibus eorum, id est,
virtutbus, quibus -- Augustine. 5. de Civit. 15.
Moral good things with temporal rewards. 2. From special express warrant of
Scripture. In Mat. 6. Christ says of Hypocrites Mat. 6.2, 5, 16.
they have their reward. As in the doing of their seeming good works, they aim
especially at the vain praise and commendation of men: so they have the full
reward of those works in the vain praise and commendation of men. Though they
have no right unto, nor reason to look for, a reward hereafter in heaven: they
have their reward (such as it is, and all they are like to have) here upon
earth. 3. From particular examples of such, as temporally rewarded for temporal
graces. To omit Intelligimus -etiam Ethnicos, si quid boni fecerint, non absque
mercede Dei judicio praeteriti. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 29. God even among the
Heathen, has often rewarded moral honesty with outward happiness. W. Ral.
hist. of the world, lib. 2. cap. 8.. 3.
Heathens, as viz. Aristides, Cyrus, etc. for Justice; Bias, Diogenes, etc. for
contempt of the world; Codrus, Regulus, etc. for love of their country, and
zeal to the common good; and sundry others, for other good things: whose moral
virtues are herein amply rewarded, (if there were nothing else but this,) that
their names and memories have been preserved in Histories, and renowned
throughout the world in all succeeding generations. I say, to Heathens, we have
examples in Scripture; of Ahab here, of 4 King. 10.30. Quid ei profuit, quod
pro nonnulla obedientia, quam, de domo Achab omnino delenda cupiditate suae
dominationis exhibuit, aliquantam mercedem transitoriam regni temporalis
accepit? Augustine. contra mend. cap. 2.
Iehu, of the Joh. 3.10.4.
Ninivites, of others elsewhere: who for their temporary obedience, zeal,
repentance, and the like, were rewarded; partly by temporal blessings upon
themselves and their posterity, partly by the removal or adjournal of temporal
punishments, which otherwise had speedily overtaken them. Fourthly, from the
greater to the less. God sometimes temporally rewards the services of such
men, as are but bruta instrumenta, brute instruments of his will and
providence; such as are employed by him for the bringing about of his most holy
and secret purposes, Citra rationem finis, aut eorum quae ad finem, in the
doing of such things, as they do without the least mixture (in their own
purpose and intent) of any respect at all to God or his ends, but merely for
the satisfying of their own corrupt lusts, and the atchieving of their own
private ends. A notable example whereof we have, in Gods dealing with
Nebuchadnezzar in Ezekiel. 29. where the word of the Lord comes to Ezekiel,
saying, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20
Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great
service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled:
yet had he no wages, nor his army for Tyrus, for the service In which place we
see Egypt is given to Nebuchadnezzar, as a reward for the service he did
against Tyrus; because therein (though he neither intended any such thing, nor
so much as knew it,) he yet was the instrument to work Gods purpose upon, and
against Tyrus. And then how much more will God reward temporally the service
and obedience of such, as purposely and knowingly endeavor an outward
conformity unto the holy will and pleasure of God, though with strong and
predominant mixture of their own corrupt appetites and ends therewithal?

Now the Reasons,. 25.
With sundry reasons thereof;
why God should thus outwardly reward the outward Hypocrites; are: First, the
manifestation of his Goodness: that we might know how willing he is to cherish
the least spark of any goodness in any man; be it natural, or moral, or
whatever other goodness it be: that he might thereby encourage us, so to
labor the improvement of those good things in us, Secondly; his Justice and
equity, in measuring unto Sinners and Hypocrites exactly according to the
measure they mete unto him. They serve him with graces, which are not true
graces indeed; he rewards them with blessings, which are not indeed true
blessings. Somewhat they must do to God; and therefore they afford him a
little temporary obedience, and there is all the service he shall have from
them: temporary favor, and there is all the reward they must look for from
him. Here is Quid pro Quo. They give God the outward work, but without any
hearty affection to him: God gives them the outward benefit, but without any
hearty affection to them. For want of which hearty affection on both sides, it
comes to pass, that neither is the outward work truly acceptable to him, nor
the outward benefit profitable to them. A third reason of Gods thus graciously
dealing even with Hypocrites, may be assigned, with reference to his own dear
Children and chosen; for whose good especially (next under own glory) all the
passages of his divine providence both upon them and others are disposed in
such sort as they are: as for whose comfort, this manner of proceeding makes
very much and sundry ways; as I shall by and by touch in the Inferences from
this Observation; whereunto I now come, because it is time I should draw
toward a Conclusion.

. 26.
And first; by what has been already said a way is opened for the clearing of
Gods Holiness in these his proceedings. And inferences thence,
If sometimes he temporally reward Hypocrites; is it not either for their own,
or for their works sake, as if he either accepted their Persons, Obedience. No:
it is but Lex Talionis; he deals with them, as they deal with him- They do
him but eye-service; and he gives them but eye-wages. Indeed God can neither
be deceived, nor deceive: yet as they would deceive God in their service, with
such obedience as falls short of true obedience; so they are deceived in
their pay from him, with such blessings as fall short of true blessings. And
all this may well stand with Gods both Justice Holiness. Secondly; it
appears from the premises, that Gods thus dealing with wicked and
unsanctified men, in thus rewarding their outward good things, gives no
warrant nor strength Popish corrupt doctrine of Meritum congrui, in deserving
the first grace by the right use of Naturals; or to that rotten principle and
foundation of the whole frame of Pelagianisme, [ Facienti quod in se est, Deus
non potest, non debet denegare gratiam.] We know, God rewards his own true and
spiritual graces graces here, and with glory hereafter: we see God rewards
even false and outward and seeming graces, natural and moral good things, with
outward and temporal favors. And all this is most agreeable to his infinite
both Justice and Mercy; and may stand with the infinite Purity and Holiness of
his nature. But this were rather to make God an unjust and unholy God; to bind
him to reward the outward and sinful works of Hypocrites, (for the best
natural or moral works without grace are but such,) with true saving grace and
inward sanctification. Inferences and uses more might be added* as viz.
Thirdly, for our Imitation; by Gods example to take knowledge natural or moral
parts that are eminent in them, and whatsoever good thing they do in outward
actual conformity to the revealed will and law of God. And fourthly, for
Exhortation to such, as do obedience and good works are true and sincere; yet
to go on, and not to grow weary of well doing: knowing that their labor is not
altogether in vain; in as much as their works (though perhaps done in
Hypocrisy) temporal blessings here; and some abatement withal (I add that by
the way) of stripes and everlasting punishment hereafter.

But I pass by all these and the like Uses;. 27.
and commend but one more unto you: especially for Comfort to the Godly 1.
against the prosperity of the wicked;
and that is it which I named before as one Reason of the point observed, viz.
the Comfort of Gods dear Children and Servants; and that sundry ways. First,
here is comfort for them, against a Temptation which often assaulteth them, and
that with much violence and danger: arising from the sense and observation of
the prosperity and flourishing estate of the wicked in this the Psalms, and
elsewhere; how frequently and strongly Psalm. 37. and 73.
David, Job 21.7, etc.
Job, and Jer. 12.1, etc.
Jeremy, and other godly ones were assailed with this temptation. For thy
instruction then, and to arm thee against this so common and universal a
temptation: if thou shall see fools on horseback; ungodly ones laden with
wealth, with honor, with ease, Hypocrites blessed with the fat of the earth,
and the due of heaven, and abundance of all the comforts of this life: yet be
not thou discomforted at it, or disquieted with it; Psalm. 37.1.
Do not fret thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious at evil
doers, Thou expectest for thine inward obedience an unproportionable reward in
the life to come: do not therefore grudge their outward obedience a
proportionable reward in this life. Some good things or other thou may think
there are in them, for which God bestows those outward blessings upon them.
But consider withal, that as they have their reward here, so they have all
their reward here: and whatsoever their present prosperity be, yet the time
will come, and that ere long be, when Job 8.13.
The and Psalm. 37.38.
The end of the wicked shall be cut off.

. 28.
Again, here is a second Comfort for the godly against temporal afflictions: 2.
against temporal afflictions;
and it arises thus. As Gods love and favor goes not always with those
temporal benefits he bestows: so on the other side, Gods wrath and
displeasure goes not always with those temporal afflictions he inflicteth.
For as he rewards those few good things that are in evil men, with these
temporal benefits, for whom yet (in his Justice) he reserveth eternal
damnation, as the due wages (by that Justice) of their grace-lesse impenitency:
so he punishes those remnants of sin that are in Godly men, with these
temporal afflictions; for whom yet (in his mercy) he reserveth Eternal
salvation, as the due wages (yet by that mercy only) of their Faith, and
repentance, and holy obedience. As Abraham said to the rich glutton in the
Parable, Luke 16. Luke 16.25.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
As if he had said; If thou had any thing good in thee, remember thou have had
thy reward in earth already; and now there remains for the full punishment of
thine ungodliness there in Hell: but as for Lazarus he has had the
chastisement of his infirmities on earth already; and now remains for him
nothing, but the full reward of his godliness here in Heaven. Thus the
meditation of this Doctrine yields good Comfort against temporal afflictions.

Here is yet a third Comfort, and that of the three the greatest, unto the
godly;. 29.
3. against doubtings of their eternal reward.
in the firm assurance of their Eternal reward. It is one of the Reasons, why
God temporally rewards the unsound obedience of natural, carnal, and
unregenerate men: even to give his faithful servants undoubted assurance, that
he will in no wise sincere obedience. Does God reward Ahabs temporary
Humiliation? and will he not much more reward thy hearty and unfeined
repentance? Have the Hypocrites Quid dabit eis quos praedestinavit ad vitam,
qui haec dedit etiam eis, quos praedestinavit ad mortem? Aug. 22. de Civit. 24.
their reward? and can thou doubt of thine? This was the very ground of all
that comfort, wherewith the Prodigal son sustained his heart and hope; when
he thus discoursed to his own soul: Luke 15.17.
If all the hired servants which are in my Fathers house have bread enough, and
to spare; surely my Father will never be so unmindfull of me, who am his Son,
though too too unworthy of perish for hunger. Every temporal blessing bestowed
upon the wicked, ought to be of the child of God entertained as a fresh
assurance given him of his everlasting reward hereafter. Genesis 25.5, 6.
Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his Concubines; and sent them away: but his
only son Isaac he kept with him, and gave him all that he had. Right so, God
gives temporal gifts to Hypocrites bastards, and not sons; (not sons of
the Gal. 4.28, 31.
free woman, not sons of promise, not born after the spirit:) and that is their
portion; when they have gotten that, they have gotten all they are like to
have; there is no more to be looked for at his hands. But as for the
inheritance; he reserveth that for his dear Children, the godly, who are Gal.
4.29.
Born after the spirit, and Gal. 3.29.
Heirs according unto promise: on these he bestows all that ever he has, 1
Cor. 3.21.
( all things are theirs;) for on them he bestows Heb. 1.2.
his Son the heir of all things, in whom are hid all the treasures of all good
things, and together Romans 8.32.
with whom all other appurtenances of him; and on them he bestows Himself,
who is 1 Cor. 15.28.
All in all, Psa. 16.11.
In whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. To which joy unspeakable and glorious, O thou the
Father of mercies, who have promised it unto us, bring us in the end, for thy
dear Sons sake Jesus Christ, who has purchased it for us, and given into our
hearts the earnest of his and thy holy Spirit to seal it unto us. To which
blessed Son, and holy Spirit, together with thee, O Father, three persons and
one only wise, gracious, glorious, Almighty and eternal Lord be ascribed by us,
and all thy faithful people throughout the world, the whole kingdom, power,
and glory, for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON Grantham L inc. Febr. 27. 1620.
3. Kings 21.29. -- because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days. --


. 1.
I Will not so far either distrust your memories, or straiten my self of time
for the delivery of what I am now purposed to speak; as to make any large
repetition of the particulars which were observed the last time from the
consideration of Ahabs person and condition, (who was but an Hypocrite,) taken
jointly with his present carriage, together with the occasion success thereof.
He was humbled: It was the voice of God by his Prophet that humbled him: Upon
his humbling God adjourneth his punishment. From all which was noted, 1. that
there might be even in Hypocrites an outward formal humiliation; 2. the power
and efficacy of the word of God able to humble an oppressing Ahab; 3. the
boundless mercy of God, in not suffering the outward formal humiliation of an
ungodly Hypocrite to pass altogether unrewarded. All this the last time; by
occasion of those first clauses in the verse, [ See thou how Ahab humbles
himself before me? because he humbles himself before me, I will not -- ] We
are now next to consider of the great Favor, which it pleased God to show to
Ahab upon his humiliation; what it was, and wherein it consisted. It was the
Removal, (at least for a time; that is, the suspension) of an heavy judgment
denounced against Ahab and his house most deservedly for his bloody and
execrable oppression; [ Because ]

The Evil which God now promises he will not bring, [ I will not bring the
evil in his days,. 2.
] is that which in verse 21. he has threatened he would bring upon Ahab and
upon his house Verse. 21. etc. hic.
[ Behold I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and
will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Abijah, for the
provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.]
A great judgment, and an heavy: but the greater the is, when it is deserved,
and threatened; the greater the mercy is, if it be afterward forborne: as some
of this was. But whatsoever becomes of the judgment: here we see is mercy
good store. God who is Ephesians. 2.4.
rich in mercy, and delighted to be styled Deus miserationum. Neh. 9.31.
the God of mercies, and the 2 Cor. 1.3.
Father of mercies, abundantly manifests his mercy in dealing thus graciously
with one that deserved it so little. Here is mercy, in but threatening the
punishment, when he might have inflicted it; and more mercy, in not inflicting
the punishment, when he had threatened it. Here is mercy first, in suspending
the Punishment, [ I will not bring the Evil:] and mercy again, in suspending it
for so long a time, [ I will not bring the evil in his days.] Of these two
points we shall entreat at this time: and first and principally, of the former.

[ I will not bring the evil.] It is no new thing to them, that have read the
sacred stories with observation, to see God,. 3.
when men are humbled at his threatenings, to revoke them, Chrysostom. in Genesis
hom. 25. and alibi saepe.
(...), says Chrysostom more than once: this is ever Gods manner; when men
change their deeds, to change his doom; when they renounce their sins, to
recall his sentence; when they repent of the evil they have done against him,
to Ion. 3.10.
Repent of the evil Search the Scriptures, and say if things run not thus, as
in the most ordinary course; God commands, and Man disobeyeth; Man
disobeyeth, and God threatens; God threatens, and Man repents; Man
repents, and God forbeareth. Genesis 20.3.
Abimelech, thou art but a dead man, because of the woman which thou have
taken! but Abimelech restores the Prophet his wife untouched; and God spares
him, Hezekiah, make thy will, and Esaias 38.1. -- 5.
Put thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live! but Hezekiah
turns to the wall, and prays, and weepeth; and God adds to his days
fifteen years. Nineveh, prepare for desolation; for now but Jon. 3.4, 10.
forty days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed: but Nineveh fasted, and prayed,
and repented; and Nineveh stood after that more than forty years twice told.
Generally, God never yet threatened any punishment upon person or place: but if
they repented, he either withheld it, or deferred it, or abated it, or
sweetened it to them; proportionably to the truth and measure of their
repentance, but howsoever always so far forth as in his infinite wisdom he
has thought good: some way or other, he ever remitted somewhat of that
severity and rigor, wherein he threatened it.

A course which God has in some sort bound himself unto, and which he often
and openly professes he will hold.. 4.
Two remarkable testimonies (among sundry other) shall suffice us to have
proposed at this time, for the clear and full evidencing hereof. The one in
Ierem. 18.7, 8. [ At what instant I shall speak concerning ] The other in Ezekiel.
33.13, 14. [ When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely die, if he turn from
his sin, and do that which is lawful and right, If the wicked restore the
pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in the statutes of life without
committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.] And every where
in the Prophets, after Denunciations of judgment follow exhortations to
Repentance: which were bootlesse, if Repentance should not either prevent them
or adjourn them, or lessen them.

. 5.
You see God both practices and professes this course: neither of which can
seem strange to us, if we duly consider, either his readiness to show mercy, or
the true End of his threatenings. We have partly already touched at the
greatness of his mercy. To show compassion, and to forgive, that is the thing
wherein he most of all delights; and therefore he does arripere ansam, take
all advantage as it were, and lay hold on every occasion to do that: but to
punish, and take vengeance is Esaias. 28.21.
opus alienum, as some expound that in Esaias 28. his strange work, his strange
act, a thing he takes Ezekiel. 3^.11.
Vivo nolo -- in Ezekiel. 33. As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, etc. As the Be labors busily all the day long, and
seeks to every flower, and to every weed for Honey; but stingeth not once,
unless she be ill provoked: so God bestirreth himself, and his bowels yearn
within him, to show compassion, Osee 6.4.
[ O Ephraim what Ezekiel. 18.31. and 33.11.
Why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? Jer. 5.1.
Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek if you can find a
man, but a man, that I may pardon it.] But vengeance comes on heavily and
unwillingly, and draws a sigh from him; Esaias 1.24.
[ Heu consola^or! Ah I must, I see there is no remedy, I must ease me of mine
adversaries, and be avenged of mine enemies; Mat. 23.27
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets -- how often would I, etc.
Osee 11.8.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim? -- my heart is turned within me; my
repentings are kindled together.] So is our God Psalm. 103.8.
slow to anger, and loath to strike Ovid. 1. de Pont. 3.
(Quique dolet quoties but plenteous in mercy, as David describes him in Psalm.
103. Never was a man truly and inwardly humbled, but God in the riches of his
special mercy, truly pardoned him: never was man so much as but outwardly
humbled, as Ahab here, but God in his common and general mercy, more or less
forbear him.

Secondly, the end of Gods threatenings also confirms this point.. 6.
For does he threaten evil think ye, because he is resolved to inflict it?
Nothing less: rather to the contrary, he therefore threatens it, that we by
our repentance may prevent it, and so he may not inflict it. Chrysostom. in Genesis
hom. 25. (...). Nazianz. -Non praedixit, ut veniat, sed ne veniat. Hieron. in
Eze. 33.
(...), Chrysostom: he foretells what he will bring upon us, for this very
purpose, that he may not bring it upon us; and warns before he strikes, to
make us careful to avoid ^he stroke. In the ancient Roman State and
discipline, the manner was, before they made war upon any people, first to
send See Dionys. Halicarn. li. 2. Antiqu. Live. 1. Dec. 1. Cic. 1. de Offic.
Heralds to proclaim it, ( Bellum indicere, ^e inserrent,) to the end that if
they would make their peace by submission, they might prevent the war; nor so
only, but be written also in albo amicorum, enrolled as their friends and
confederates. So God sends his Heralds the Prophets, to threaten vengeance
against sinners: not thereby to drive them mercy, but to draw them to
repentance and humiliation; whereby they may not only turn away the vengeance
threatened, but also (if they perform them unfeignedly, and with upright hearts)
interest themselves farther in his favor and love. Nor is it to be accounted
among the least of Gods mercies when he might in his just displeasure
over-whelm us in the very act of our sins, as Number. 25.8
Zimri and Cosbi were runn through in the very act of filthinesle; and as 2 Samuel
6.7.
Uzzah and Act* 5.5, 10.
Annanias and Sapphira, and some few others whom God picked out to show
exemplary judgment upon, were stricken dead upon the sudden for their
transgressions: justice deal with the same rigor against us all; I say, it is
not the least of his mercies, that he forbeareth and forewarneth, and
foretells and threatens us before he punish; that (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis
hom. 25.
if we will take any warning, he may do better to us than he has said, and not
bring upon us what he has threatened.

. 7.
A point very useful and comfortable: if it be not derogatory to Gods truth.
Let us therefore first clear that; and then proceed to the Uses. If God thus
revoke his threatenings, it seems he either before meant not what he spoke,
when he threatened; or else after when he revoketh, repents of what he meant:
either of which to imagine, far be it from every Christian heart; since the
one makes God a dissembler, the other a changeling; the one charge him with
falsehood, the other with lightness. And yet the Scriptures sometimes speak of
God, as if he Genesis 6.6. Psalm. 95.10.
grieved ^or what he did, or Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.11. Jerem. 18.8. Am^s 7.3, 6.
Jon. 3.10.
repented of what he spoke, or altered what he had purposed: and for the most
part, such like affections are given him in great mercy and kindness to
sinful mankind. We all know, we cannot indeed give God any greater glory than
the glory of his mercy: yet must know withal, that God is not so needy of
means to work out his own glory, as that he should be forced to redeem the
glory of his mercy, with the forfeiture either of his Truth or Stedfastness. We
are therefore to lay this as a firm ground and infallible, that our God is both
truly Unchangeable, and unchangeably True. Number. 23.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.
The strength of Israel is not as man, that he should he, nor as the son of
man, that he should repent: his words are not 2 Cor. 1.19, 20.
Yea and neither does he use lightness. But his words are Yea and Amen; and
himself Heb: 13.8.
yesterday and to day and the same for ever: Man. 24.35
Heaven and Earth may pass away, yea shall pass away; but not the least
(...). Mat. 5.18.
tittle of Gods words shall pass away unfulfilled. Psalm. 102.26, 27.
They may wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall he change them, and they
shall be changed; but he is the same, and his years fail not: neither do his
purposes fail, nor his promises fail, nor his threatenings fail, nor any of his
words fail. Let Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and Angel, and Man, and Devil, and
all change: still still Mal. 3.6.
Ego Deus, and non mutor; God he is the Lord of all, and he changes not.

. 8.
As for those Phrases then of Repenting, Gri^ving, etc. which are spoken of God
in the Scriptures: that (...). Chrysostom: in Genesis hom. 3. So also Ibid. hom* 15.
and 26. and 60. and in Ps. 6 (...). Bernard. lib. 5. de Con^si^. ad Fug^^.
(...), whereof Saint Chrysostom so often speaks, salveth them. God speaks
to us; and therefore speaks as we use to speak, and frames his language to
our ( l) dullness, and teaches us by (...). Chrysostom. In Psalm. 8*
our own phrases what he would have us learn: as Nurses talk half syllables,
and (...).
lipse out broken language to young children. But what is so spoken (...), of
God, after the manner of men; must yet be understoo^ (...), so as befitteth the
Majesty and perfection divine nature. When he repents then, we are not so to
conceive it, as if God Nunquam primi consilii Deos poenitet. Sener. 6. de
benef. 23.
changed his mind, or altered any thing of his everlasting purpose and
counsel, either in substance or circumstances: it only Quod dicit
(Poenitentiam agam) intelligitur metaphorice dictum: nam homines, quando non
impleut quod comminati sunt, poenitere videntur. Aquin* 1. quaest. 19.7. ad. 2.
imports, that he now does not that; which, so far as we could reasonably
conjecture by his words, or works, or our deserts, or otherwise, seemed to us
to have been his purpose to have done.

the Phrases:. 9.
but yet the main doubt for the thing it self stands uncleared. Abimelech and
Hezekiah shall dye, and yet Abimelech and Hezekiah shall not dye* Nineveh shall
be destroyed, and yet Nineveh shall not be destroyed; I will bring evil upon
Ahab's house, and yet I will not bring it: is not this Yea and Nay? is not this
a plain contradiction? How is there not here a plain change of Gods will? If
not for substance; because the things were at length performed: yet at least in
circumstance; because they were not performed at those times, and in that
manner, as they were threatened and foretold. That wretched miscreant Vorstius,
instead of untying Pelagian conclusions from blasphemous Principles, trembles
not to affirm, Vorst. de Deo.
In part aliqua divini decreti fieri aliquam mutationem; that there may be
some change made in some part of Gods decree. An assertion unbeseeming an
ingenuous Pagan, and to be for ever abhorred and held accursed by every soul
that professes it self Christian. Admit this once: and let Man, yea and the
devil too, be true; and only God a liar. Leave we him therefore to the
judgment of that great God, whom he has blasphemed; and seek we better
satisfaction. That of Aquinas, and the Schoolmen, is true, subtle: that God
does sometimes Aquin. 1. qu. 19.17.
Velle mutationem, though he does never mutare voluntatem; that though he never
changes his will, yet he sometimes wills a change. That of Cum exterius
mutari videtur sententia, consilium non mutatur* quia de unaquaque re
immutabiliter intus constituitur, quicquid for^s muta^ilitor agitur. Gregor. in
Moral.
Gregory is plainer, and no less true; Mutat Deus sententiam, non consilium^
God sometimes changes the sentence which he has denounced, but never the
Counsel which he has decreed. Others, otherwise: diverse men conceiving the
same answer for substance, in diverse and different terms.

That which is plainest, and gives fullest satisfaction, and whereinto the
answers of Gregory and Aquinas, and the rest,. 10.
(as many as have spoken with any truth and pertinency to the point,)
threatenings, (and so his promises too,) have ever a condition annexed unto them
in Gods purpose: which though it be not ever, (indeed but seldom) expressed;
yet is it ever inclucluded, and so to be understood. All Gods promises, (how
absolutely so ever expressed,) are made sub condition Obedientiae: and
threatenings (how absolutely so ever expressed,) sub condition Impoenitentiae.
And these Conditions, viz. of continuing in Obedience, in all Promises; and of
continuing in Impenitency, in all Threatenings; are to be understood of course;
whether they be expressed, or not. This is plain from those two famous places
before cited, Ier. 18. and Ezekiel. 33. Jer. 18.7, 8. See Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad
pop. Antioch. ^use and pulch^e.
When I say to the wicked, thou shall surely dye; if the wicked turn from his
sin, etc. he shall surely live, he shall not dye. Where Almighty God plainly
teaches us, that we ought so to conceive of all his threatenings, be they never
so peremptorily set down, (as what more peremptory than this, Thou shall surely
dye?) as that he may reserve to himself a power of revocation repent. The
examples make it plain. Abimelech shall dye for taking Sarah: understand it;
unless he restore her. Forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed: understand
it with this reservation; unless they repent. And so of all the rest.

. 11.
But why is not that clause expressed then? may some demand. I answer: first, it
needs not; secondly, it booteth not. First, it needs not. For God having in
Ierem. 18. and Ezekiel. 33. and elsewhere instructed us in the general, that all
his Threatenings are to be understood with such clauses and conditions and
reservations; particular: As amongst Christian men, who acknowledge Gods
providence to rule in all things, and to dispose of all actions and events; it
is needless in every speech de futuro contingenti to express this clause [ if
God will;] we will go to such or such a place, or do such or such a thing, if
God will* because we readily conceive it, as a clause, which either is, or
should be understood in every such speech, as Jam. 4.15.
St. James requires. And so in many promises amongst men, this clause, though
not expressed, is yet allowed of course, and to common intendment understood, [
Rebus sic stantibus; things standing promise absolutely, without expressing
that or any other like clause of Limitation or Exception, if in the interim
some such unexpected accident befall, as makes that either he cannot or may
not do what he promised; we may not in right reason charge such a man with
breach of promise, if he perform not all he promised: because the foresaid
clause, though not expressed, is yet presumed to have been intended by the
promiser. And that Gods Threatenings, as de jure they ought to be by us when we
hear them, so de facto they were understood by him when he made them, with a
secret clause Repentance; appears by the usual practice of many upon such
threatenings, and the use they made of them. The Ninevites when Jonah preached
destruction within forty days, without any express clause of Repentance; Ion.
3.9.
For who can tell, say they, if God will turn and repent, and turn away from
his fierce anger, that we perish not? The like may be said of Abimelech,
Hezekiah, and others: and of Ahab in this place.

Again, as it is sometimes needless, so it is always bootlesse,. 12.
to express this clause of repentance in the threatenings of God. The
expressing of it can do little good; secure ones will repent never the sooner
for it: but it may do much harm; secure ones may thereby forbearance, and so
linger their repentance till it be too late. Beloved, it is admirable to
observe (...), Gods gracious courses, which he uses for the calling of men to
repentance. In this particularity whereof we now speak, see how his Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and truth are met together, and do most lovingly embrace each other.
Where he spares in the end, it is most certain he ever meant to spare Deus
perseveravit in proposit^ suo, misereri volens ab initio. Hieron. in Ion. 3.
from the beginning: but that his everlasting purpose is part of his secret
counsel, and unrevealed will; which as we cannot learn, so we may not seek to
know, till the event declare it. Now to bring this his secret purpose
repentance, whom he has thus everlastingly purposed to spare: else his justice
should become questionable, in finally sparing the impenitent. Amongst other
means to work men to repentance, this is one, to (...). Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop.
Antioch.
threaten them with such judgments, as their sins have deserved: which
threatening the more terrible it is, the more likely it is to be effectual; and
the more peremptory it is, the more terrible it is. So then God, to bring those
men to Repentance whom he means to spare, in his word and by his messengers
denounces against them such judgments, as their sins have deserved, and as
his Justice without absolutely and in a peremptory form, without any express
clause of reservation or exception, the more to terrify and affright them, and
to cast them down to the deeper acknowledgement of his Justice and their own
unworthiness: which are yet to be understood conditionally; and interpreted
with reservation and exception of Repentance.

You have heard evidence enough to acquit Gods Truth; and do by this time, I
doubt not, perceive how, as in all other things,. 13.
so in the revoking of his threatenings, Gods Mercy and his Truth go Inferences
may be raised hence for our use. The sum of all we have said, is but this.
Gods threatenings are terrible; but yet conditional: and if he spare to execute
them, when we are humbled by them; it is a glorious illustration of his Mercy,
but without the least impeachment of his truth. Here is something for the
Distressed, something for the Secure, something for All, to

First; for the Distressed. Consider this, and take comfort; all you that Esaias.
61.3.
mourn in Sion,. 14.
and groan under the weight of Gods heavy displeasure, and the fearful
expectation of those bitter curses and judgments, which he has threatened
against sin. Why do you spend your strength and spirit, in gazing with broad
eyes altogether on Gods Justice; or Truth: take them off a little, and refresh
them, by fastening them another while upon his mercy. Consider not only what he
threatens: but consider withal why he threatens; it is, that you may repent:
and withal how he threatens; it is, unless you repent. He threatens to cast
down humiliation, not into despair. He shoots out his arrows, even bitter
words: but as 1 Samuel 20.20, 21.
Ionathans arrows, for warning, not for destruction. Think not, he aims so
much at thy punishment, when he threatens: alas, if that were the thing he
sought, he could lay on load enough (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 25. Nemo
punire desiderans, quod facturus est comminatur. Hieronym. in Ion. 3.
without words: No, it is thy amendment he aims at, and seeks therein: and
therefore holds not his tongue, that if thou will take it for a warning, he
may hold his hand. If the Father do but threaten the Child, when the Rod lies
by him; it is very likely he means not to correct him for that time, but only
to make him the more careful fearful to offend, for the time to come. Can
thou gather hope from the chiding of thy earthly father; and will thou find no
comfort in the chidings and threatenings of thy heavenly Father? whose bowels of
tender compassion to usward are so much larger, than any earthly Parents can
be; by how much himself the Heb. 12.9.
Father of spirits is greater than those fathers of our flesh. Yea, but who am
I, will some disconsolate soul say, that I should make Gods threatenings void?
or what my repentance, that it should cancel the Oracles of truth, or reverse
the sentence of the eternal Judge? Poor distressed soul, that thus disputest
against thine Mercy, and the wonderful dispensations of his Truth. Know, that
his threatenings are not made void, or of none effect, when thou by thy
repentance stayest the execution of them; yea rather then are they of all other
times most effectual: for then do they most of all accomplish their proper end,
and the thing for which they were intended, in thy amendment. Neither let his
truth make thee despair; but remember, that the tenor of all his most
peremptory threatenings runs with an implicit reservation and conditional
exception of Repentance: which condition if thou on thy part faithfully the
judgment shall be turned away, and yet Gods Truth no whit impaired. This for
the Distressed.

. 15.
Now for the Secure. Moses in Deuteronomy. 29. speaks of a certain Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19.
root, that bears gall and wormwood; that blesses it self when God curses,
and stands unmoved when God threatens. Here is an Axe for that root; to hew
it in pieces: and, unless it Mat. 7.19.
bring forth better fruit, to cleave it out for the fire. If there be any
sprigs or spurns of that root here; let them also consider what has been said,
and tremble. Consider this I say and tremble, all you that make a mock at God,
and at his word, and imagine that all his threatenings are but Bruta ^ulmina,
empty cracks, and Powder without shot; because sundry of them have fallen to
the ground, and not done the hurt they made show of. But know, whosoever thou
art, that thus abusest the Mercy, and despisest the Truth Mercy never did, so
his Truth shall never fail. Thou say, some of his threatenings have done no
harm: I say as much too; and his mercy be blessed for it: but what is that, to
secure thee? If any where Gods threatenings did no harm, and wrought no
destruction; it was there only, where they did good, and wrought repentance. If
they have turned thee from thy sins, as they have done some others; there is
hope thou may turn them away from thee, as some others have done. But if
they have done no good upon thee, in working thy repentance; certainly they
hang over thee to do thee harm, and to work thy destruction. GODS threatenings
are in this respect, as all other his words are, sure and steadfast; and such as
Esaias. 52.11.
Shall never return void, but accomplish that for which they were sent: if not
the one way, then without all doubt the other. If they do not humble thee,
they must overwhelm thee; if they work not thy conversion, they will thy ruin.
As some strong Physic, that either mendeth or ends the Patient; so are
these. And therefore when judgments are denounced; resolve quickly, off or on:
Here is all the choice that is left thee; either Repent, or Suffer. There is a
generation of men, that (as Moses complains) Deuteronomy. 29.19.
When they hear the words of; that (as Saint Paul complains) Romans 2.4.
Despise the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, not
taking knowledge that the goodness of God would lead them to repentance; that
(as S. Peter complains) 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
Wal^ after their own lusts, and scoffingly jest at Gods judgments, saying,
where is the promise of his coming? But let such secure and carnal scoffers be
assuted, that howsoever others speed, they shall never go unpunished:
Whatsoever becomes of Gods threatenings against others, certainly they shall
fall heavy upon them. They Moses and Paul and Peter; have taught us also their
punishments. Moses tells such a one, how ever others are dealt with, that yet
Deuteronomy. 29.20.
The Lord will not spare him; but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in Gods Book shall
light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. Saint
Paul tells such men, that by despising the riches of his goodness Romans 2.5.
Treasure up unto themselves wrath against the great day of wrath, and of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Saint Peter tells them,
howsoever they not only sleep, but snort in deep security; that yet 2 Pet. 2 3.
Their judgment of long time sleeps not, and their damnation (...) not so
much as slumbereth. Do thou then take heed, whosoever thou art, and whatsoever
thou do, that thou abuse not the Mercy of God: and to divorce it from his
Truth, is to abuse it. If when God threatens, thou layest aside his Truth, and
presumest on his bare Mercy: when he punishes, take heed he do not cry
quittance Mercy, and manifesting his bare Truth. God is Psalm. 145.8.
patient and merciful. Patience will bear much, Mercy forbear much: but being
scorned, and provoked, and dared, Furor sit laesa saepius patientia.
Patience it self turns furious, and Mercy it self cruel. It is Mercy, that
threatens; it is Justice, that punishes. Mercy has the first turn; and if by
Faith and Repentance we lay timely hold of it, we may keep it for ever, and
(revenging) Justice shall have nothing to do with us. But if careless and
secure, we slip the opportunity, and neglect the time of Mercy; the next turn
belongs to Justice: which will render judgment without to them that forgot
God, and despised his Mercy. That for the Secure.

. 16.
Now thirdly, and generally for All. What God has joined together, let no man
put asunder. God has purposely in his threats joined and tempered Mercy and
Truth together; that we might take them together, and profit by them together.
Auson. Epig. 10.
Dividat haec si quis, faciunt discreta venenum; Antidotum sumet, qui sociata
bibet: as he spoke of the two poisons. Either of these single, though not
through any malignant qua^ity in themselves, (God forbid we should think so)
yet through the corrupt temperature poison to us. Take Mercy without Truth; as
a cold Poison it benummeth us, and makes us stupid with careless Security.
Take Truth without Merry; as an hot poison it scaldeth us, and scorcheth us in
the flames of restless Despair. Take both together, and mix them well: as hot
and cold poisons, fitly tempered by the skill of the Apothecary, become
medicinable; so are Gods Mercy and Truth restorative to the soul. The
consideration of his Truth humbles us; without it we would be fearlesse: the
consideration of his Mercy supporteth us; without it we would be hopeless.
Truth begets Fear and Repentance; Mercy, Faith and Hope: and these two Faith
and Repentance keep the soul even, and upright and steady, as the ballast and
sail do the ship; that for all the rough waves and weather that encountereth
her in the troublesome sea of this World, she miscarrieth not, but arriveth
safe and joyful in Faith without Repentance, is not Faith, but Presumption;
like a Ship all sail, and no ballast, that tippeth over with every blast: and
Repentance without Faith, is not Repentance, but Despair; like a Ship all
ballast, and no sail, which sinketh with her own weight. What is it then that
we are to do, to turn away Gods wrath from us, and to escape the judgments, he
threatens against us? Even this: As in his Comminations he joyneth Mercy and
Truth together; so are we in our Humiliations to join Faith and Repentance
together. His threatenings are true: let us not presume of forbearance; but
fear, since he has threatened, that unless we repent, he will strike us. Yet
his threatenings are but conditional: despair of forbearance; but hope, although
he has threatened, that yet if we repent he will spare us. That is the course,
which the godly, guided by the direction of his holy Spirit, have ever truly
and sincerely held; and found it ever comfortable to assure them of sound
peace, and reconciliation with God. That is the course, which the very
Hypocrites from the suggestion of natural Conscience have sometimes offered at,
as far as Nature ( enlightened, but unrenewed) could lead them; and found it
effectual, to procure them at the least some forbearance of threatened abatement
of temporal evils from God.

Thus have you heard three Uses made,. 17.
of Gods mercy in revoking, joined with his truth in performing, what he
threatens. One, to cheer up the distressed; that he despair not, when God
threatens: another, to shake up the secure; that he despise not, when God
threatens: a third, to quicken up all; that they believe and repent, when God
threatens. There is yet another general Use to be made hereof; which, though
it be not directly proper to the present argument, yet I cannot willingly pass
without a little touching at it: and that is, to instruct us for the
understanding Gods promises. For contraries, (as Promises and Threatenings are,)
being of the like kind and reason either with other, do mutually give and take
light either to and from other. Gods threatenings are true and steadfast: his
Promises are so too, Titus 1.2.
[ Promisit qui non mentitur Deus, which God that cannot lie has promised]
says the Apostle in one place; and in another, 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the Promises of God are Yea and Amen:] and where in a third place he
speaks of Heb. 6.18.
Two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, his promise
is one of those two. The Promises then of God are true, as his Threatenings are.
Now look on those Threatenings again; true, but withal conditional, and such as
must be ever understood with a clause of reservation or exception. It is so
also in the Promises of God: they are true, but yet conditional, and so they
must ever be understood with a conditional clause. The exception there to be
understood, is Repentance; and the condition here, Obedience. What God
threatens to do unto us, absolutely in words; the meaning is, he will do it,
unl^ss we repent and amend: promises to do for us, absolutely in words; the
meaning is, he will do it, if we believe and obey. And for so much as this
clause is to be understood of course, in all Gods promises: we may not charge
him with breach of Promise, though after he do not really perform that to us,
which the letter of his promise did import, if we break the condition, and obey
not.

Would thou know then, how thou art to entertain Gods promises,. 18.
and with what assurance to expect them? I answer, with a confident and
obedient heart. Confident, because he is true, that has promised; Obedient,
because that is the condition, under promised. Here is a curb then for those
men's presumption; who living in sin, and continuing in disobedience, dare yet
lay claim to the good Promises of God. If such men ever had any seeming
interest in Gods Promises; the interest they had, they had but by contract and
covenant: and that covenant, whether either of the two it was, Law or Gospel,
it was conditional. The covenant of the Law wholly, and a Priori conditional;
Luke 10.28.
Hoc fac and vives, Do this and live: and the Covenant of the Gospel too, after
a sort, and a Posteriori Conditional; Creed and Vives, Believe and Live. If
then they have broken the conditions of both covenants, Believe, nor Do what is
required: they have by their Unbelief and Disobedience forfeited all that
seeming interest they had in those Promises. Gods promises then, though they be
the very main supporters of our Christian Faith and Hope, to as many of us, as
whose consciences can witness unto us a sincere desire and endeavor of
performing that Obedience we have covenanted; yet are they to be embraced even
by such of us, with a reverend fear and trembling, at our own unworthiness.
But as for the unclean, and filthy, and polluted; those Mat. 6.6.
Swine and Dogs, that delight in sin and disobedience, and every abomination:
they may set part nor fellowship in any of the sweet promises of God. Let dirty
2 Pet. 2.22.
Swine wallow in their own filth; these rich Mat. 6.6.
pearls are not for them, they are too precious: let hungry 2 Pet. 2.22.
Dogs glut themselves with their own vomit; the Mat. 15.26.
Childrens bread is not for them, it is too delicious. Let him that will be
filthy, Rev. 22.11.
be filthy still: the promises of God are holy things, and belong to none but
those that are holy, and desire to be holy still. For our selves in a word; let
us hope that a promise being left us, if with faith and obedience and patience
we wait for it, we shall in due time receive it: but withal Heb. 4.1.
let us fear, Heb. 4.) Lest a promise being left us, through disobedience or
unbelief, any of us should seem to come short of it.

. 19.
Thus much of the former thing proposed; the magnifying of Gods Mercy, and the
clearing of his Truth in the revocation and suspension of threatened judgments;
by occasion of these words [ I ] There is yet a Circumstance remaining, of this
general part of my Text, which would not be forgotten: it is the extent of
time, for the suspending of the judgment [ I will not bring the Evil in his
days.] Something I would speak of it too by your patience: it shall not be
much, because the season is sharp, and I have not much sand to spend. I will
not bring the evil in his days. The judgment denounced against Ahabs house,
was in the end executed upon it; as appears in the sequel of the story, and
especially from those words of Iehu (who was himself the instrument raised up
by the Lord, and used for that execution, in 4 Kings 4 King. 10.10.
[ Know that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of the Lord,
which the Lord spoke concerning the house of Ahab; for the Lord has done that
which he spoke by his servant Eliah.] Which were enough, (if there were nothing
else to be said) to justify Gods Truth in this one particular. That which Ahab
gained by his humiliation, was only the deferring of it for his time; I will
not bring the evil in his days. As if God had said, This wretched King has
provoked me, and pulled down a curse from me upon his house, which it were but
just to bring upon him and it without farther delay: yet because he made not a
scoff at my Prophet, but took my something to heart, and was humbled by them;
he shall not say, but I will deal mercifully with him, and beyond his merit: as
ill as he deserves it, I will do him this favor, I will not bring the evil
that is determined against his house, in his days.

The thing I would observe hence, is; That,. 20.
When God has determined a judgment upon any people, family, or place; it is
his great mercy to us, if he do not let us live to see it. It cannot but be a
great grief, (I say not now to a religious, but even) to any soul, that has
not quite cast off all natural affection: to forethink and foreknow country
and kindred. Herodot. in Polyh. Valor. Max. 9.13.
Xerxes could not forbear weeping, beholding his huge army that followed him;
only to think, that within some few scores of years so many thousands of
proper men would be all dead and rotten: and yet that a thing that must needs
have happened by the necessity of nature, if no sad accident or common calamity
should hasten the accomplishment of it. The declination of a Commonwealth, and
the funeral of a Kingdom, foreseen in the general corruption of manners, and
decay of discipline, (the most certain symtomes of a totering State;) have
fetched tears from the eyes, and blood from the hearts, of heathen men
zealously affected to their Country. How much more grief then must it needs
be, to them that acknowledge the true God, not only to foreknow the
extraordinary plagues and miseries and calamities which shall befall their
posterity: but also to fore-read in them Gods fierce wrath and heavy
displeasure and bitter vengeance, against their own sins, and the sins of their
posterity? Our blessed Savior, though himself without sin, and so no way
accessory to the procuring of the evils that should ensue, could not yet but
Luke 19.41.
Weep over the City of Jerusalem, when he beheld the present security, and the
future ruin thereof.

A grief it is then to know these things shall happen: but some happiness
withal,. 21.
and to be acknowledged as a great favor from God, to be assured that we shall
never see them. It is no small mercy in him, it is no small Comfort to us: if
either he take us away, before his judgments come; or keep his judgments
away, till we be gone. When God had told Abraham, in Genesis 15. that his Genes.
15-13 -- 15.
seed should be a stranger in a land that was not theirs, meaning Egypt, where
they should be kept under, and afflicted 400 years: lest the good Patriarch
should have been swallowed up with grief at it; he comfortteth him, as with a
promise of their glorious deliverance at the last, so with a promise also of
prosperity to his own person, and for his own time, [ But thou shall go to thy
fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age, verse. 15.] In Esaias 39.
when Hezekiah heard from the mouth of the Prophet Esaiah, that all the Esa.
39.6.8.
treasures in the Lords house should be carried into Babylon, and that his
sons whom he should beget should be taken away, Eunuchs in the palace of the
King of Babylon; he submitted himself (as it became him to do,) to the sentence
of God; and comforted himself with this, that yet there should be peace and
truth in his days, verse 8. In 4 Kings 22. when Huldah had prophesied of the 4
King. 2.16 -- 20.
evil that God would bring upon the City of Jerusalem, and the whole land of
Judah; in the name of the Lord she pronounces this as a courtesy from the
Lord unto good King Josiah, [Because thy heart was tender, and thou have
humbled thy self -- Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and
thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see
all the. 22.
which I will bring upon this place.] verse last.

Indeed every man should have, and every good man has, an honest care of
posterity; would rejoice to see things settled well for them, would grieve to
see things likely to go ill with them. That common speech which was so frequent
with Dio. lib. 57.
Tiberius, was monstrous, and not Illa vox scel^rata atque inhumana -- Cic. 3.
de finib. Vox magna and detestabili^. Senec. 2. de Clement. 2.
favoring of common humanity, Everso juvat orb mori. Dictum Ruffini apud
Claudian.
(...), When I am gone, let Heaven and Earth be jumbled again into their old
Chaos: but he that mended it, with Nero apud Sueton. In Nerone, cap. 38.
(...), yea (says he,) whilst I live; seems to have renounced all that was
man in him. Aristotle has taught us Arist. 1. Ethic. 11.
Res posterorum pertinent ad defunctos; the good or evil of those that come
after us, does more than nothing concern us, when we are dead and gone. This is
true: but yet Teren^. Andr. 4.1.
Proximus egomet mi, though it were the speech of a Shark in the Comedy, will
bear a good construction. (...).
nearest to himself: and that Charity, which looks abroad, and seeks not
only her own, yet begins at home, and seeks first her own. Whence it is,
that a godly man, as he has just cause to grieve for posterities sake, if they
must feel Gods judgments; so he has good cause to rejoice for his own sake,
if he shall escape them: and he is no less to take knowledge of Gods Mercy, in
sparing him; than of his Justice, in striking them.

This point is useful many ways:. 23.
I will touch but some of them, and that very briefly. First, here is one
Comfort, among many other, against the bitterness of temporal death. If God
midst of thy days, and best of thy strength; if death turn thee pale, before
age have turned thee gray; if the flower be plucked off, before it begin to
wither: grudge not at thy lot therein; but meet Gods Messenger cheerfully, and
embrace him thankfully. It may be, God has some great work in hand; from which
he means to save thee. It may be, he sends death to thee, as he sent his
Genesis 19.16, 17.
Angel to Lot; to pluck thee out of the midst of a froward and crooked
generation, and to snatch thee away, lest a worse thing than death should
Sodom, neither desire to linger in the plain; (it is but a valley of tears and
misery:) but up to the mountain from whence comes thy salvation, lest some
evil overtake thee. Possibly that which thou think an untimely death; may be
to thee a double advantage: a great advantage, in ushering thee so early into
GODS glorious presence; and some advantage too, in plucking thee so seasonably
from Gods imminent Judgments. It is a favor to be Non mehercule q^^nquam
a^dio hoc anno ereptum, qui mihi non a Diis immort. ereptus ex his mis^riis,
and ex iniquissima condition vitae videretur. Cic. 5. Epist. 16. Fuit hoc
luctuosum suis, acerbum patriae, grave bonis omnibus: sed ii tamen Remp. cosus
secuti sunt, ut mihi non erepta L. Cr^sso a Diis imm. vita, sed donata more
esse videretur. Non vidit flagrantem, etc. Id. 3. de Orat. Fortunatus iliius
[Hortensii] exitus, qui ea non vidit cum fierent, quae praevidit futura -- sed
illum videtur felicitas ipsius qua semper est usus, ab eis miseriis quae
consecutae sunt, morte vindicasse, Id. in Bru^o.
taken away betimes, when evil is determined upon those that are left.

Secondly, here is a Warning for us,. 24.
to take consideration of the loss of good or useful men; and to fear, when
they are going from us, that some evil is coming toward us. The Prophet
complains of the too great and general neglect hereof in his Esaias. 57.1.
[ The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men
are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil
to come, Esa. 57.] When God sends his Genesis 19.16.
Angel to pluck out his righteous Lo^s, what may Sodom expect but fire and
brimstone to be rained down upon them? When he plucketh up the fairest and
choicest flowers in his garden, and croppeth off the tops of the goodliest
poppies: who can think other, garden waste, and to turn it into a wild
wilderness? when he undermineth the main pillars of the house, takes away the
very props and buttresses of Church and Commonweal; sweepeth away religious
Princes, wise Senators, zealous Magistrates, painful Ministers, men of
eminent rancks, gifts, or example: who can be secure, that either Church, or
Commonweal shall P^riturae urbis, aut malorum imminentium, vel futurae labis,
hoc primum indicium est; si decidant viri consultores -- Ambros. de Cain and
Abel, c. 3.
stand up long; and not ^otter at least, if not fall? God in Mercy takes such
away from the evil to come: we in wisdom should look for evil to come: when God
takes such away.

Thirdly, here is instruction for wordlings, to make much of those few godly
ones that live among them:. 25.
for they are the very pawns of their peace, and the pledges of their security.
Think not, ye filthy Sodomites, it is for your own sakes, that ye have been
spared so long; know to whom you are beholden: This Fellow Genesis 19.9.
that came in to sojourn among you, this stranger, this Lot, whom you so hate,
and malign, and disquiet; he it is that has bayled you hitherto, and given you
protection. Despise not Gods patience, and long suffering, ye profane ones;
neither bless your selves in your ungodly ways; neither say, We prosper,
hand, and holds his tongue at us; surely Psalm. 50.21.
He is such a one as our selves. Learn, O ye despisers, that if God thus
forbear you, it is not at all for your own sakes, or because he cares not to
punish evil doers: no; he has a little remnant, a Luke 12.13.
little flock, a little handful of his own among you; a Revel. 3.4.
few names that have given themselves unto him, and call upon him daily for
mercy upon the land, and that Ezekiel. 9.4.
weep and mourn in secret and upon their beds for your abominations; whom you
hate, and despise, and persecute, defame, and account as the very scumme of the
people, and the refuse and off-scowring of all things; to whom yet you owe your
preservation. Surely, if it were not for some godly Iehoshaphat or other, whose
4 King. 3.14.
presence God regards among you; if it were not for some zealous Moses or
other that Psalm. 106.23.
stands in the gap for you: Gods wrath had entered in upon you long ere this,
as a mighty breach of water; and as an overflowing deluge overwhelmed you; and
you had been swept away as with the Esaias. 14.23.
Besome of destruction, and devoured as stubble before the fire. It is Job.
22.30.
The innocent that delivers the land, and repriveth it from destruction, and
it is delivered by the pureness of his hands. O the goodness of our GOD! that
would have spared the five Cities of the Salt Sea, if among so many thousands
of beastly and filthy persons there had been found but Genesis 18.32.
Ten righteous ones; and that was for two persons: nay, that would have
pardoned Jerusalem, if in all the Jer. 5.1.
streets and broad places thereof, replenished with a world of Idolaters, and
Swearers, and Adulterers, and Oppressors, there had been found but one single
man, that executed judgment, and sought the truth from his heart. But O the
madness of the men of this foolish world withal! who seek to do them most
mischief of all others, who of all others seek to do them most good; thirsting
most after their destruction, who are the chiefest instruments of their
preservation. On foolish and mad world! if thou had but wit enough, yet,
hug and to make much of that little flock, the hostages of thy peace, and the
earnest of thy tranquillity! if thou would but Luke 19.42.
Know, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
peace! Thou art yet happy, that God has a remnant in thee: and if thou knew
how to make use of this happiness, at least in this thy day, by honoring
their persons, by procuring their safety and welfare, by following their
examples, by praying for their continuance; thou might be still, and more,
and ever happy. But if these things, that belong unto thy peace, be now hidden
from thine eyes; if these men, that prolong thy peace, and prorogue thy
despised in thy heart, in this day of thy peace: God is just; thou know not
how soon they may be taken from thee: and though he do not bring the evil upon
thee in their days; when they are gone, thou know not how soon vengeance may
overtake thee, and Psalm. 50.22.
Then shall he tear thee in pieces, and there shall be none left to deliver
thee.

I have now done. Beseech we God the Father of mercies, for his dear son Jesus
Christ his sake,. 26.
to shed his Holy Spirit into our hearts; that by his good blessing upon us,
that which has been presently delivered agreeably to his holy truth and word,
may root downwards in our hearts, and bring forth fruit upwards in our lives
and conversations: and so to assist us ever with his grace, that we may with
humble confidence lay hold on his mercies, with cheerful reverence tremble at
his judgments, by unfeigned repentance turn from us what he has threatened,
and by unwearied Obedience assure unto us what he has promised. To which Holy
Father, Son, and Spirit, three persons, and etc.

THE THIRD SERMON Grantham Linc. Iun. 19. 1621.
3 Kings 21.29. -- I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his sons
days will I bring the evil upon his house.


. 1.
I Come now this third time to entreat of this Scripture, and (by Gods help) to
finish it. Of the three parts whereof, heretofore propounded, viz. 1. Ahabs
Humiliation; 2. The suspension of his judgment for his time; 3. And the
Devolution of it upon Iehoram: the two former having been already handled; the
last only now remains to be considered of. In the prosecution whereof; as
heretofore we have cleared GOD'S Holiness, and Truth: so we shall be now
occasioned to clear his Justice, from such imputions, as might seem to lie upon
it from this Act. And that in three respects; accordingly as Iehoram, who
stands here punishable for Ahabs sin, may be considered in a threefold
reference to Ahab: that is to say, either relate, as the son of Ahab; or
disparate, as another man from Ahab; or comparate, 4 King. 3.2.
not altogether so bad as Ahab. Now what Quisquam est hominum, qui fuisse illum
[Jovem] Deum credat, tam injustum, tam impium, nec mortalium saltem constituta
servantem; apud quos nesas haberetur magnum, alterum pro altero pl^cti, and
aliena delicta aliorum cervicibus vindicari? Arnob. contr. Gen^. lib. 7.
Justice first to punish the son for the father? or indeed secondly, any one
man for another? but most of all thirdly, the less offender for the greater?

It is not a matter of so much difficulty,. 2.
as at the first appearance it seems, to clear these doubts; if all things
thereto appertaining be duly and distinctly considered. The greatest trouble
will sort them in such manner, as that we may therein proceed orderly and
without confusion. Evermore, we know, Certainties must rule Uncertainties; and
clear truths, doubtful: it will be therefore expedient for us, for the better
guiding of our judgments, first to lay down some Certainties; and then
afterward by them to measure out fit resolutions to the doubts; and then
lastly from the premises to raise some few instructions for our use.

The first Certainty then, and a main one, is this.. 3.
Howsoever things appear to us, yet God neither is, nor can be unjust; as not
Romans 3.5, 6.
Is God unrighteous, that takes vengeance? God forbid: for then how shall God
judge the world? Genesis 18.25.
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Indeed the reasons of his
Justice oftentimes may be, oftentimes are unknown to us: but they never are,
they never can be unrighteous in him. If in a deep point of Law, a learned
discreet Judge should upon sufficient grounds give sentence, flat contrary to
what an ordinary by-stander would think reason, (as many times it falls out;)
it is not for the grieved party to complain of injustice done him: he should
rather impute what is done, to want of skill in himself, than of Conscience in
the Judge. Right so, if in many things Gods proceedings hold not proportion
with those characters of Justice and Equity, which our weak and carnal reason
would express; we must thence infer our own ignorance, not his injustice. And
that so much the rather; because those matters of Law are such as fall within
the comprehension of ordinary reason; whereas the ways of God, are far
removed out of our sight, and advanced above our reach: and besides, an earthly
Judge is subject to misprision, misinformation, partiality, corruption, and
sundry infirmities that may vitiate his proceedings; whereas no such thing can
possibly fall upon the divine Nature. David Psalm. 36.6.
The righteousness of God is as the great mountains, and his judgments as the
great deep. A great Mountain is eath to be seen; a man that will but open his
eyes cannot overlook it: but who can see into the bottom of the Sea, or find
out what is done in the depths thereof? Whatsoever we do then; let us beware
we measure not Esaias 55.8, 9*
his ways, by our ways, nor his works, by our works: howsoever they seem to
swerve from the rules of our ways and works; yet still Psalm. 14.5.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Though we
cannot fathom the deeps of his judgments, (for John 4.11
The Well is deep, and we have not wherewithal to draw;) yet let the assurance
of the righteousness of all his proceedings stand firm and manifest as the
mountains, which can neither be removed not hid, but stand fast-rooted for
evermore. This we must rest upon as a certain Truth; howsoever, whomsoever,
whenever, God punishes, he is never unjust.

. 4.
The second Certainty. To speak of Punishments properly; no temporal evil is
simply, and de toto genere a punishment. By temporal evils, I understand all
the penal evils of this lfe, that do or may befall us from our bodily
conception, to our bodily deaths inclusive; hunger, cold, nakedness,
sicknesses, infirmities, discontents, reproaches, poverty, imprisonments,
losses, crosses, distresses, death, and the rest; in a word, all that Eccles.
1.13.
Sore travel, which God has given to the sons of man, to be exercised
therewith, and that Sirac* 40.1.
Heavy yoke which is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their I say none of all these are properly and de toto genere to be accounted
punishments. For to make a thing simply and properly and formally a punishment,
there are required these three conditions: 1. That it be painful, and grievous
to suffer. 2. That it be inflicted for some fault. 3. That it be involuntary,
and against the sufferers will. That which has but the first of these three
conditions, may be called after a sort (and truly too) Malum poenae, a kind of
punishment. But (...), and properly, that Evil only is a punishment, wherein
the whole three conditions concur. temporal evils, though they have the two
first conditions; all of them being grievous to suffer, all of them being
inflicted for sin: yet in the third condition they fail, because they are not
involuntary simply, and perpetually, and de suo genere involuntary: (to omit
also a kind of failing in the second condition; not but that they are ever
inflicted for some sin deserving them; but for that, there are withal other
ends, and reasons for which they are inflicted, and whereunto they are
intended, besides and above the punishment of the offense) It may not be
gainsaid indeed, but these things are involuntary sometimes in the particular,
and especially to some men, even the least of them: but simply and universally
such they are not; since by othersome men, the greatest of them are willingly
and cheerfully, not only suffered, but desired. Not but that they are grievous
to the best. (It must needs be some grief, as to the Merchant, to see his rich
lading cast overboard, and to the Patient to have an Christian, to have Gods
correcting hand lie heavy upon him in some temporal affliction: The Apostle
tells us plainly, Heb. 12.11.
No affliction for the present is joyous, but grievous.) But involuntary it is
no more in him, than those other things are in them. As therefore the Merchant,
though it pity his heart to see so much wealth irrecoverably lost, yet gets
the best help, and uses the best speed he can to empty the Vessel of them, for
the saving of his life; and as the Patient, though Est plane quasi saevitia,
medicina de scalpelli -- Non tamen secari idcirco malum: quia dolores utiles
affert -- ul^lans ille, and gemens and mugiens inter manus medici, postmodum
easdem mercede cumulabit. Tert. in Scorp. cap. 5.
he smart when the wound is dressed, yet thanketh and feeth the Surgion for his
pains, in hope of future ease: so the Christian, though temporal evils somewhat
trouble him, yet he is willing to them, and he is cheerful under them, and he
acknowledges Gods goodness in them, and returns him thanks for them; because
he knows they are sent for his future good, and that they will at the last
Heb. 12.11.
Yield him the peaceable fruit of righteousness, when he shall have been
sufficiently exercised thereby. See Acts 5.41.
Peter and John rejoicing, when they suffered for the name of Jesus, and Saint
Paul so far from fearing, that he Phil. 1.23.
longed after his dissolution; and the blessed Martyrs running to a faggot, as
to a feast. Verily, Gods children see great good in these things, which others
account evils: punishments sent to afflict them; but as glorious trials to
exercise them, as gracious corrections to humble them, as precious receipts to
purge, and recover, and restore, and strengthen them.

So that it is not any of the temporal evils of this life;. 5.
but much rather the everlasting pains of hell, wherein the just reward and
punishment of sin properly and especially consists. Romans 6.23.
The wages of sin is death: the proper wages of sin eternal death. For so
the Antithesis in that place gives it to be understood, viz. of such a death
as is opposed to Eternal Life, and that is Eternal Death; 6. By the
distribution of those Eternal punishments then, we are rather to judge of GODS
righteousness in recompensing sinners; than by the dispensation of these
temporal evils. It was a stumbling block to the (...). Mar moreo tumulo Licinus
jacet; at Cato parvo: Pompeius nullo. Credimus esse Deos? Varro. See Plat. de
leg. Cic. 3. de Not* deor* Senec. de provid. Aug. 3. de lib. arb. 2. Menand.
apud Stob. Sermon. 104.
heathen, to see good men oppressed, and vice prosper: it made them doubt;
some, whether there were a God, or no; others nothing better, whether a
providence, or no. But what marvel if they stumbled, who had no right knowledge
either of God, or of his providence; when Job, and David, and other the dear
children of God have been much puzzled with it? David confesses in Psalm. 73.
that Psalm. 73.23.
His feet had welnigh slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked: and
certainly down he had been, had he not happily stepped Ibid. 17.
Into the Sanctuary of God, and there understood the end of these men. Temporal
evils, though they be sometimes punishments of sin: yet they are not ever
sent as punishments, (because sometimes they have other ends and uses, and are
ordinabilia in melius;) and secondly, they are the only punishments of sin;
because there are greater and more lasting punishments reserved for sinners
after this life, of which there is no other use or end, but to punish, since
they are not ordinabilia in melius. If we will make these temporal evils the
measure, whereby to judge of the Justice of God, we cannot secure our selves
from erring dangerously: Gods purposes in the dispensation of these unto
particular men being unsearchable. But those everlasting punishments are they,
wherein Gods Justice shall be manifested to every eye, in due time; at that
last day, which is therefore called by Saint Paul, Romans 2. Romans 2.5.
The day of wrath, and of the revelation of the Implying, that howsoever God is
just in all his judgments and acts of providence, even upon earth; yet the
Counsels and Purposes of God in these things are often secret, and past finding
out: but at the last great day, when Ibid. 6.
He shall render to every man according to his works his everlasting
recompense; then his vengeance shall manifest his wrath, and the righteousness
of his judgment shall be revealed to every eye in the condign punishment of
unreconciled sinners. That is the second Certainty; Temporal evils are not
always, nor simply, nor properly, the punishments for sin.

If any man shall be yet unsatisfied, and desire to have Gods justice somewhat
farther cleared,. 6.
even in the disposing of these temporal things: although it be neither safe,
nor possible for us, to search far into particulars, yet some general
satisfaction we may have from a third Certainty; and that is this. Every evil
of pain, whatsoever it be, or howsoever considered, which is brought upon any
man, is brought upon him evermore for sin, yea and that also for his own
personal sin. Every branch of this assertion would be well marked. I say
first, [ Every evil of pain, whatsoever it be,] whether natural defects and
infirmities in soul or body, or outward afflictions in goods, friends, or good
name; whether inward distresses of an afflicted, or terrors of an affrighted
conscience; whether temporal or eternal Death; whether evils of this life, or
after it: or whatsoever other evil it be, that is any way grievous to any man;
every such evil is for sin.

. 7.
I say, secondly, every evil of pain, howsoever considered: whether formally,
and sub ratione poenae, as the proper effect of Gods vengeance fatherly
correction and chastisement, nurture us from some past sin; or as a medicinal
preservative, strengthen us against some future sin; or as a clogging chain
to keep under and disable us from some outward work matter and object whereon
to exercise our faith, charity, patience, humility, and the rest; or as an
occasion given and taken by Almighty God, for the greater manifestation of the
glory of his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, Exemplary justice, for the
admonition

I say thirdly, Every such evil of pain, is brought upon us for sin.. 8.
There may be other ends, there may be other occasions, there may be other uses
of such Evils: but still the original Cause of them all, is sin. [ Ps. 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin.] It was not for any Jo^.
9.2, 3.
extraordinary notorious sins, either of the blind man himself, or of his
parents, above other men, that he was born blind. Our Savior Christ acquitteth
John 9. in answer to his Disciples, who were but too forward (as God knows
most men are,) to judge the worst. Our Saviors answer there, never intended
other, but that still the true cause deserving that blindness was his, and his
parents sin: but his purpose was to instruct his Disciples, that that
infirmity was not laid upon him rather than upon another man, merely for that
reason, because he (or his parents) had deserved it more than other men; but
for some farther ends which God had in it in his secret and everlasting
purpose, and namely this among the rest, that the works of God might be
manifest in him, and the Godhead Nature, the intention of the Sea Arist. 2.
Phys. c. 8. and 9.
End does not overthrow, but rather suppose the necessity of the Matter: so is
it in the works of God, and the dispensations of his wonderful providence. It
is from Gods mercy, ordering them to those Ends he has purposed; that his
punishments are good: but it is withal from our sins, deserving them as the
cause, that they are just. Even as the rain that falls upon the earth,
whether it moysten it kindly, and make it fruitful, or whether it choke and
slocken and drown it, yet still had its beginning from the vapors, which the
earth it self Evils, which fall so daily and thick upon us from Heaven,
(whether to warn us, or to plague us,) are but arrows which our selves first
shot up against heaven, and now drop down again with doubled force upon our
heads. Omnis poena propter culpam: all evils of pain, are for the evils of
sin.

I say fourthly, All such evils are for our own sins.. 9.
The Scriptures are plain. 1 Pet. 1.17.
God judges every man according to his own works. Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden, etc. God has enjoined it as a Law for
Magistrates, (wherein they have also his Deuteronomy. 24.16.
not the fathers for the children, nor the children for the fathers, but every
man should be put to death for his own sin, Deuteron. 24. If Israel take up a
Proverb of their own heads, [ Ezekiel. 18.2, etc. Jer. 31.29.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge;]
they do it without cause, and they are checked for it. The soul that sins,
it shall dye: and if any man eat sour grapes, his own teeth (and not another
for shall be set on edge thereby. For indeed, how can it be otherwise? or who
can reasonably think, that our most gracious God, who is so ready to take from
us the guilt of our own, should yet lay upon us the guilt of other men's sins?
The only exception to be made in this kind, is that alone satisfactory
punishment of our blessed Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ: not at all for his
own sins, (far be the impiety from us, so to imagine; for 1 Pet. 2.22.
He did no sin, neither was there any guilt found in his mouth:) but for ours.
Psalm. 69.4. Non rapui and exsolv^b^m: non peccavi and poenas dabam. Aug. Ibi.
He paid that which he never took; it was For our transgressions that he was
wounded, and the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him. meritorious
sufferings of his, may be said (in a qualified sense) to have been for his own
sins: (although in my judgment, it be far better to abstain from such like
speeches, as are of ill and suspicious sound, though they may be in some sort
defended.) But how for his own sins? his own by Commission? by no means: (God
forbid any man should teach, any man should conceive so; the least thought of
this were blaspemy:) but his own by Imputation. Esaias. 53 5.
Not that he had sinned, and so des^rved punishment: but that he had Delictorum
susceptor, non commissor. Aug. in Psalm. 68.
taken upon him our sins, which deserved that punishment. As he that
undertaketh for another debt, makes it his own, and stands chargeable with
it, as if it were his own personal debt: so Christ becoming surety for our
sins, made them Delicta nostra sua delicta fecit, ut justitiam suam nostram
justitiam faceret. Aug. exp. 2. in Psalm. 21.
his own, and so was punishable for them, as if they had been his own personal
sins; 1 Pet. 2.24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2 That he
was punished for us, who himself deserved no punishment; it was, because 2 Cor.
5.21.
He was made sin for us, who himself knew no sin. So that I say, in some sense
the assertion may be defended universally, and without exception: but yet I
desire rather it might be thus; Christ's only excepted, all the Pains and Evils
of men are brought upon their own sins.

These three points then are certain: and it is needful they should be well
understood and remembered;. 10.
because nothing can be objected against Gods Justice, in the punishing of sin,
which may not be easily removed, if we have recourse to some one or other of
these three Certainties, and rightly apply them. All the three doubts proposed
in the beginning, have one and the same resolution: answer one; and answer all.
Ahab here sins by Oppression: and yet the evil must light, though not all of
it (for some part of it fell, and was performed upon Ahab himself) yet the of
it upon his son Iehoram. [I will will not bring the evil in his days, but in
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.] It is not Iehorams case
alone: it is a thing that often has, and daily does befall many others. In
Genesis 9. when Noah's ungracious son Ham had discovered his Fathers nakedness:
the old man (no the curse not upon Ham himself, but upon his son Canaan, Genesis
9.25.
[ Cursed be Canaan, etc.] And God ratified the curse, by rooting out the
posterity of Canaan, first out of the pleasant Land, wherein they were seated;
and then afterward from the face of the whole earth. Ieroboams 3 King. 15.29,
30.
Idolatry cut off his posterity from the Kingdom; and the 1 Samuel 2.33. -- 36.
wickedness of Eli his sons, theirs from the Priesthood of Israel. Gehasi with
the bribe he took, purchased a 4 King. 5.27.
leprosy in fee-simple to him and his heirs for ever. The Jews, for stoning
the Prophets of God, but most of all for crucifying the Son of God, brought
themselves, but upon their children also, Mat. 27.25.
[ His blood be upon us, and upon our Children.] The wrath of God therefore
coming upon them 1 These. 2.16.
to the utmost, and the curse of God abiding upon their posterity even unto
this day: wherein they still remain, (and God knows how long they shall) a
base and despised people; scattered almost every where, and every where hated.
Instances might be endless, both in private persons and families, and in whole
Kingdoms and Countries. But it is a needless labor to multiply instances in
so confessed a point: especially God Almighty having thus far declared himself
and his the second commandment of the Law; that he will not spare in his Exodus
20.5.
Jealousy sometimes to visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto
the third and fourth generation.

There is no question then de facto, but so it is;. 11.
the sins of the Fathers are visited upon the Children: but de jure, with what
right and equity it is so, it is (as Saint Chrysostom speaks) Chrysostom. in
Genesis hom. 28.
(...), a question famous, and much debated. The considerations, which I find
given in for the resolution of this question, August. qu. 42. in Deuter.
Theophylact. in Joh. 9. Perer. 14. in Genesis Disp. 4. Aquin. 1.2. qu. 87.8. Sasb.
quodlib. 3.
by those that have purposely handled it, are very many. But multitude breeds
confusion: and two only, unto which so many of the rest as are material may be
reduced; and those two grounded upon the certainties already declared. The
former concerns the Nature of those Punishments, which are inflicted upon the
Children for the fathers sins; the later, the Condition of those Children, upon
whom such punishments are inflicted.

As to the first,. 12.
The punishments which GOD brings usually upon the Children for the fathers
sins, are only temporal and outward punishments. Some have been plagued with
infectious diseases: as 4 King. 5.27.
Gehazies posterity; and 2 Samuel 3.29.
Ioabs also, if that curse which David pronounced against him took effect, as
it is like it did. Some have come to untimely and uncomfortable ends: as David's
children 2 Samuel 13.29.
Amnon and 2 Samuel 18.15.
Absalon; and the Number. 16.27.33.
little ones of Dathan, and Abiram, and others. Some have had losses, and
reproaches, and manifold other distresses and afflictions in sundry kinds, too
long to rehearse. And all these temporal judgments their fathers sins might
bring upon them: even as the faith, and virtues, and other graces of the
fathers do sometimes conveigh temporal blessings to their posterity. So
Jerusalem was saved in the siege by Senacherib, for Esaias. 37.35.
David's sake many years after his death; Esaias 37.35. And the succession of the
Crown of Israel continued in the line of 4 King. 10.30.
Iehu for four descents; for the zeal that he showed against the worshippers of
Baal, and the house of Ahab. So then, men may fare the better; and so they may
fare the worse too; for the virtues, or vices of their Ancestors. Outwardly,
and temporally they may: but spiritually and eternally they cannot. For as
never yet any man went to heaven for his fathers goodness; so neither hell for
his fathers wickedness.

If it be objected; that for any people or person to suffer a Amos 8.11.
famine of the word of God,. 13.
to be deprived of the use and benefit of the sacred and saving ordinances of
God, to be left in utter darkness without the least glimpse of the glorious
light of the Gospel of God, without which (ordinarily) there can be no
knowledge of Christ, nor means of Faith, nor possibility of Salvation; to be
thus visited, is more than a temporal punishment: and yet this kind of
spiritual judgment does sometimes light upon a Nation or people, for the
unbelief, and unthankfulness, and impenitency, and contempt of their the
Children for their Parents, and Posterity for their Ancestry are punished not
only with Temporal, but even with Spiritual judgments also. If any shall thus
object, one of these two answers may satisfy them. First, if it should be
granted, the want of the Gospel to be properly a spiritual judgment; yet it
would not follow that one man were punished spiritually for the fault of
another. For betwixt private persons, and public societies there is this
difference: that in private persons, every succession makes a change; so that
when the Father dies, and the son comes after him, there is not now the
person that was before, but another: but in Cities, and countries, and
Kingdoms, and all public societies, succession makes no change; so that when
Eccles. 1.4. V. responsionem Alfeni J.C. l. 76. ff. de Judiciis.
One generation passes, and another comes after it, there is not another
City, or Nation, or People than there was before, but the same. If then the
people of the same land should in this generation be visited with any such
spiritual judgment, as is the removal of their Candlestick, and the want of the
Gospel, for the sins and impieties of their Ancestors in some former
generations: yet this ought no more to be accounted the punishment of one for
another; than it ought to be accounted the punishing one for another, to punish
a man in his old age, for the sins of his youth. For as the body of a man,
though the primitive moisture be continually spending and wasting therein, and
that decay be still repaired by a daily supply of new and alimentall moisture,
is yet truly the same body; and as a River fed with a living the water that is
in the chanel be continually running out* and other water freshly succeeding in
the place and room thereof, is truly the same River: so a Nation or People,
though one generation is ever passing away, and another coming on, is yet
truly the same Nation or People, after an hundred, or a thousand years, which
it was before.

Again secondly; The want of the Gospel, is not properly a spiritual, but
rather a temporal punishment.. 14.
We call it indeed sometimes a spiritual Judgment, as we do the free use of it
a spiritual Blessing: because the Gospel was written for, and revealed unto the
the Spirit of GOD; and also because it is the holy Ordinance of GOD, and the
proper instrument whereby (ordinarily) the Spiritual life of Faith and of Grace
is conveyed into our souls. But yet properly and primarily, those only are
Ephesians. 1.3.
Spiritual blessings, which are immediately wrought in the soul by the spirit
of God, and by the same Spirit cherished and preserved in the heart of the
receiver for his good, and are proper and peculiar to those that are born again
of the spirit: and all those on the contrary, which may be subject to decay, or
are common to the reprobate with the Elect, or may turn to the hurt of the
receiver, are to be esteemed temporal blessing, is the outward partaking of the
word and Ordinances of GOD: the want thereof therefore consequently, is to be
esteemed a temporal judgment, rather than spiritual. So that, notwithstanding
this instance, still the former consideration holds good: that GOD sometimes
visits the sins of the fathers upon the children with outward and temporal,
but never with spiritual and eternal punishments.

Now, if there could no more be said to this doubt,. 15.
but only this; it were sufficient to clear Gods Justice: since we have been
already instructed, that these temporal judgments are not always properly and
formally the punishments of sin. For as outward blessings are indeed no true
blessings properly; because Wicked men have their portion in them as well as
the Godly, and they may turn (and often do) to the greater hurt of the soul,
and so become rather Punishments, than Blessings: so to the contrary, outward
punishments are no true punishments properly; because the Godly have their
share in them as deep as the Wicked, and they may turn (and often do) to the
greater good of the soul, and so become rather Blessings, than Punishments.

If it be yet said;. 16.
But why then does God threaten them as Punishments, if they be not so? I
answer. First; because they seem to be punishments, and are by most men so
accounted for their Secondly; for the common event; because ut plurimum and for
the most part they prove punishments to the sufferer, in case he be not
bettered, as well as grieved, by them. Thirdly; because they are indeed a kind
of punishment, though not then deserved, but formerly. Fourthly, and most to
the present purpose; because not seldom the (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 20.
Filii bona valetudo, felicitas, patrimonium, per^inet ad patrem. Felicior
futu^us, si salvum habu^rit filium; infelicior, si amiscrit. Senec. 5. de
Benef. 19. Nihil interest in se quis veritus fuerit, an in liberis: cum pro
affectu parents magis in liberis terreantur. lib. 8.. haec quae ff. 4.2. Quod
metus causa.
Father himself is punished in them, who through tenderness of affection
takes very much to heart the evils that happen to his child; sometimes more,
than if they had happened to himself. See David 2 Samuel 18.33.
weeping and puling for his traiterous son Absalom, when he was gone; more 2 Samuel 19.5, 6.
affectionately, than we find he did for the hazzards of his own person, and of
the whole State of Israel, whiles he lived. For if it be a punishment to a man
to sustain losses in his cattle, or goods, or lands, or friends, or any other
thing he has: how much more then in his children, of Image, but even a Nature
pater and filius eadem esse persona pene intelligitur. l. ult. Cod. 626. d^
impub.

Pars quodammodo corporis ejus. l. 22. Cod. 11.47. de agric. and cens.


part of himself;) and for whose sakes especially it is, that he makes so much
account of the rest? The Egyptians were plagued not only in the blasting of
their corn, the murrain of their cattle, the unwholesomenesse of their waters,
the annoyance of vermin, and such like; but also and much more in the death of
their Exodus 11.5, 6.
firstborn: that was their last, and greatest plague. The news of his
children slain with the fall of an house, did put Job (though not quite out of
patience, yet) more Then Job arose, etc. Job 1.20.
to the trial of his patience, than the loss of all his substance Oxen, and
Asses, and Sheep, and Camels. Now if no man charge God with injustice, if when
a man sins he punish him in his body, or goods, or good name, or in other
things: why should it be suspected of injustice, when he sins, to punish him
in his children? at least there, where the evil of the children seen or
foreseen, redoundeth to the grief and afflion of the father? And so was David's
murder and adultery justly punished in the loss of his incestuous son Amnon,
and of his murtherous son Absalon. Upon which ground, some think that clause
Exodus 20.5.
[ Unto the third and fourth generation] to have been added in the respectively
to the ordinary ages of men; who oftentimes live to see their children to the
third, and sometimes to the fourth generation, but very seldom farther:
Implying, as they think, that God usually punishes the sins of the fathers
upon the children, within such a compass of time, as they may in likelihood
see it, and grieve at it; and then what ever evil it be, it is rather inflicted
as a punishment to them, than to their children. This in part satisfies the
doubt: that the punishments which God lays upon the children for the fathers
sins, are only temporal punishments, and consequently by our second ground not
properly

But yet for so much as these temporal evils, (be it properly, be it
improperly,. 17.
) are still a kind of Punishment; and we have been already taught from the
third ground, that all evils of punishment, whether proper, or improper, are
brought upon men evermore own personal sins: the doubt is not yet wholly
removed, unless we admit of a second Consideration; and that concerns the
condition of those children, upon whom such punishments are inflicted for their
fathers sins.

And first; It is considerable,. 18.
that Children most times tread in their Fathers steps, and continue in their
sins: and so draw upon themselves their punishments. And this they do
especially, by a threefold conveyance of sin from their Parents; viz.
Nature, Example, and Education. First, Nature: and this is seen especially in
those sins, that are more sensual than other, and symbolize with the
predominant humor in the body. It is plain from experience, that some sins
(especially the proneness, and inclination unto them) do follow some
complexions and constitutions of body, more than others; and arise from them:
As Ambition, Rage, rashness, and turbulent intermedling in other men's affairs,
from Choler; Wantonness, and Licentious mirth, from Blood; Drunkenness, and
Laziness, from Phlegm; Envy, and Sullenness, implacable thirst of Revenge,
from Melancholy. And these kind of sins (to note that by the way) do
oftentimes prove our master-sinnes; such as Divines usually call our bosom, and
darling, and beloved sins, ( Peccatum in deliciis) (...). Theophrast.
Charact. 19.
naturally we have a stronger proneness and inclination to these, than to other
sins. And therefore we ought to pray against, and to strive against, and to
fight against these sins, and to avoid the occasions of them, especially and
above all other sins. And if it shall please God so to strengthen us with his
grace, and enable us by his spirit, as to have in some good measure subdued
these sins in us, and denied our selves in them: it is to be comfortably
hoped, that we have wrought the main and the masterpiece of our Mortification.
But to return where I was; as color and favor, and proportion, of hair, and
face, and lineament; and as diseases and infirmities of the Body; so commonly
the abilities, and dispositions, and tempers of the mind and affections become
hereditary, and (as we say) (...). Eurip. d: apud Stob. Sermon. 88.
Run in a blood. Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae. An evil bird hatcheth
an evil egg; and one (...). Egdo^: ibid.
Viper will breed a generation of Vipers.

Secondly; We are (God knows) but too apish,. 19.
apt to be led much by examples, more by the worst, most by the nearest. --
Juvenal. Satyr. 14.
Velocius and citius nos Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domestica. Young ones will
do, as they see the old ones do before them: and Non qua eundum, sed qua
itur; not as their father bids them, but as he leads them. Juv. Ibid.
Si nociva senem juvat alea -- If the -- probum patrem esse opportet, Qui
gnatum suum probiorem, quam ipsus furit, postulat. Plaut. in Pseud.
father be given to swearing, or gaming, or scoffing, or whoring, or riot, or
contention, or excess in drink, or any thing else that naught is: let him
counsel and advise his son as often and as earnestly as he can; he shall find
one cursed example, (without the singular mercy and grace of God) to do more
hurt upon him, admonitions will do good. Juvenal. ubi supra.
-- fugienda patrum vestigia ducunt, Et monstrata diu veteris trahit orbita
culpae.

. 20.
A third means of conveying vices from parents to children, is Education: when
parents train and bring up their children in those sinful courses, wherein
themselves have lived and delighted. So covetous worldlings are ever distilling
into the ears of their children precepts of parsimony and good husbandry,
reading them lectures of thrift, and inculcating principles of getting and
saving. Juvenal. Satyr. 14.
Sunt quaedam vitiorum elementa: his protinus illos Imbuet, Idle wandering
Beggars train up their children in a trade of begging, and lying, and cursing,
and filching, and all idleness and abominable filthiness. And idolatrous
parents how careful they are to nuzzle up their Posterity in Superstition and
Idolatry; I would our professed Popelings, and half-baked Protestants, did not
let us see but too often. Wretched and accursed is our supine carelessness; if
these men's wicked diligence, (whose first care for the fruit of their bodies,
is to poison their souls, by sacrificing their sons and daughters to Idols;)
shall rise up in judgment against us, and condemn our foul neglect, in our
children with such religious, godly, and virtuous Ephesians. 6.4.
informations, as they are capable of.

. 21.
However it be, whether by Nature, Example, or Education, one, or more, or all
of these: certain it is, that most times sins -- reddit ad authors genus,
Stirpemque primam degener sanguis refert. Senec. in Hippol. act. 3.
pass along from the father to the son, and so downward, by a kind of lineal
descent from predecessors to posterity; and that for the most part with (...).
Hom: Odyss. (...).

Et qui Omnia deterius tua per vestigia peccet. Juven. Satyr. 14.


advantage and increase: whole families being tainted with the special vices of
their stock. John Baptist speaks of Mat. 3.7.
a generation of vipers: and if we should but observe the families in a long
line of succession; might we not epsy here and there, even whole generations
of Drunkards, and generations of Swearers, and generations of Idolaters, and
generations of Worldlings, and generations of seditious, and of envious, and of
riotous, and of haughty, and of unclean persons, and of sinners in other kinds?
This ungodly King Ahab; see how all that come of him, taste of him, and have
some spice and relish of his evil manners. Of his son Ahaziah, that next
succeeded him in the kingdom of Israel, the Text says in the next Chapter,
that 3 King. 22.25.
He walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother. And another
Ahaziah Judah, the grandchild of Iehosaphat by the fathers side, and of Ahab
by the mothers; drew infection from the mother, and so trod in the steps rather
of this his wicked Grandfather Ahab, than of his good Grandfather Iehosaphat:
and of him therefore the Scripture says remarkably in 4 Kings. 8. 4 King. 8.27.
He walked Little does any man think, what hurt he may do unto, and what
plague he may bring upon, his posterity, by joining himself or them in too
strict a bond of nearness, with an ill or an Idolatrous House or Stock. Here,
we see, is Ahab's house taxed, and not his person only: even the whole family,
and brood, and kinn of them, branch and root. And that Iehoram also, who is the
son here spoken of and meant in my Text, did 4 King. 3.2.
Patrisare too as well as the rest of the kindred, and take after the father,
(though not in that height of impiety, and idolatry, as his father) is plain
from the sequel the Evils of sin with his father; why might not he also in
justice partake of the Evils of punishment with his father?

Secondly,. 22*
the sins of the fathers are visited upon the children sometimes, as
possessours of something which their fathers left them, with Gods curse
cleaving unto it. As in the Law, not only he, that had an See Levit. 15.2. --
11.
issue of uncleanness, made them unclean that touched him; but even the saddle
or stool he sat upon, the clothes he wore, the bed whereon he lay, any vessel
of earth or of wood that he did but touch, was enough to bring legal pollution
and uncleanness our fathers sins, if we touch them by imitation; but even their
(...). Euripid.
lands and goods and houses, and other things that were theirs, are sufficient
to derive Gods curse upon us, if we do but hold them in possession. What is
gotten by any evil and unjust and unwarrantable means, is in Gods sight and
estimation no better than stolen. Now stolen goods, we know, though they have
passed through never so many hands before, (...), Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 15.
that man is answerable for, in whose hands they are found, and in whose
custody and possession they are. God hates not sin only; but the very
monuments of sin too: and his curse fasteneth, not only upon the agent, but
upon the brute and dead materials too. And where theft, or oppression, or
perjury, or sacrilege have laid the foundation, and reared the house; there the
Zach. 5.4.
Curse of God creeps in between the walls and seelings, and lurketh close
within the stones, and the timber, and as a fretting moath or canker,
insensibly gnaweth asunder the pinns and the joints of the building, till it
have unframed it, and resolved it into a ruinous heap: for which mischief there
is no remedy, no preservation from it, but one; and that is, free and speedy
Restitution. For any thing we know, Ahab the father got without justice,
Iehoram the son held without scruple. We do not find, that ever he made
restitution of Naboths vineyard to the right heir; and it is like enough he did
not: and then between him and his father there was but this difference; the
father was the thief, and he the receiver; which two the Law severeth not
either in guilt or punishment, but wrappeth (...). Pnocylid.
(...). And who knows, whether the very holding of that vineyard might not
bring upon him the curse of his fathers oppression? it is plain that 4 King.
6.25, 26.
vineyard was the place, where the heaviest part of that curse overtook him.

. 23.
But that which is the upshot of all, and untieth all the knots both of this and
of all other doubts, that can be made against Gods justice, in punishing one
for another, arises from a third consideration; which is this. That the
children are punished for fathers sins, or indefinitely any one man for the
sins of any other man; it ought to be imputed to those sins of the fathers or
others, not as to the causes properly deserving them, but only as occasioning
those punishments. It pleases God to take occasion from the sins of the
fathers, or of some others, to bring upon their children, or those that
otherwise belong unto them in some kind of relation, those evils which by their
own corruptions and sins they have justly deserved. This distinction of the
Cause and Occasion, if well heeded, both fully acquitteth Gods justice; and
abundantly reconcileth the seeming Contradictions of Scripture, in

There is a kind of Cause de numero efficientium, which the learned,. 24.
for distinctions sake, call the Impulsive Cause: and it is such a cause as
Quae principalem efficientem impellit ad efficiendum. Keckerm. 1. Syst. Log. 10
moves and induces the principal Agent, to do that which it does. For
example; A Schoolmaster corrects a boy with a rod for neglecting his book. Of
this correction here are three distinct causes, all in the rank of efficients;
viz. the Master, the Rod, and the boys neglect: but each has its proper
causality in a different kind and manner from other. The Master is the Cause,
the principal Agent, that does it; the Rod is the Cause, as the Instrument
wherewith he does it: and the boys neglect the impulsive cause, for which he
does it. Semblably, in this judgment which befell Iehoram; the principal
efficient cause and Agent, was God, (as he is in all other punishments and
judgments; Amos 3.6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.) and
here he takes it to himself, [ I will bring the evil upon his house.] The
Instrumental Cause under God, was 4 King. 9.
Iehu, whom God raised up, and endued with zeal and power for the execution of
that vengeance, which he had detetmined against Ahab and against his as
appears in 4 Kings 9. and 10. But now, what the true proper impulsive cause
should be, for which he was so punished, and which moved God at that time and
in that sort to punish him; that is the point wherein consists the chiefest
difficulty in this matter, and into which therefore we are now viz. whether
that were rather his own sin, or his father Ahabs sin?

Whether we answer for this, or for that; we say but the truth in both: for
both sayings are true;. 25.
[God punished him for his own] and [God punished him for his Fathers sin.] The
difference only this. His own sins were the impulsive cause that deserved the
punishment; his fathers sin the impulsive cause that occasioned it: and so
indeed upon the point, and respectively to the justice of God, rather his own
sins were the cause of it, than his fathers: both because justice does
especially look at the desert; and also because effectually, and primarily, and
properly the impulsive cause of punishing, than that which only occasioneth it.
The terms whereby Artists express these two different kinds of impulsive
causes (borrowed from Galen and the Physicians,) of See Kecker. 1 Syst. Log.
10. called by Brulif. Causa dispositiva, and Excitativa. apud Altenst. in dict.
Causa.
(...), would be excellent, and full of satisfaction; if they were of easy
understanding. But for that they are not so, especially to such as are not
acquainted with the terms and learning of the Schools; I forbear to use them:
and rather than to take the shortest cut over hedge and ditch, choose to lead
you an easier and plainer

A man has lived for some good space in reasonable state of health; yet by
gross feeding, and through continuance of time, his body the whilst has
contracted many vicious, noisome, and malignant humors. It happens he had
occasion to ride abroad in bad weather; takes wet on his feet or neck, gets
cold with it, comes home, finds himself not well, falls a shaking first,
and anon after into a dangerous and lasting fever. Here is a fever, and here
are two different causes of it, an antecedent cause within, the abundance of
noisome and crude humors, Interiores dispositiones quae irritantur ab externis
causis. Melancthon. causa dispositiva. Brulifer.
causa (...);) and the evident cause ah extra, his riding in the wet, and
taking cold upon it, (and that is Galens Causa externa irritatrix. Melancthon.
causa excitativa. Brulifer.
causa (...).) Let us go on a little, and compare these causes. The Physician
is sent for, the sick man's friends they stand about him, and in comes the
Physician among them, and enquireth of him and them how he got his fever. They
presently give him such information as they can, (and the information is both
true, and sufficient, so far as it reaches:) they tell him the one cause, the
occasional cause, the outward evident cause: [Alas, Sir, he rode such a
journey, such a time, got wet on his took cold upon it; and that has brought
him to all this.] That is all they are able to say to it: for other cause they
know none. But by and by after some surview of the state of the body, he is
able to inform them in the other cause, the inward and original cause; whereof
they were as ignorant before, as he was of that other outward one: and he
tells them the cause of the malady humors, rankness of blood, abundance of
melancholy, tough phlegm, or some other like thing within. Now if it be
demanded, which of these two is rather the cause of his sickness? The truth is,
that inward antecedent cause within, is the very cause thereof; although
perhaps it had not bred a fever at that time, if that other outward occasion
had not been. For by that inward hidden cause the body was prepared for an
ague: only there wanted some outward fit accident, to stir and provoke the
humors within, and to set them on working, And the parties body being so
prepared, might have fallen into other accident as well as that; as over
heating himself with exercise, immoderate watching, some distemper or surfeit
in diet, or the like. But neither that, nor any of these, nor any other such
accident could have cast him into such a fit, if the humors had not been ripe,
and the body thereby prepared to entertain such a disease. So as the bad
humors within may rather be said to be the true cause; and that cold-taking
but the occasion of the Ague; the disease it self issuing from the hidden cause
within; and the outward accident being the cause, not so much of the disease it
self, why the Ague should take him, as why it should take him at that time,
rather than at another, in that part, or in that manner, rather than in another.

From this example we may see in some proportion, how our own sins,. 27.
and other men's, concur as joint impulsive causes of those punishments, which
God brings upon us. Our own sins they are the true Causa (...), interna,
antecedens, dispositiva.
hidden antecedent causes, which deserve the punishments: our Fathers sins, or
our governors sins, or our neighbors sins, or whatsoever other man's sins,
that are visited upon us, are only the Causa (...), externa irritatrix,
excitativa.
outward evident causes (or rather occasions) why we should be punished at this
time, and in this thing, and in this manner, and in this measure, and with
these circumstances. And as in the former Example, the Patients friends
considered one cause, and the Physician another; they, the evident and outward,
he, the inward and antecedent cause: so respectively to God's Justice, our own
sins only are the causes of our punishments; but in respect of his Providence
and Wisdom, our Fathers sins also, or other men's. For Justice looks upon the
desert only; and so the punishments are ever and only from our own personal
sins, as we learned from our third Certainty: but it is Providence, that
orders the occasions, and the seasons, and the other circumstances of Gods
punishments.

Hence may we learn to reconcile those places of Scipture, which seem to Cross
one another in this Argument.. 28.
In Ezekiel and Jeremy it is said, that Jer. 31.30. and Ezekiel. 18.20.
Every man shall be punished for his own sins, the Children shall not bear
the iniquity of the Fathers: and yet the same Jeremy complains as if it were
otherwise, ( Lam. 5.) Lam. 5.7.
Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have born their iniquities, Yea
God himself proclameth otherwise, I am Exodus 20.5.
a jealous God, visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the Children -- Nor only
does he visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children: but he visits also
the sins of Princes upon their Subjects; as 2 Samuel 24.17.
David's people were wasted for his sin in numbering them: yea and he visits
sometimes the sins even of ordinary private men upon public societies; Josh.
22.20.
[ Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed Now how
can all this stand together?

Yes very well: even as well, as in the act of punishing, Gods Justice and his
Wisdom can stand together. Mark then,. 29.
wheresoever the Scripture ascribes one man's punishment to another man's sin;
it points us to Gods Wisdom and Providence; who for good and just ends
makes choice of these occasions, rather than other sometimes, to inflict those
punishments upon men, which their own sins have otherwise abundantly
deserved. On the contrary, the personal sins of the sufferer, it points us
to Gods Justice: which looks still to the desert, and does not upon any
occasion whatsoever inflict punishments, but where there are personal sins to
deserve them; so that every man that is punished in any kind, or upon any
occasion, may join with David in that confession of his, Psalm 51. Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: that thou might be
justified in thy sayings, and clear when thou judge.

Say then, an unconscionable great one, by cruel oppression,. 30.
Ahab did here, his poorer neighbors Vineyard from him; or by countenanced
sacrilege g^ld a Bishopric of a fair Lordship or Manor; and when he has done,
his prodigal heir run one end of it away in matches, drown another end of it in
Taverns and Tap-houses, melt away the rest in lust, and beastly sensuality: who
does not here see, both Gods Justice, in turning him out of that, which was so
foulely abused by his own sins; and his Providence withal, in fastening the
Curse upon that portion, which was so unjustly gotten by his fathers sins?
Every man is ready to say, It was never like to prosper, it was so ill gotten;
and so acknowledge the Covetous fathers sin, as occasioning it: and yet every
man can say withal, It was never likely to continue long, it was so vainly
lavished out; and so acknowledge the Prodigal sons sin, as sufficiently
deserving it.

Thus have we heard the main doubt solved.. 31.
The sum of all is this. God punishes the son for the Fathers sin: but with
temporal punishments, not eternal; and with those, perhaps so as to redound the
fathers punishment in the son. Perhaps, because the son treads in his fathers
steps; Perhaps, because he possesses that from his father, to which Gods curse
adhereth; perhaps for other reasons best known to God himself, wherewith he
has not thought meet to acquaint us: but what ever the occasion be, or the
ends; evermore for the sons own personal sins, abundantly deserving them.

And the same resolution is to be given to the other two doubts proposed in the
beginning: 32.
to that, Why GOD should punish any one man for another? and to the third, Why
God should punish the lesser offender for the greater? In which, and all other
doubts of like kind, it is enough, for the clearing of Gods Justice, to
consider: that when God does so, they are first only temporal punishments which
he so inflicteth; and those secondly no more, than what the sufferer by his own
sins has most rightfully deserved. All those other considerations, as that
the Prince and people are but one body; and so each may feel the smart of
others sins and stripes: That oftentimes we have given way to other men's
sins, when we might have stopped them; or consent, when we should have
withstood them; or silent allowance, when we should have checked furtherance,
when we should rather have hindered them: That the punishments brought upon us
for our fathers or other men's sins, may turn to our great spiritual advantage,
in the humbling of our souls, the subduing of our corruptions, the increasing
of our care, the exercising of our graces; That where all have deserved the
punishment, it is left to the discretion of the Judge, whom he will pick out,
the Father or the Son, the Governor or the Subject, the Ringleader or the
Follower, the Greater or the Lesser offender, to show exemplary justice upon,
as he shall see expedient. considerations many, though they are to be admitted
as true, and observed as useful; yet they are such, as belong rather to GODS
Providence and his Wisdom, than to his Justice. If therefore thou know not
the very particular reason, why God should punish thee in this or that manner,
or upon this or that occasion; let it suffice thee that the Counsels and
purposes of God are secret: and thou art not to enquire with scrupulous
curiosity into the dispensation and courses of his Providence, farther than it
has pleased him either to reveal it in his word, or by his manifest works to
discover it unto thee. But whatsoever thou do, never make question of his
Justice. Begin first to make inquiry into thine own self: and if after
unpartial search, thou deserve all out as much as God has laid upon thee,
then complain of injustice, but not before. And so much for the doubts.

. 33.
Let us now from the premises raise some instructions for our Parents we think
have reason to be careful, (and so they have) for their children; and to
desire and labor, as much as in them lies, their well-doing. Here is a fair
course then for you that are parents, and have children to care for. Do you
that which is good, and honest, and right: and they are like to fare the better
for it. Would thou then, Brother, leave thy lands, and thy estate to thy
child, entire and free from encombrances? It is an honest care: but here is the
way. Juvenal Satyr. 14.
Abstineas igitur damnandis; Leave them free from the (...). Isocr.
guilt of thy sins; which are able to comber them beyond any statute, or
morgage. If Law, if not the care of thine own soul, if not the fear of hell, if
not the inward checks of thine own conscience: Juvenal Satyr. 14.
At peccaturo obstet tibi filius infans; at the least let the good of thy poor
sweet infants restrain thee from doing that sin, which might pull down from
heaven a plague upon them and theirs. Go too then, do not applaud thy self in
thy witty villainies, when thou have circumvented and prospered; when Ahab-like
thou have ver. 19. hic.
killed and taken possession; when thou have larded thy leaner revenues with
fat collops sacrilegiously cut out of the sides or flanks of the Church; and
have nailed all these with all the appurtenances, by fines, and vowchers, and
entayls, as firm as Law can make them, to thy child, and his child, and his
child's child for ever. After all this stir, cast up thy bills, and see what a
goodly bargain thou have made: thou have damned thy self, to undo thy child;
thou have brought a curse upon thine own soul, to purchase that for thy child,
which shall bring a curse both upon it and him. When thy Indentures were drawn,
and thy learned Counsel fee'd to peruse the Instrument, and with exact severity
to ponder with thee every clause and syllable therein; could none of you spy a
flaw in that clause [ with all and singular the appurtenances,] neither
observe, estate, the wrath, and vengeance, and curse of God, which is one of
those appurtenances? Had thou not a faithful Counselor within thine own
breast, if thou would but have conferred and advised with him plainly and
undissemblingly, that could have told thee, thou had by thy oppression and
injustice, ipso facto, cut off the entail from thy issue, even long before thou
had made it? But if thou would leave thy posterity a firm, and secure,
and durable estate: do this rather. Purchase for them by thy charitable works,
the prayers and blessings of settle upon them the fruits of a religious, sober,
and honest education; bequeath them the legacy of thy good example, in all
virtuous and godly living: and that portion thou leavest them besides, of
earthly things, be it much or little, be sure it be (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom.
2.
well gotten; otherwise never look it (...). Pau^an. in Corinthiacis, v.
Juven^l. Satyr. 13.
should prosper with them. 1 Cor. 5, 6.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and sowreth it: and a little i^l
gotten, like a gangrene, spreads through the whole estate; and worse than
aqua fortis, or the poisoned -- a^ d^o; Quantum nec atro delibutus Hercules
Nessi cr^^ore. Horat. Epod. 17. See Sophocl. in Trachin.
shirt that Deianira gave Hercules, cleaves unto it, and feeds upon it, and
by little and little gnaweth, and fretteth, and consumes it to nothing. And
surely, Gods Justice has wonderfully manifested it self unto the world in this
kind, sometimes even to the public astonishment and admiration of all men:
that men of ancient Families, and great estates; well left by their Ancestors,
and free from debts, legacies, or other encombrances; not notedly guilty of any
expencefull sin or vanity, but wary, and husbandly, and careful to thrive in
the world; not kept under with any great burden of needy friends, or charge of
children; not much hindered by any extraordinary losses, or casualties of fire,
thieves, suretiship, or suits: that such men, I say, should yet sink and decay,
and run behind hand in the world; and their estates crumble and milder away,
and come to nothing, and no man knows how. No question, but they have sins
enough of their own, to deserve all this, and ten times more than all this: but
yet withal, who knows but that it might, nay who knows not that sometimes
it does, (so legible Gods judgments) come upon them for the greediness and
avarice, and oppression, and sacrilege, and injustice of their not long
foregoing Ancestors? You that are parents, take heed of these sins. It may
be, for some other reasons known best to himself, God suffers you to go on
your own time, and suspendeth the judgments, your sins have deserved, for a
space, as here he did Ahab's upon his humiliation: but be assured, sooner or
later, vengeance will overtake you or yours for it. You have Hab. 2.9.
Coveted an evil covetousness to your house: and there hangs a judgment over
your house for it, as rain in the clouds; which, perhaps sons, perhaps in your
grand-childs days, some time or other, will come dashing down upon it, and
over-whelm it. Think not the vision is for many descents to come -- de male
quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres: seldom does the Exo. 20.5.
third, scarce ever the fourth generation pass, before God visit the sins of
the Fathers upon the Children; if he do not in the very next generation. [In
his sons days will I bring the evil upon his house.]

. 34.
Secondly; if not only our own, but our fathers sins too may be, shall be
visited upon us: how concerns it us, as to repent for our own, so to lament
also the sins of our forefathers; and in our confessions remember them, that he
may forget them, and to set them before his face, that he may cast them behind
his back? We have a good president for it in our public Letany; Remember not
Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers! A good, and a
profitable, and a needful sobriety, and allow but just interpretations to
things advisedly established; rather than busy themselves nodum in scirpo, to
pick needless quarrels where they should not: What unity would it bring to
brethren, what peace to the Church, what joy to all good and wise men!) As to
this particular, God requires of the Israelites in Lev. 26. that they should
Lev. 26.39, 40.
confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their Fathers, Psalm. 106.6.
David did so, and Jer. 3.15.
Jeremy did so, and Dan. 9.5.
Daniel did so: in Psalm. 106. in Ierem. 3. in Dan. 9. And if David hought it a
fit curse, to pronounce against Judas, and such as he was, in Psalm. 109. [
Psalm. 109.14.
Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of the
Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away:] why may we not, nay
how ought we not, to pray for the removal of this very curse from us, as well
as of any other curses? The present age is rise of many enormous crying sins,
which call loud for a judgment upon the land: and if God should bring upon us
a right heavy one, whereat all ears should tingle; could we say other, but that
it were most just, even for the sins of this present generation? But if unto
our own, so many, so great, God forefathers; the bloodshed, and tyranny, and
grievous unnatural butcheries in the long times of the Civil wars, and the
universal idolatries and superstitions covering the whole land, in the longer
and darker times of Popery: and if, as he sometimes threatened to bring upon the
Jews of Mar. 23.35, 36.
that one generation, all the righteous blood that ever was shed upon the
earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the
son of Barachias; so he should bring the sins of our Ancestors for many
generations past, upon this generation of ours: who could be able to abide it?
Now, when the security of the times the regions begin to look white toward the
harvest: is it not time for us with all humiliation of Soul and Body to cast
down our selves; and with all contention of voice and spirit to lift up our
prayers? and to say; Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our
forefathers; neither take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us good Lord,
spare the people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be
not angry with us for ever. Spare us good Lord.

Thirdly. Since not only our fathers sins, and our own;. 35.
but our Neighbors sins too, ( aliquid malum propter vicinum malum,) but
Princes and Governors, ( -- Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi,) may bring judgments upon us, and enwrap
us in their punishments: it should reach every one of us, to seek his own
private in the common and public good; and to endeavor, if but for our own
security from punishment, to awaken other from their security in sin. How
should we send up 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
Supplications and prayers and intercessions for Kings; that God would incline
their hearts unto righteous courses, and open their ears to wholesome counsels,
and strengthen their hands to just actions? when but a sinful oversight in one
of them, may prove the overthrow of many thousands of us: as David but by once
numbering his people in the pride of his heart, lessened their number at one
clap 2 Samuel 24.15.
threescore and ten thousand. If Jos. 7.8, 10, 15.
Israel turn their backs upon their enemies; up Iosuah, and make search for the
troubler of Israel, firret out the thief, and do execution upon him: one
Achan, if but suffered, is able to undo the whole host of Israel; what
mischief might he do if countenanced, if allowed? The hour I see has
overtaken me, and I must end. To wrap up all in a word then, and conclude: Thou
that have power over others; suffer no sin in them by base connivence, but
punish it: thou that have charge of others; suffer no sin in them by dull
silence, but rebuke it: thou that have any interest in, or dealing with others;
suffer no sin upon them, by easy allowance, but distaste it: thou that have
nothing else; yet by thy charitable prayers for them, and by constant example
to them, stop the course of sin in others, further the growth of grace in
others, labor by all means (as much as in thee draw others unto God; lest
their sins draw Gods judgments upon themselves and thee. This that thou
may do, and that I may do, and that every one of us, that fears God, and
wishes well to the Israel of God, may do, faithfully and discreetly in our
several stations and callings: let us all humbly beseech the Lord, the God of
all grace and wisdom, for his Son Jesus sake, by his holy Spirit to enable us.
To which blessed Trinity, one only wise, Immortal, Invisible, Almighty, most
gracious, and most glorious Lord and God, be ascribed by every one of us, the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

THE FOVRTH Paul's Church London, 4 Nov. 1621.
1 Cor. 7.24. Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with
God.


IF flesh and blood be suffered to make the Gloss,. 1.
it is able to corrupt a right good Text. It easily turns the doctrine of
Gods grace into Jude 4.
wantonness: and as easily the doctrine of Christian liberty into
licentiousness. These Corinthians, being yet but 1 Cor. 3.1, 3, 4.
Carnal; for the point of Liberberty consulted (it seems) but too much with
this cursed gloss. Which taught them to interpret their Calling to the
Christian Exemption from the duties of all other callings: as if their
spiritual freedom in Christ had cancelled ipso facto all former obligations,
whether of Nature or Civility. The Husband would put away his Wife, the Servant
disrespect his Master, every other man break the bonds of relation to every
other man: and all under this pretense, and upon this ground, that Christ has
made them free. In this passage of the Chap. the Apostle occasionally Marriage;
but with a farther and more universal extent to all outward states and
conditions of life. The sum of his Doctrine this. He that is yoaked with a
wife, must not put her away, but count her worthy of all love; he that is bound
to a Master, must not despise him, but count him worthy of all honor; every
other man that is tied in any relation to any other man, must not neglect him,
but count him worthy of all good offices and civil respects suitable to his
place and person: though She or He, or that other, be Infidels and
Unbeleevers. The Christian Calling does not at all prejudice, much less
overthrow; it rather establishes and strengthens, those interests, that
arise from natural relations, or from voluntary contracts (either domestical or
civil) betwixt Man and Man. The general rule to this effect he conceives in
the form of an Exhortation; that every man (notwithstanding his calling unto
liberty in Christ) abide in that station wherein God has placed him, contain
himself within the bounds thereof, and cheerfully and contentedly undergo the
duti^s that belong thereto, ver. 17. [ As God has distributed to every man, as
the Lord has called every one, ] And lest this Exhortation, (as it fares with
most other, especially such as come in but upon Ex incidenti dat documentum
generale. Lyran. ad verse. 17.
the by, as this does) should be slenderly regarded: the more fully to Quod,
ut plene commendet, reiterat. Ambros. in 1 Cor. cap. 37.
commend it to their consideration and practice, he repeateth it once again,
verse 20. [ Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called.]
And now again once more; in the words of this verse; concluding therewith the
whole discourse into which he had digressed, [ Brethren, let every man, wherein
he is called, therein abide with God.]

From which words, I desire it may be no prejudice to my present. 2.
if I take occasion to entreat at this time of a very needful argument; viz.
concerning the Necessity, Choice, and Use of particular callings. Which whilst
I do, if any shall blame me for shaking hands with my text: let such know,
First, that it will not be very charitably done, to pass a hard censure upon
another labor; no nor yet very providently for their own good, to slight a
profitable truth for some little seeming impertinency. Secondly, that the
points proposed are indeed not impertinent: the last of them (which supposes
also the other two) being the very substance of this Exhortation; and all of
them such as may Thirdly, (which Saint Bernard deemed a sufficient Apology for
himself in a case of like nature, Noverint -- me non tam intendisse exponere
evangelium, quam ex Evangelio sumere occasionem loquendi, quod loqui
delectabat. Bernard. super Missus est.
Noverint me non tam intendisse, etc.) let them know, that, in my choice of
this Scripture, my purpose was not so much to bind my self to the strict
exposition of the Apostolical Text, as to take occasion therefrom to deliver
what I desired to speak, and judged expedient for you to hear; concerning, 1.
the Necessity, 2. the Choice, and 3. the Use of particular Callings.

Points, if ever needful to be taught and known; certainly, in these days
most. Wherein some habituated in idleness,. 3.
will Calling: like a heavy jade, that is spurred up, and whipped on end.
Othersome, through weakness, do not make a good choice of a fit Calling: like
a young unbroken that has metal, and is free, but is ever wrying the wrong
way. These would be fairly checked, turned into the right way, and guided with a
steady, and skillful hand. A third sort (and I think the greatest) through
unsetledness, or discontentedness, Calling: like an unruly Colt, that The first
sort are to be taught the Necessity of a Calling; the second, to be directed
for the Choice of their Calling; the third, to be bounded and limited in the
Exercise of their Calling. Of which three in their order: and of the First,
first; the Necessity of a calling.

The Scriptures speak of two kinds of Vocations or Callings:. 4.
the one, ad Foedus; the other, ad Munus. The usual known terms are; the
General and the Particular Calling. Vocatio ad Foedus, or the General Calling,
is that wherewith God calls us, either outwardly in the ministry of his
Word, or inwardly by the efficacy of his Spirit, or jointly by both; to the
faith and obedience of the Gospel, and to the embracing of the Covenant of
grace and of mercy and salvation by Jesus Christ. Which is therefore termed the
General Calling, (not for that it is of larger extent than the other, but)
because the thing whereunto we are thus called, is one and the same, and common
to all that are called. The same duties and the same promises, and every way
the same conditions. Here is no difference in regard of Persons: but Ephesians. 4.4,
5.
One Lord,: That Is the General Calling. Vocatio ad Munus. Our Particular
Calling, is that wherewith GOD enableth us, and directs us, and puts us on
to some special course and condition of life, wherein to employ our selves, and
to exercise the gifts he has bestowed upon us, to his glory, and the benefit
of our selves, and others. And it is therefore termed a Particular not as if it
concerned not all in general; (for we shall prove the contrary anon;) but
because the thing whereunto men are thus called is not one and the same to all,
but differenced with much variety according to the quality of particular
persons, Ver. 7. hic.
Alius sic, alius vero sic: [Every man has his proper gift of God; one man on
this manner, another on that.] Here is Ibid.
(...): some called to be Magistrates, some Ministers, some Merchants, some
Artificers, some one thing, some another, as to their particular Callings. But
as to the General Calling, there is (^u^e 3.
(...) the common Salvation: all called to the same State of being the servants
and children of God; all called to the performance of the same duties of
servants, and to the expectation of the same inheritance of children; all
called to be Christians. Of both which Callings, the General and Particular,
there is not (I take it) any where in Scripture mention made so expressly and
together, as in this passage of our Apostle; especially at the 20 ver. [ Let
every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called.] Where, besides the
matter, the Apostles elegancy is observable in using the same word in (...).
Piscat. hic.
both significations: the Noun signifying the Particular, and the Verb the
General Calling. Let every one abide Particular Calling, wherein he stood at
the time of his General Calling. And the same, and no other, is the meaning of
the words of my Text.

. 5.
Whence it appears, that the Calling my Text implies, and wherein every man
is here exhorted to abide, is to be understood of the Particular, and not of
the General Calling. And of this Particular Calling it is we now intend to
speak. And that in the more Proper and restrained signification of it; as it
imports some settled course of life with reference to business, office, and
employment: accordingly as we say a man is called to be a Minister, called to
be a Lawyer, called to be a Tradesman, and the like. Although I cannot be
ignorant, that our Apostle (as the stream of his argument carried him) here
takes the word in a much wider extent; as including not only such special
courses of life as refer to employment, but even all outward personal states
and conditions of men whatsoever, whether they have such reference, or no: as
we may say, a man is called to Marriage, or to single life, called to riches or
poverty, and the like.

But omitting this larger signification, we will hold our selves either only or
principally,. 6.
to the former: and by Calling understand a special settled course of life,
wherein mainly to employ a man's gifts and time for his own and the common good.
The Necessity whereof whilst we mention, you are to imagine, not an absolute
positive, but a conditional and suppositive necessity. Not as if no man could
be without one de facto, (daily experience in these dissolute times manifests
the contrary:) but because de jure no man should be without one. This kind of
Calling is indeed necessary for all men: But how? Not as a necessary thing
ratione termini, so as the want thereof would be an absolute impossibility: but
virtute praecepti, as a necessary duty, the neglect whereof would be a grievous
and sinful enormity. He that will do that which he ought, and is in
conscience bound to do; must of necessitity live in some calling or other.
That is it we mean by the Necessity of a Calling. And this Necessity we are now
to prove.

And that First,. 7.
from the Obedience we owe to every of Gods Ordinances; and the account we must
render for every of Gods Gifts. Amongst those Ordinances this is one, and one
of the first; that Genesis 3.19.
in the sweat of our faces every man of us should eat our bread, Genesis 3. The
force of which precept, let none think to avoid by a quirk: that forsooth it
was laid upon Adam after his transgression, rather as a Curse, which he must
endure; than as a Duty, which he should perform. For first; as some of Gods
Curses, (such is his goodness) are promises as well as Curses; as is that of
the Genesis 3.15.
Enmity between the Woman's seed and the Serpents: so some of Gods Curses (such
is his Justice) are Precepts as well as Curses; as is that of the Genesis 3.16.
Ephesians. 5.22. Col. 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.11, etc.
Woman's subjection to the Man. This of eating our bread in the sweat of our
face, is all the three: it is a Curse; it is a Promise; it is a Precept. It is
as Curse; in that God will not suffer the earth, to afford us bread, without
our sweat. It is a promise; in that God assures us, we shall have bread for
our sweat. And it is a Precept too; in that God enjoyneth us, if we will have
bread, to sweat for it. Secondly; although it may injunction to Adam was given
as a Curse; yet the substance of the Injunction was not the thing wherein the
Curse did formally consist. Herein was the Curse: that whereas before the fall,
the task which God appointed man was with Non erat laboris afflictio, sed
exhilaratio voluntatis. Augustine. 8. de Genesis ad lit. 8.

-- Non labor servili, sed bonesta animi voluptate.

Ibid. c. 9.


pleasure of body, and content of mind, without sweat of brow or brain; now
after the fall he was to toil and forecast for his living, with Sore travel,
Eccl. 1.13. Great travel and a heavy yoke. Sirac. 40.1.
care of mind and travel of body, with Eccl. 12.12.
weariness of flesh, and Eccl. 1.14.17.
vexation of spirit. But as for the substance of the Injunction, which is, that
every man should have somewhat to do, wherein to bestow himself and his time
and his gifts, and whereby to earn his bread: in this it appears not to have
been a Curse, but a Precept of divine institution; that Adam, in the time and
state of innocence, before he had deserved a Curse, was yet enjoined his Task,
Genesis 2.1^.
To dress and to keep the Garden. And as Adam lived himself, so he bred up his
children. His two first born, though heirs apparent of all the world, had yet
their peculiar employments; the one in Genesis 4.2.
tillage, pasturage. And as many since, as have walked orderly, have observed
Gods Ordinance herein; Ephesians. 4.28.
working with their hands the thing that is good in some kind or other: those
that have set themselves in no such good way, our Apostle elsewhere justly
blaming as (...). 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.11.
inordinate, or disorderly walkers. And how can such disorderly ones hope to
find approvance in the sight of our God, who is a God of Order? He commands
us to live in a Calling: and woe to us, if we neglect it.

. 8.
But say there were no such express Command for it: the very distribution of
Gods gifts were enough to lay upon us this necessity. bestows, he binds:
and to whom any thing is Lu. 12.48.
given, of him something shall be required. The inference is stronger, than
most are aware of; from the Ability to the Duty, from the Gift to the Work,
from the Fitting to the Calling. Observe how this Apostle knitteth them
together at the 17. Verse. [ Ver. 17. hic.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so
let him walk.] God has distributed to every man some proper gift, or other:
and therefore every man must glorify God in some peculiar Calling, or other.
And in Ephesians. 4. having alleged that of the Psalm, Psalm. 68.18.
He gave gifts unto men; immediately he Ephesians. 4.8, etc.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. as giving us to understand, that
for no other end God did bestow upon some Apostolical, upon others Prophetical,
upon others gifts in other kinds; but that men should employ them some in the
Apostolical, some in the Prophetical, some in Offices and Callings of other
kinds. And if we confess, that Deus and Natura nihil faciunt f^ustra.
Nature does not, we may not think the God of Nature does bestow abilities,
whereof he intends not use: for that were to bestow them Frustra est
potentia, qu^ non perducitur in actum.
in vain. Since then he bestows gifts and graces upon every man some or other,
and none in vain; let every man take heed, that he receive them not in vain:
let every man beware of Lu. 19.20.
napkening up the talent, which trade withal: Let all, 1 Pet. 4.10.
As every one has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. The manifestation of the Spirit
being given to every man 1 Cor. 12.7.
to profit withal; he that lives unprofitably with it, and without a Calling,
abuses the intent of the giver, and must answer for his abuse.

. 9.
Secondly, the necessity of a Calling is great, in regard of a man's self: and
that more ways than one. For man being by nature active, so as he cannot be
long, but he must be doing: he that vocation to busy himself in, that has
nothing of his own to do, must needs from doing nothing, proceed to doing
naught. That saying of Cato was subscribed by the wiser Heathens as an oracle,
Catonis oraculum, quo nihil verius. Colum. 11. de re rust. 1.
Nihil agendo male agere disce^. Syrac. 33.28.
Idleness teaches much evil, says the wise son of Syrac: nay all kind of
evil, as the Devils greatest business is, to tempt other men; the idle man's
only business is to tempt the Devil. Experience of all histories and times
shows us, what advantages the Devil has won upon godly and industrious men
otherwise, (as upon David in the matter of Uriah, and many others) only by
watching the opportunity of their idle hours, and plying them with suggestions
of noysom lusts, at such times, as they had given themselves but some little
intermission more than ordinary, from their ordinary employments. lead captive
at his pleasure those, whose whole lives are nothing else but a long vacation;
and their whole care nothing but to make up a Nos numerus sumus and fruges
consumere nati. Horat. 1. Epist. 2.
number, and to waste the good creatures of God? There is no readier sanctuary
for thee then, good Christian, when the Devil pursues thee, than to betake thy
self at once to prayer, and to the - res age, tutus eris. Ovid. de remed.
works of thy Calling: fly thither, and thou art safe, as in a Castle. Non
licet is a very good, and proper, and direct answer, when the Devil would tempt
thee to sin; it is evil, and I may not do it: but yet Non vacat is the
stronger busy, and I cannot do it. That gives him scope to reply; and it is
not safe to hold argument with the Devil upon any terms: he is a cunning
Sophister, and thou may be circumvented by a subtilty before thou art aware.
But this stubborn and blunt answer cutteth off all reply; and disheartneth the
Tempter for that time. It was Saint Hieroms advice to his friend; Hieron. ad
Rusticum. Tom. 1, Ep. 4.
Semper boni aliquid operis facito, ut Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum:
Be always doing something, that the Devil may never find thee at leisure.
There is no Cross, no Holy Water, no Exorcism so powerful to drive away and to
conjure down the Fiend; as Employment is, and faithful labor in some honest
Calling.

Thirdly, Life must be preserved, Families maintained, the poor relieved: this
cannot be done without Bread,. 10.
for that is the Lev. 26.26
staff of life; and Bread cannot be gotten, or not honestly, but in a Lawful
vocation or Calling. Which who ever neglects, is in very deed no better, than
a very (...). Phocylides. (...). Chry. in Ephesians. Hom. 2.
thief: the Bread he eats he cannot call his own. 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12.
We hear, says Saint Paul writing to the Thessalonians, That there are some
among you that walk inordinately, and work not at all, but are busybodies:
Them therefore that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they work with quietness, As if it were not their own bread, if not
gotten with the work of their own hands, and in the sweat of their own faces.
And again writing to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him, that stole, steal no more: but rather let him labor, etc. If he will
not steal, he must labor; and if he do not labor, he does steal: steal from
himself, steal from his family, steal from the poor.

. 11.
He steals from himself, and so is a kind of Felo de se. Spend (...). Hesiod.
in (...).
beggary will be the end. God has ordained Labor as a Proper means whereby to
obtain the good things of this life: without which, as there is no promise, so
ordinarily there is no performance of those blessings of plenty and
sufficiency. God has a bountiful hand; Psalm. 145.16.
He opens it, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse: but unless
we have a diligent hand, wherewith to receive it, we may starve. Qui vitat
molam, vitat ^arinam. Adag.
No Mill, we say, no meal. And he that by the sloth of his hands dissurnisheth
himself of the means of getting, he is as near of kin a waster as may be;
(they may call Prove. 18.9.
Brothers:) and it is but just, if Gods curse light upon him, and that he has,
and bring him to want, it to nothing.

. 12.
He steals also from his Family, which should eat the fruit of his labors.
The painful house-wife; see in what a happy case her husband is, and her
children, and her servants, and all that belong to her. They Prove. 31. verse.
15.21.27.28.
are not afraid of hunger, or cold, or any such thing: they are well fed, and
well clad, and carefully looked unto. Her Husband prayseth her, and her
servants: and her children, when they have kneeled down, and asked her
blessing, arise up, and call 31. But the idle man, that for want of a course to
live in, impoverisheth himself, and his family, whom he is bound to maintain;
is a burden to his friends, an eyesore to his kindred, the shame of his name,
the ruin of his house, and the bane of his posterity. He bequeatheth misery to
his offspring instead of plenty: they that should fare the better for him, are
undone by him; and he that should give his children Gods blessing and his,
pulls upon himself Gods curse and theirs. 1 Timothy 5.8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he
has denied the faith, and is in that respect even worse than an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5.8. The very Infidels take professes the faith of Christ, by his supine
carelessness this way, justify the Infidel, and deny the Faith.

He steals also, (which is the basest theft of all) from the poor:. 13.
in robbing them of that relief, which he should minister unto them out of his
honest gettings; the overplus whereof is their proper revenew. The good
housewife, of whom we heard something already out of the 31. of the Proverbs,
Prove. 31. Verse. 13.
Seeks wool and flax, Verse. 19.
Lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distas^e. But cui
bono, and to what end, and for whose sake, all this? Not only Verse. 22.
To make her coverings of tapestry, though that also; nor yet only for her
household, Verse. 21.
To cloth them in Scarlet, though that also: but withal that she might have
somewhat in her hands Verse. 20.
To reach out to the poor and needy; like another Dorcas, to make Acts 9.39.
coats and garments for them, that Job 51.20.
their loins might So every man should be painful and careful, to get some
of the things of this Earth by his faithful labor: not as a foolish
worldling, to make a Mammon of it; but as a wise Steward, to Luke 16.9.
make him friends with it. So Romans 22.13.
Distributing it to the necessities of the poor Saints, that it may redound
also upon the by to his own advantage: whilst sowing to them temporal things,
the comfort of his Alms; he reapeth in recompense of it their spiritual
things, the benefit of their Prayers. Saint Paul exhorts the Ephesians by
word of mouth, (and it was the very close of his solemn farewell, when he took
his last leave of them, and should Acts 20.34.35.
By their labor they ought to support the weak, and minister to the
necessities of others; remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give than to receive. And after his departure, he thought it
needful for him to put them in mind of the same duty once again by letter;
Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his
hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.. 14.
Lay all this, that I have now last said, together: and say if you know a
verier thief than the Idle person? that steals from himself, and so is a
foolish thief; steals from his family and friends, and so is unnatural thief;
steals from the poor, and so is a base thief.

Fourthly, and lastly: a Calling is necessary in regard of the Public. God
has made us (...). Arist. 1. Polit. 2.
sociable creatures; contrived us into policies, and societies and
commonwealths; made us Membra sumus corporis magni. Senec. Epist. 93.
fellow members of one body, and Romans 12.5.
every one another members. As therefore we are not Non nobis solum nat^
sumus: sed partem patria, partem parents, etc. Cic. ex Platonis Epist. 9. In
commune nati sumus. Senec. Epist. 95.
born, so neither must we live, to and for our selves alone: but our Parents,
and Friends, and acquaintance, nay every man of us has a kind of right and
interest in every other man of us, and our (...), Arist. 8. Polit. 1.
Country and the Commonwealth in us all. And as in the artificial body of a
Clock, one wheel moves another, the natural body of a Man, consisting of many
members, all the members To. 12.4.
Have not the same office, (for that would make a confusion) yet there is no
member in the body so mean or small, but has its proper faculty, function and
use whereby it becomes useful to the whole body, and helpful to its fellow
members in the body: so should it be in the civil body of the State, and in the
Mystical body of the Church. Every man should confer aliquid in publicum;
put-to his helping hand to advance the common good, employ himself some way or
other, in such sort; as he may be (...). Arist. 8. Pol. 1.
serviceable to the whole body, and profitable to his fellow members in the
body. For which reason, the ancient renowned Commonwealths were so careful to
ordain, that no man should live but in some profession; and to take district
examination who did otherwise; and to punish them, some with fasting, some with
infamy, some with banishment, yea and some with death. The care of the Indians,
Egyptians, Athenians, and other herein, See Valor. Max. 2.6. Patric. 1. de
Rep. 8. Cassan. 11. Catal. glor. consid. 1.
Historians relate, and I omit. It were to be wished that Christian would take
some greater care, if but from their example, to rid themselves of such
unnecessary burdens as are good for nothing but to devour the fruits of the
Land; and either force these -- (...). Hesiod in (...). Plat. Polit. 8.
droans to take pains for their living, or else thrust them out of the Hives
for their Idleness.

14.
Which course if it were taken; what would become of many thousands in the
world, quibus anima pro sale, who like Swine live in such sensual and
unprofitable sort, as we might well doubt whether they had any living souls in
their bodies at all or no, were it not barely for this one argument, that their
bodies are a degree sweeter than carrion? I mean all such, of what rank and
condition so ever they be, as for want of a calling mis-spend their precious
time, bury their masters talent, waste Gods good creatures, and wear away
themselves in idleness, without doing good to themseves, to their friends, to
humane society. Infinite is -- (...). Homer Iliad. 6 -- (...). Plat. in. Theaet.
unprofitable burdens of the earth: but there are amongst other, three sorts of
them especially, whereof the world ringeth, and such as a man that has to
speak of this argument can scarce balk without some guilt of unfaithfullness.
It is no matter how you rank them, for there is never a better of the three.
And therefore take them hand over head as they come: they are Monks, Gallants,
and Rogues.

First those, (...), Ti. 2.12.
Evil Beasts, slow bellies; stall-fed Monks and Friars:. 16.
who live mued up in their Cells and Cloisters; like Boars in a frank, pining
themselves into Lard, and beating institution and Original of these kind of
men: which was then excusably good, the condition of those times considered;
and might yet be tollerably followed even in these times, if those gross
superstitions and foul abuses, which in process of time have adhered, and are
by long and universal custom grown almost essential thereunto, could be fairly
removed. But Incredibile dictu est, quantum a maforibus suis degeneraverint.
Polyd. Virgil. Hist. Angl. lib. 6.
Monkery was not then that thing, which it is now. There was not then that
opinion of sanctity and perfection, in the choice; that imposition of
unlawful, unnatural, and (to some men) impossible vows, the Entrance; that
clogge of ridiculous habits and Ceremonies, and regular irregular observances,
in the use; that heavy note of Apostasy upon such as altered their course, in
the loose: all which now there are. Those by their fastings, and watchings, and
devotions, and charity, and learning, and industry, and temperance, and
austerity, and strictness of life, won from many of the ancient Fathers (as
appears in their writings) ample and large testimonies of their virtue and
piety. And that most deservedly: although their willingness, (out of a zealous
desire to excite others to the imitation of their virtues,) to set forth their
praises in the highest Panegyric strains they could, drew from their pens now
and then such hyperbolical excesses in modo loquendi, as gave occasion to those
superstitions in after ages, which they then never dreamed of. But such were
those Monks of old: so good, so godly. Whereas these V. Erasm. in Adag. Monacho
indoctior. Nic. de Clemang. 3. de corrupto Eccl. statu c. 21. -- 23. Camden. in
Brit. p. 766. Fr. Mod. in l. de ordin. Eccles. Polyd. Virg. 7. de invent. 4.
Alu. Pelag 2. de planct. Eccl. 2.73.83. etc. Palingen. in Leo. Virg. Sagittat.
etc.
of later times, by their affected habits, and gestures, and rules; by their
gross and dull ignorance; by their insufferable pride, though pretending
humility; and their more than Pharisaical overlooking of others; by their
insatiable avarice, and palpable arts of getting into their hands the fattest
of the earth, and that under color of Religion, and pretenses of poverty; by
their sensual wallowing in all ease and idleness and fullness of bread, and (the
fruits of these) in abominable and prodigious filthiness and luxury: became as
Proverbs and as bywords in the mouths and pens of men of all sorts. No sober
writer almost of any note, even in those darker times, but noted and bewailed
the Church and Clergy in that behalf: for by this time, you must know, these
droans had thrust themselves, against all reason and common sense, into the
rank of Churchmen, and shrouded themselves under the title of the Clergy.
Diverse godly and learned men Ricard. Armachanus; Gul. de S. Amore; Nic. de
Clemangis; Rob. Abbas Molismensis, etc.
wrote against the abuses, desired a reformation, labored to have Monkery
reduced, if not to the first Institution, (there seemed to be little hope of
that, things were so far out of course;) yet at least wise to some tolerable
expression of it. The Poets wanted no sport the while; who made themselves
bitterly merry with descanting upon the lean skuls, and the O Monachi, vestri
stomachi, sunt amphora Bacchi, etc.
fat paunches of these lasie gutlings: there was flesh-hold enough for the
riming Satyrists, and the wits of those times, whereon to fasten the sorest and
the strongest teeth they had.

Not to insist upon other differences; that which concerns the point we have
in hand,. 17.
argues a manifest and wide declination in these kind of men men from their
primitive purity. The ancient V^de Aegyptiorum Monachis. Chrisost. in. Mat.
hom. 8.
Monks lived upon the labor of their hands: and thereby not only maintained
themselves, (which they might do with a very little in that course of
abstinence and austerity wherein they relieved many others, and did many pious
and charitable works, out of that they had earned with their fingers. And when
about St Augustines and Saint Hieromes times, Monks began to relish ease, and
under pretense of reading and prayer to leave off working, and to live upon the
sweat of other men's brows; both those good Fathers misliked it: Saint Hierome
to Aegyptiorum monasteria hunc ordinem tenent, ut nullum absque operis labor
suscipiant. Hiet. Tom. 1. Epist 4.
Rusticus alleging the laudable custom of the Monasteries in Egypt, which
admitted none to be Monks but with express condition of labor; and Saint
Augustine in a just Tom. 3. libro de opere Monacho. um.
Treatise opposing it not without some bitterness, rebuking them as
contumacious and peevishly Qui autem se dicunt vacare lectioni, nonne illic
inveniunt quod praecipit Apostolus? Quae est ista ergo perversitas, lectioni
nelle obtemperare, dum vult ^i vacare; and, ut quod bonum est diutius legatur,
ideo facere nolle quod legitur? c. 17. ib.
perverse, who reading in the Scriptures, that he that will not labor should
not eat, do yet resist the Apostles admonition, and under pretense that they
may have leisure to read, refuse to obey what they do read. But ease is (...).
Euripid. in. Hipp. coron.
pleasing to flesh and blood; and will not be easily wrung from those that have
any while given themselves to it; especially when it can pretend the face and
color of religion. So that for all this the humor Orders of disorderly
Mendicants, begging runnagate Friars: who by their affected poverty, diverting
the Charity of well-minded people from those that were truly poor, enriched
themselves with the spoils of the poor; and under color of long prayers, made
a prey not now (as those craving Pharisees of old, whose simplicity they pity)
of Mat. 23.14.
widows houses, but of goodly Lordships, and whole countries before them. It
is well known in this our Land, how both Church and Commonwealth groaned under
the burden of these Commonwealth, whilst they became Lords of very little
less (by their computation who have traveled in the search) than the one half
of the Temporalties of the Kingdom; and the Church, whilst they engrossed into
their hands the fruits of most of the best Benefices in the Realm; allowing
scarce so much as the chaff toward the maintenance of those that 1 Cor. 9.9.
trod out the corn. Their profession is (God be thanked) now long since
suppressed, and their habitations demolished, by the violent and Iehu-like
reformation of a mighty King: and the land by that means well-purged of these
overspreading Locusts. There is nothing the rubbish of their nests, and the
stink of their memory: unless it be the sting of their devilish sacrilege in
robbing the Church by damnable Impropriations.

But let them go. The next we meet withal are those, with whose either
birth,. 18.
or breeding, or estate it sorteth not (as they think) to be tied to labor in
any vocation. It is the sin of many of the Gentry, whom God has furnished
with means and abilities to do much good; to (...). Epitaph. T^mocreontis,
apud Athen. dipnos. 5.
spend their whole days and lives, in an unprofitable course of doing either
nothing, or as good as nothing, or worse than nothing. I cannot be so either
stupid, as not to apprehend; or rigorous, as not to allow, a difference the
manner of employment, and in other circumstances thereto belonging, between
those that are nobly or generously born and bred, and those of the meaner and
ordinary rank. Manual and servile and Mechanic trades, and arts, are for men
of a lower condition. But yet no man is born, no man should be bred, unto
idleness. There are generous and ingenuous and liberal employments, sortable to
the greatest births and educations. For some man whom God has blessed with
power and authority in his country; with fair livings and large revenues; with
a numerous family of servants, retainers and tenants, and the like: it may be a
sufficient Calling, and enough to take up his whole time, even to keep
hospitality, and to order and overlook his family, and to dispose of his lands
and rents, and to make peace, and preserve love and neighborhood among them
that live near or under him. He that does but this as he ought to do, or is
otherwise Non o^iose vivit, qui qualitercunque utiliter. 2.2. qu. 187.5. ad 2.
industrious for the common good; must be acknowledged a worthy member of the
Commonwealth: and his course of life, a calling (although perhaps not so
toylsom, yet) in suo genere as necessary and profitable, as that of the
Husbandman, Merchant, Lawyer, Minister, or any other.

But for our ( mere or parcel) Gallants, who live in no settled course of life,
but spend half the day in sleeping,. 19.
half the night in gaming, and the rest of their time in other pleasures and
vanities, to as little purpose as they can devise; as if they were born for
nothing else but to eat and drink, and snort and sport; who are the Lillies
Mat. 6.29.
( Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed like one of these:) yet they
neither sow, nor reap, not carry into the barn; they neither labor nor spin,
nor do any thing else for the good of humane society: let them know, there is
not the poorest contemptible creature, that cries Oysters and Kitchen-stuff in
the streets, but deserves his bread better, than they; and his course of life
is of better esteem with God and every sober wise man, than theirs. A horse,
that is neither good for the way, nor the cart, nor the race, nor the wars, nor
any other service; let him be of never so good a Nempe volucrem Sic laudamus
equum. Nobilis hic, quocunque venit de gra^^ine -- Sed venale p^cus Corythae,
posteritas and Hi^pini, si rara jugo victoria sedit; Nil ibi majorum respectus,
gratia nulla umbrarum: dominos preciis muta^e jubentur Exiguis. Juvenal. Satyr.
8.
breed, never so well marked and shaped; jade: his Master sets no store by
him, thinks his meat ill-bestowed on him; every man will say, better knock
him on the head than keep him; his skin, though not much worth, is yet better
worth than the whole beast besides.

Consider this, you that are of Noble or Generous birth. Look unto the Rock,
whence you were hewn; and to the pit,. 20.
whence you were dug. Search your Pedigrees; collect the scattered Monuments
and Histories of your Ancestors: and observe by what steps your worthy
Progenitors raised their houses to the height of Gentry, or Nobility. Scarce
shall you find a man of them, that gave any accession, or brought any noted
eminency to his house; but either serving in the Camp, or sweating at the Bar,
or waiting at the Court, or adventuring on the Seas, or trucking in his Shop,
or some other way (...). Euripid.
industriously bestirring himself in some settled Calling, and Course of life.
You usurp their Arms, if you inherit not their virtues: and those Effigies quo
Tot bellatorum, si lud^tur alca pe^nox Ante Numantinos? juven. Sa^. 8.
ensigns of honor and Gentry trappings upon Asses backs; which serve but to
render the poor beast more ridiculous. If you by brutish sensuality, and
spending your time in swinish luxury, stain the colors, and embase the metals
of those badges of your Gentry and Nobility, which you claim by descent: think,
when we worship or honor you, we do but Nanum cujusdam, Atlanta vocamus;
Aethiopem Cygnum. Juven. Ibid.
flout you; and know, the -- Honores, Quos illis damus, and dedimus, quibus
omnia debes. Juven. Ibid.
titles we in courtesy give you, we bestow upon their memories whose
degenerate offspring you are, and whose Arms you unworthily bear; and they do
Quis enim generosum dixcrit hunc, qui Indignus genere? Ibid.
no more belong to you, than the reverence Isis, belonged to the Ass that
carried her Image.

The third sort of those that live unprofitably and without a Calling, are our
idle sturdy Rogues and vagrant towns-end Beggars: the very scabs, and filth,
and vermin of the Commonwealth. I mean such as have health, and strength, and
limbs, and are in some measure able to work,. 12.
and take pains for their living; yet rather choose to wander abroad the
Country, and to spend their days in a most base and ungodly course of life:
and, which is yet more lamentable, by I know not what connivence, contrary to
all Conscience, Equity, Law, are suffered. All Christian Commonwealths should
be the Gal. 6.16.
Isreal's of God; and in his Israel, God as he promised there should be some
always Mat. 26.11.
poor, on whom to exercise charity; so he ordained there should be As some
understand that in Deuteronomy. 15.4.
no beggar, to make a trade and profession of begging. Plato, than whom never
any laid down a more exact Idea of an happy Commonwealth, allows not any
(...). Pla^. de legib. 11.
beggar therein: alleging, that where such were tolerated, it was impossible
but the State must abound with (...). Id. de ^ep. l, 8.
pilfering and whoring, and all kind of base villainy. The Civil Laws have flat
constitutions against them, in the titles Cod. Justin lib. 11. Tit. 25. and
Cod. Theo. 14 Tir. 11.
de mendicantibus But I think never kingdom had more wholesome laws in both
kinds, I mean both for the competent relief of the orderly poor, and for sharp
restraint of disorderly vagabonds; than those provisions which in many of our
own memories have been made in this land. But Horat. l. 3. Ca^m. 24.
Quid leges sine moribus --? Those Laws are now no Laws, for want of due
execution: but Beggars are Beggars still, for want of due correction. Tacit.
lib. 1. Histor.
Et vetabitur semper, and retinebitur; the saying is truer of Rogues and
Gypsies in England, than ever it was of Mathematicians in Rome. You to whose
care the preservation of the Justice, and thereby also of the Peace of the Land
is committed, as you tender the Peace and Justice of the quiet and the safety
of your neighbors; as you tender the weal of your Country and the honor of
God: breath fresh life into the languishing Laws by severe execution; be rather
cruel to these Vipers, than to the State. So shall us from the Plague, and your
selves from the guilt, and them from the opportunities, of infinite sinful
abominations.

But we are unreasonable to press you thus far,. 22.
or to seek to you or any others for Justice in this matter; having power
enough in our own hands to do our selves Justice upon these men, if we would
but use it. Even by making a strait Covenant with out Ears, not to heed them;
and with our Eyes, not to pity them; and with our Hands, not to relieve them.
Say I this altogether of my self? or says not the Apostle even the same? 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat: relieve him not. But has not Christ
feed the hungry, and to cloth the naked, and to be free and charitable to the
poor? Nothing surer: God forbid any man should preach against Charity and
Almesdeeds. But remember, that as God approves not 1 Cor. 13.3.
Alms or any other work, if without Charity; so nor Charity it self, if without
Discretion. 1 Timothy 1 5, 3.
Honor Widows, says Saint Paul, But those that are Widows indeed: so
relieve the poor, but relieve those that are poor indeed. Not every one that
asks; not every one that wantth; nay more, not every one that is poor, is
poor indeed: and he that in his indiscreet and mis-guided charity should give
to every one that asks, or wants, poor, meat, or clothing, or Alms; would
soon make himself more hungry, and naked, and poor, than he that is most
hungry, or naked, or poor. The poor, whom Christ commends to thee as a fit
object for thy charity, the poor indeed; are those that want, not only the
things they ask, but want also means to get without asking. A man that is
blind, or aged, and past his work; a man that is sick, or weak, or lame and
cannot work; a man that desires it, and seeks it, and cannot get work; a man
that has a greater charge upon him than his honest pains can maintain; such a
man as one of these, he is poor indeed. Let thine Ears be open, Eyes open, and
thy Bowels open, and thy Hands open to such a one: it is a charitable deed, and
a Phil. 4.18.
Sacrifice of sweet smelling, Heb. 13.16.
With such sacrifices God is well pleased: Forget not thou to offer such
sacrifices upon every good opportunity, and be well assured God will not forget
in due time to reward thee. But for a lusty able upright man (as they style him
in their own dialect) that had rather beg, or steal, or both, than dig: he is
no more to be relieved as a poor man, than a woman that has poisoned her
husband is to be honored as a Widow. Such a woman is a Widow, for she has no
more an husband than any other Widow has: 1 Timothy 5. Compare ver. 3. with v.
5. and 16.
a Widow indeed, as St. Paul would be understood; not such a Widow as he
would have honored: it is alms to hang up such a Widow, rather than to honor
her. And I dare say, he that helps one of these flurdy Beggars to the stocks,
and the whip, and the house of correction, not only deserves better of the
Commonwealth; but does a work of greater Charity in the sight of God, than he
that helps him with meat, and money, lodging. For he that does this,
corrupts his Charity by a double error. First, he maintains, and so
encourages the other in idleness; who, if none would relieve him, would be
glad to do any work rather than starve. And Secondly, he disableth his
Charity, by mis-placing it; and unawares robs the poor, whilst he thinks
he relieveth them. As he that gives any honor to an Idol, robs the true
God, to whom alone all religious honor is due: so he that gives any Alms to
an idle Beggar, Pars sacrilegii est, rem pauperum dare non pauperibus. Hieron.
ad Pammach. Epist. 26.
robs the truly poor, to whom properly all the fruits of our Alms are due.
And so it comes to pass oftentimes (as Saint Ambrose Neque transcribatur
vita pauperum in spolia fraudulentorum. Ambros. 2. Offic. 16.
maintenance of the poor is made the spoil of the loyterer.

. 23.
But I forget my self, and you, and the time; whilst I give way to my just
indignation against these base excrements of the Commonwealth. You have seen
the Necessity of a Calling: without it, we despise Gods Ordinance, and smother
his Gifts; we expose our selves to sinful temptations; we deprive our selves,
our familes, and the poor of due maintenance; we withdraw our bounden service
from the Commonwealth. It is not the pretense of Devotion, that can exempt the
lazy Monk; nor of Birth, the riotous Gallant; nor of Want, the able Beggar;
nor of any other thing, any other man, Necessity. And that is the sum of our
first point, viz. the Neeessity of a Calling. Proceed we now to the second, the
Choice of a Calling.

. 24.
A Point indeed (I must confess) not directly intended in the words of my Text:
yet being after a sort employed therein (for the Apostles wish that every
particular man would abide in his own proper station, and particular Calling,
cannot but imply that there is a difference and choice of such Callings;) and
being withal a matter of such great consequence to be taught and known; I
thought it would be more expedient for the present discharge of impertinency to
my self) than by passing it over, to defraud them (and it is likely there are
many such here present) whom it may concern in point of conscience, of such
instructions, as may give them profitable directions in a business so
material. Concerning which, it behooves every man the rather to have an
especial care, because much of a man's comfort and content in this life
depends thereupon: it being scarce possible, that that man's life should be
(...). Socratis dictu^. apud Stob. sermon.
comfortable to him, or cheerfulness in his course, that lives in a Calling
for which neither he is fit, nor the Calling fit for him. Neither will the
consideration hereof be useful only for such, as are yet free to choose; but
even for those also, who have already made their choice. For, since the very
same rules which are to direct us the choice of our Calling, are to help us
also for the trial of our Callings; it can be no loss to the best of us all to
give heed to those Rules: thereby either to rectify our choice; or to quicken
our alacrity in what we have chosen, by warranting our courses to our own
souls, and silencing many unnecessary scruples, which are wont frequently to
arise concerning this matter, in the Consciences of Men.

And first, we are to lay this as a firm ground,. 25.
that that is every man's Proper and right Calling, whereunto God calls him.
For he is the Author, as of our general, so of our particular Callings As the
Lord has called every one, verse. 20.] When therefore we speak of the choice of
a Calling, you are not so to understand it, as if it were left free for us
ever, to make our choice where, and as we list. The choice that is left to us,
is no other but a conscionable enquiry which way God calls us, and a
conscionable care to take that way. So that if it shall once appear, that God
calls us this way or that way, there is -- mortalia quaerunt Consilium;
certus jussa capesse Dei. Auson. Theodosio.
no more place for choice; all that we have to do, is to obey. -- Auson. ib.
Obsequium sufficit esse meum. The enquiries we are to make ordinarily, are (as
you shall hear anon) what lawfulness there is in the thing, what abilities us,
what warrant we have from without. But all these must cease, when God once
expresses himself, and calls us with an audible voice. No more enquiry then
into the thing, how lawful it is. If God bid Peter Acts 10.13, etc.
kill and eat, and send him to preach unto the Gentiles; there is no answering
(...), not so Lord, nor alleging the uncleanness of the meat, or the
unlawfullnesse of going into the way of the Gentiles: Injusta justa habenda --
what God will have clean, he Ib. verse. 28.
must not account common. His very call to any thing, makes it lawful. No
more our selves how able we are. If God call Exodus 4.10, etc.
Moses, the sheepfold, to plead for his people before a Tyrant; or Judge. 6.14,
15.
Gideon, a mean stripling of a small family and Tribe, from the threshing
floor, to deliver Israel out of the hands of their oppressors; or Jerem. 1.6,
etc.
Jeremy, a very child and one that could not speak, from his cottage in
Anathoth, to set him over nations and kingdoms, to root out and to plant; or
Amos 7.13, 14, 15.
Amos, a plain country fruit-gatherer, from the Herd in Tekoah, to prophecy
at Bethel, and in the Kings Court: it is a fruitless and unseasonable modesty
to allege unsufficiency or unworthiness. Auson. ubi supra.
Iuvat idem Qui jubet. Where he sets on strength to go through with it. His
very calling of any man makes him able. No more enquiry into outward what
warrant we have. If God Romans 1.1.
call Paul to be an Apostle, and Act. 9.15.
to bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel;
it is needless to Gal. 1.16, 17.
conferr with flesh and blood, or to seek confirmation at Jerusalem from them
which were Apostles before him, by the imposition of their hands. Gods work
Paul is as good an Apostle as the best of them, although he be Ibid. verse. 1.
an Apostle, not of men, neither by man. Gods calling any man to any office,
seals his warrant. Auson. ubi supra.
Non tutum renuisse Deo. Away with all excuses, and pretenses, and delays:
when God calls; submit thy will, subdue thy reason, answer his Call, as
Samuel was taught to do, 1 Samuel 3.9, 10.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

If it were expedient for us, that God should still deal with us as he did long
with the Jewish,. 26.
and a while with the infant Christian Church, by immediate inspirations; and
call us either by secret Enthusiasms, or sensible insinuations (as he did many
of them) into the way wherein he would have us walk: the Rule for our Choice
would be easy; or rather there would need no Rule at all, (because indeed
there would be left no choice at all;) but this only, even to get up and be
doing, to put our selves speedily into that way whereunto he did point us. But
since the wisdom of GOD has thought it better for us, to take counsel from his
written word, which he has left us for our ordinary direction in this and all
other difficulties; rather than to depend upon immediate and extraordinary
inspirations: it will be very profitable Rules, whereby to make reasonable
judgment concerning any course of life, whether that it be, whereunto God has
called us, or no. The Rules, as I have partly intimated already, may be reduced
to three heads: according as the enquiries we are to make in this business are
of three sorts. For they either concern the course it self; or else our selves,
that should use it; or else thirdly, those that have right and power over us in
it. If there be a fail in any of these; as if either the course it self be not
lawful, or we not competently fit for it, or our superiors will not allow of
us, or it: we may well think, God has not called us thither. God is just; and
will not call any man to that, honest and good: God is all-sufficient; and will
not call any man to that, which is above the proportion of his strength:
wonderful in his providence; and will not call any man to that, whereto he
will not open him a fair, and orderly passage. Somewhat, by your patience, of
each of these.

. 27.
And first, of the Course we intend. Wherein let these be our Enquiries: First,
whether the thing be simply and in it self lawful, Secondly, whether it be
lawful so as to be made a Calling, Thirdly, whether it will be profitable, or
rather hurtful the Commonwealth. Now observe the Rules. The first Rule this,
Adventure not on any course, without good assurance that it be in it self
lawful. The ground of this Rule is plain and evident. For it cannot be that
God, who hates, and forbids, and punishes every sin in every man, should
call any man to the practice of Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, says S. Paul; But rather let him labor
with his hands the thing that is good, Ephesians. 4. If it be not something that is
good; it is good for him to hold his hands off: let him be sure God never
called him to labor in that: and he were as good hold to his old trade, and
steal still, as labor with his hands the thing that is not good. If Acts
19.25. -- 27.
Diana of Ephesus be an Idol, Demetrius his occupation must down: he must make
no more silver shrines for Diana, though by that craft he have his wealth.
Tertullian excellently enlarges himself in this argument in his praesertim
cap. 5. -- 8.
Book de Idololatria; strongly disapproving their Christians, yet got their
living by making Statues and Images and other ornaments to sell to Heathen
Idolaters. Offenders against this Rule are not only such as live by Stealing,
and Robbing, and Piracy, and Purse-cutting, and Witchcraft, and other such
like ungodly practices as are made capital even by the Laws of Men, and
punishable by death: but all such also, as maintain themselves by, or get their
living in any course, absolutely condemned by the Law of God; howsoever they
may find amongst men either express allowance, as Whores and Baudes do in the
holy Mother Church of Rome; or at least some kind of toleration by connivence,
as Charmers, and Fortune Tellers, and Wisards do amongst us. Which sort of
people, it is scarce credible how generally and miserably our common ignorants
are besotted with the opinion of their skill, and how pitifully they are gulled
by their damnable impostures, through their own foolish credulity. These
superstitions helped to root out the Deuteronomy. 18.10. -- 12.
Amorites out of the Land of Canaan: and it may pass among Saul's best Acts,
that he rooted out these 1 Samuel 28.9.
superstitions out of the Land of Israel: And great pity it is, that such as
make a trade of these superstitions are not by some severe provisions rooted
out of this, and every other Christian Land. first Rule be remembered of us in
every choice and trial of our Callings; No unlawful thing can be a lawful
Calling.

No, nor yet every lawful thing neither.. 28.
For many things may be lawful in the private use, which yet may not lawfully
be made a Calling, or trade of life. Who can reasonably deny the lawfulness of
many disports and recreations, as Bowling, or Shooting, or even Cards and
Dice? and yet who can (...). Arist. 8. Pol. 3.
reasonably think it should be a commendable Calling for any man to be a
professed Bowler, or Archer, or Gamester, and nothing else? Therefore take second
Rule; Make not a Calling of that, which was not made to be a Calling. If you
shall ask how you shall know a thing to be such. I answer, generally all such
things are of this nature, as are indifferent for men of all sorts and callings
to use with due caution and circumstances; and more especially matters of
delight, and recreations are such. And the reasons are good. The hic ver. 17.
ground of particular Callings is some (...). ver. 7.
peculiar gift of God, according the soul, or of the body, or of outward
things: whereas such things as these, whereof we now speak, become of Lawful
and commendable use, not so much from any special ability received from God,
which should be exercised therein, as from the common necessity of our weak
nature, which is to be refreshed thereby. And the End also, for which God
permits us these things, is not to employ our strength and time in them; but
to give us some Uti quidem illis licet: sed sicut somno, and quictibus
caet^ris, tum cum gravibus seriisque rebus satisfecerimus. Cic. 1. Offic.
refreshing, when we are wearied with former labor, and so to fit us for fresh
and future employment. The works of our Callings, they Meats and Drinks: these
of Delight, as Sauces, or as (...). Arist. 8. Polit. 3.
Physic; and as sauces or Physic they are to be used, and not otherwise. As
absurd then as it would be for a man to accustom himself to no other diet but
slabber-sauces, and Druggs: so absurd a thing it is for a man to have no other
Calling but Dicing and Carding, and Gaming. Amongst offenders against this
Rule, that I reckon not Iuglers, and Fiddlers, and Tumblers, and Bearwards, and
Rope-dancers, and Rymers, and the rest of that Rabble; they may thank the
baseness of their condition, rather than the Lawfulness of their Course. I
strike rather, at those that are more both eminent Bawdes of unthriftinesse,
and almost every other Vice; (for where unthriftinesse is, there is almost
every other Vice,) I mean those parcell-Gallants that have nothing to live on
but their wits, and no other use of their wits, but to distill a kind of
maintenance from juicie heirs and flush novices by play. I would our
Pantomimes also and Stage Players would examine themselves and their Callings
by this Rule. If they should have been tried by the bench of Fathers and
Councils of old, or would have put it to most voices among later Divines both
Popish and Reformed; they had the first Rule, and not have been reprieved till
now: most holding, not the Calling only, but the very Practice and Thing it
self unlawful and damnable. For my own part, I dare not at all say the
Practice is, neither will I now say the Calling is, unlawful: only let them
that make a Calling of it, consider themselves and their Calling well, and
examine whether God has not bestowed upon them some gifts, which they might
have employed a better way; and what inducements they have, and of what weight
those inducements are, to give their consciences security, that they have done
well, in embracing this Calling. And when they have thus done, freely and
faithfully as in the sight of God; if their own hearts condemn them not,
neither do I: In the mean time, I would but be their remembrancer of thus much
only, that there are some things lawful to do, which are not lawful to live
by; some things lawful as Delights, Callings. And so much for that second Rule.

There is yet a third Rule behind, and that is this. Resolve not upon that
course for thy Calling, what pretenses soever,. 29.
or what reasons thou may have for the lawfulness of it otherwise, which is
rather hurtful than profitable for the Commonwealth. The Sea before. 14.
Public good is one of those main respects which enforce the necessity of a
Calling: the same respect then must of necessity enforce such a Calling, as may
at leastwise stand with the Public good* 1 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man (says our Apostle after
to profit withal. Yea perhaps, to profit himself with all. If it were but so,
yet that were enough to infer more: since the (...). Zenoph. de Venatione.
private good is included in the public, tanquam trigonum in tetragono. But
the Apostle meant to speak home; and therefore he made choice of a word that
will not admit that gloss of private profit: (...). That very word impliedly
prefers the Sanis hominibus publicae privatis potiora sunt. Sen. 1. de Clem.
4.
public good before the private; and scarce allows the private, otherwise
than as it is interwoven in the public. Now things in themselves lawful, and
at sometimes useful, may, in regard of the End, or of the Matter, or by some
accident otherwise, the Commonwealth: and hereof such due consideration would
be had in the choice and exercise of our Callings, as ever to have one eye upon
the common good, and not wholly to look after our own private gain. Offenders
against this Rule are most of our Engrossers, and Forestallers, and sundry
kinds of Hucksters and Regraters: as also those that export money, corn, or
other needful commodities out of the Land in times of want or scarceness, or
bring in unnecessary commodities when there is plenty at home: and all those
that project new devices, and unjust Monopolies, to fill their own Coffers;
perhaps pretension of some small benefit to the Commonwealth, but certainly
not without sensible and grievous pressures of those that are a great part of
the Commonwealth.

Thus have we delivered three Rules, concerning the Quality of a right
Calling:. 30.
and pointed out some special offenders against each of them. And now me thinks
I see the Usurer hugging himself, and clapping his sides, that he has come off
so fairly: surely his Calling is absolute good, whereon none of these Rules
could fasten. But it is indeed with the Usurer in this case, as with the
Drunkard. If the Drunkard should ask me against which of the ten Commandments
the sixth Commandment, by distempering his body; he sins against the
seventh, by enflaming his lust; he sins against the eighth, by making waste
of the good Creatures of God. Right so is it with our Usurer in this three
Rules fetcheth-in the Usurer and his Calling. Verily I cannot well tell which
most; I think every one of the three may: howsoever, among the three, I am sure
I have him. If Usury be simply unlawful (as most of the learned have
concluded) the first Rule has him. I should be very tender to condemn any
thing as simply unlawful, which any even imaginary conjuncture of
Circumstances would render lawful; and would choose rather by an over-liberal
Charity to 1 Pet. 4.8.
cover a multitude of sins, (if I may abuse the Apostles phrase to that sense)
than by a too superstitious restraint make one. Yet the Texts of Scripture are
so express, and the grounds of Reason, brought by learned men, seem so strong
against all Usury: that I have much ado to find so much charity in my self, as
to absolve any kind of Usury (properly so called) with what cautions or
circumstances soever qualified, from being a sin. But I will suspect mine own
and the common judgment herein, and admit for this once ( dato non concesso,)
that Usury be in some case lawful, and so our Usurer escape the first Rule;
which yet cannot be, till his teeth be knocked out brains too, before he escape
our second Rule. I dare say, the most learned Usurer that lives Usurers) will
never be able to prove, that Usury, if it be at all lawful, is so lawful, as
Artem nequitiae delegerunt, unde vitam transigant* and inde se volunt pascere,
unde offendant eum, a quo omnes pascuntur. August. in Psalm. 129.
to be made a Calling. Here all his Doctors, and his Proctors, and his
Advocates leave him. For can it possibly enter into any reasonable man's head to
think, that a man should be born for nothing else, but to tell out many, and
take in paper? which if a man had many millions of gold and silver, could take
up but a small portion of that precious time which God would have spent
employment. But what do I speak of the judgment of reasonable men in so plain
a matter; wherein I dare appeal to the conscience, even of the Usurer himself;
and it had need be a very plain matter, that a man would refer to the
conscience of an Usurer? No honest man need be Pervagatissimus ille versus, qui
vetat a^tem p^dere proloqui, quam factites. Cic. in Orator.
ashamed of an honest Calling: if then the Usurers Calling be such, what need
he care who knows, or why should he shame with it? If that be his trade, why
does he not in his Bills and bonds, and Noverints, make it known to all men by
those presents that he is an Usurer, rather than write himself Gentleman or
Yeoman, or by some other style? But say yet our Usurer should escape, at Rules,
as from the sword of Iehu and Hazael: there is yet a third Rule, like the sword
of Elisha, to strike him stone-dead; and he shall never be able to escape that.
Let him show wherein his Calling is profitable to humane society. He keeps no
chest, and a strong lock to keep his God and his Scriptures (his Mammon and his
Parchments in) he has house-room enough. He fleeceth many; but cloatheth none.
He biteth and devoureth; but eats all his morsels alone: He gives not so
much as a crumme, no not to his dearest Broken or Scrivener; only, where he
biteth, he allows them to scratch what they can for themselves. The King, the
Church, the poor, are all wronged by him, and so are all that live near him: in
every common charge he slippeth the collar, and leaves the burden upon those
that are less able. It were not possible Usurers Heathen Writers; so severely
censured by the Civil, and Canon Laws; so uniformly condemned by godly Fathers
and Councels; so universally Jerem. 15.10.
hated by all men of all sorts and in all ages and countries; as Histories and
experience manifest they ever have been, and are: if their Practice and calling
had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way hurtful and incommodious
both to private men and public societies. If any thing can make a Calling
unlawful; certainly the Usurers Calling cannot be lawful.

first care past, which concerns the Calling it self;. 32
our next care in our choice must be, to enquire into Our selves, what Calling
is most fit for us, and we for it. Wherein our Enquiry must rest especially
upon three things; our Inclination, our Gifts, and our Education. Concerning
which, let this be the first Rule: Where these three concur upon one and the
same Calling, our consciences may rest assured that that Calling is fit for us;
and we ought, so far as it lies in our power, to resolve to follow that. This
Rule, if well observed, is of singular use, for the settling of their
consciences, who are scrupulous and doubtful inward calling to any office or
employment. Divines teach it commonly, and that truly, that every man should
have an inward Calling from God for his particular course of life: and this in
the calling of the Ministry is by so much more requisite, than in most other
Callings, by how much the business of it is more weighty than theirs, as of
things more immediately belonging unto GOD. Whence it is, that in our Church
none are admitted into holy Orders, until they have personally and expressly
made profession before the Bishop, that they find themselves Book of ordering,
etc.
inwardly called and moved thereunto. But because what that inward is, and how
it should be discerned, is a thing not so distinctly declared and understood,
generally as it should be: it often falls out, that men are distressed in
conscience with doubts and scruples in this case, whilst they desired to be
assured of their inward Calling, and know not how. We are to know therefore,
that to this inward calling there is not of necessity required any inward
secret sensible testimony of Gods blessed sanctifying to a man's soul, (for then
an unsanctified man could not be rightly called;) neither yet any strong
working of the Spirit of Illumination, (for then a mere heathen man could not
be rightly called) both which consequents are false. For 1 Samuel 10.24.
Saul and Joh. 6.70.
Judas were called; the one to the Kingdom, the other to the Apostleship; of
whom it is certain the one was not, and it is not likely the other was, endued
with the holy Spirit of Sanctification. And many Heathen men have been called
to several employments, wherein they have also labored with much profit to
their own, and succeeding times; who in all probability never had any inward
motion, than what might arise from some or all of these three things now
specified, viz. the Inclination of their nature, their personal Abilities, and
the care of Education. If it shall please GOD to afford any of us, any farther
gracious assurance than these can give us, by some extraordinary work of his
Spirit within us; we are to embrace it with joy and thankfulness, as a special
favor: but we are not to suspend our resolutions for the choice of a course,
in expectation of that extraordinary assurance; since we may receive
comfortable satisfaction to our souls without it, by these ordinary means, now
mentioned. For destinated thee to some special course, (admit the Ministry)
and been at the care and charge to breed thee up in learning, to make thee in
some measure fit for it: when thou art grown to some maturity of years and
discretion, desire to be doing someting that way in thy private study by way of
trial; and withal some measure of knowledge, discretion, and utterance (though
perhaps not in such an eminent degree as thou could wish, yet) in such a
competency, the Ministry. In this so happy concurrence of Propension,
Abilities, and Education; make no farther enquiry, doubt not of thine inward
calling: Tender thy self to those, that have the power of Admission for thy
outward calling; which once obtained, thou art certainly in thine own proper
Course. Up and be doing; for the Lord has called thee, and (no doubt) the Lord
will be with thee.

. 33.
But say, these three do not concur; as oftentimes they do not. A man may be
destinated by his friends, and accordingly bred, out of some covetous or
ambitious or other corrupt respect, to some Calling; wherefrom he may be
altogether averse, and whereto altogether unfit: as we see some Parents, that
have the donations or advocations of Church livings in their hands, must
misshapen chip of the whole block, to make timber for the Pulpit; but some of
their children they will have thrust into the Ministry, though they have
neither a head, nor a heart for it. Again, a man may have good sufficiency in
him for a Calling, and yet out of a sloathfull desire of ease and liberty, if
it seem painful or austere; or an ambitious desire of eminency, and
reputation, if it seem base and contemptible; or some other secret corruption,
cannot set his mind that way; as Solomon says, there may be Pro. 17.16.
A price in the hand of a fool, to buy wisdom, and yet the fool have no heart
to it. And diverse other occurrents Nature, Skill, and Education. Now in such
Cases as these, where our Education bends us one way, our Inclination swayeth
us another way, and it may be our Gifts and Abilities lead us a third; in this
distraction, what are we to do? which way to take? what Calling to pitch upon?
In point of Conscience, there can no more be given General Rules, to meet with
all Cases, and regulate all difficulties, than in point of Law, there can be
general Resolutions given, to set an end to all suits, or provisions made to
prevent all inconveniences. Particulars are infinite, and various: Rules are
not, must not, cannot be so. He whose Case it is, if he be not able to direct
himself, should do well to take advice of his learned Counsel. This we can
readily do in matters of Law, for the quieting of our Estates: why should we
not do it at least as readily in matter of Conscience, for the quieting of our
souls? But yet for some light, at least in the generality; what if thou
should proceed thus?

First, have an eye to thy Education:. 34.
and if it be possible to bring the rest that way, do so rather, than forsake
it. For besides that it would be some grief to thy Parents, (to whom thou
comfort) to have cast away so much charge as they have been at for thy
education; and some dishonor to them withal, (whom thou art bound by the law
of God and Nature to Exodus 20.12.
honor,) to have their judgments so much slighted, and their choice so little
regarded by their child: the very consideration of so much precious time, as
has been spent in fitting thee to that course, which would be almost Haud
aequum facit, qui quod didicit, id dediscet. Plaut. in Amphitr.
all lost upon thy change, should prevail with thee to try all possible means,
rather than forgo it. It were a thing indeed much to be wished, that Parents
and Friends, and Guardians, and all those other whatsoever, that the Education
of young ones committed unto them; (all greedy desires to make their Children
great, all base penurious nigardnesse in saving their own purses, all fond
cherishing of their children in their humors, all doting opinion of their
forwardness, and wit, and towardliness, all other corrupt partial affections
whatsoever, laid aside;) would Inque eo vel maxim probavi -- Apollonium, qui
cum mercede dic^ret, ^ame^ non patiebatur eos, quos judicabat non posse
oratores evadere, operam apud sese perdere, dimittebatque ^ and ad quamcunque
artem putabat esse aptum, ad eam impellere, atque hortari sol^bat, Cic. 1. de
Orat.
out of the observation of their natural propensions and inclinations, and of
their particular abilities and defects, frame them from the beginning to such
courses; as wherein they were likeliest to go on with cheerfulness and
profit. This indeed were to be wished: but this is not always done. If it have
not been so done to thee; the fault is theirs, that should have done it, and
not thine: and thou art not able now to remedy that which is past and gone. But
as for thee, and for the future; if thy Parents have not done their part, yet
do not thou forget thy duty: if they have done one fault, in making a bad
choice; do not thou add another, in making a worse change: disparage not
their Judgments by misliking, neither gainsay their Wills by forsaking their
choice, upon every small incongruity with thine own Judgment or Will. If thine
Inclination draw thee another way; labor thoroughly to subdue thy nature
therein: Suspect thine own corruption; Think this backwardness proceeds not
from true judgment in thee, but issues rather from the root of some carnal
affection: Consider thy years are green, Iuvenile vitium est, regere non posse
impetum. Senec. in Troad.
affections strong, judgment unsettled: Hope that this backwardness will grow
off, as years and stayednesse grow on: Pray and endeavor that thou may daily
more and more wain thy affections from thine own bent, and cheerful and
delightful unto thee, which now is grievous and irksom. And as for thy
insufficiency, if that dishearten thee; (which is indeed a main rubb,) do
thus. Impute thy former non-proficiency to thine own sloth and negligence:
Think, if after so long time spent in this course, thou have attained to no
greater perfection in it; how long it would be ere thou should come to a
tolerable mediocrity in another: Resolve, not to lose all that precious time
forepast, by beginning the world anew; but rather save as much of it, as is
Suspect that it comes from thy pride, that thou can not content thy self
with a Calling, wherein thou may not be excellent; and imagine that God, of
purpose to humble thee, might divert thy education to another, for which thou
art less apt: Observe what Nihil est quod non expugnet pertinax opera, and
intenta ac diligens cura. Senec.

-- Labor omnia vincit Improbus. Virgil. 1. Georg.

Praeliatus est contra rerum naturam, and quidem victor abiit, malignitatem
ejus pertinacissimo robore superando. de Demost. Val. Max. 8.7. (...).
Heliodo^. l. 3* Aethiop. Hist.


strange things past belief, and such as have seemed insuperable, have been
conquered and subdued by the obstinacy and improbity of unwearied labor, and
of assiduity: Doubt not, but by Gods blessing upon thy faithful industry, to
attain in time, (if not to such perfection as thou desire, and might
perhaps have attained in some other competent sufficiency, as may render thy
endeavors acceptable to God, comfortable to thy self, and serviceable to
community. If by these and the like considerations, and the use of other good
means, thou can bring thy affections to some indifferent liking of, and thy
abilities mediocrity for, that course which Education has opened unto thee:
thou have no more to do; There Is thy Course, that is thy Calling, that is the
Work whereunto God has appointed thee.

But if after long striving, and pains, and trial, thou can neither bring thy
mind to it, nor do any good upon it,. 35.
having faithfully desired and endeavored it, so that thou must needs leave
the course of thy Education; or (which is another case) if thy Education have
left thee free; (as many Parents, God knows, are but too careless that way:)
then Secondly, thou art in the next Gifts and Abilities; and to take direction
from them, rather than from thine inclination. And this Rule I take to be very
sound: not only from the Apostles intimation, verse. 17. ( Verse. 17. hic.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one,)
where he seems to make the choice of men's Callings, to depend much upon the
distribution of Gods Gifts: but withal for two good Reasons. One is, because
our Gifts and Abilities, whether of body or mind, being in the brain or hand,
are at a better certainty; than our Propensions and Inclinations are, which are
seated in the Heart. The heart is Jer. 17.9.
deceitful above: and there are so many rotten corruptions in it, that it is a
very hard thing for a man to discern his own Inclinations and Propensions,
whether they spring from a sound, or from a corrupt root. Whereas in the
discerning of our Gifts and Abilities; we are less subject to gross Errors
and mistakings: I mean for the truth and reality of them; howsoever we are apt
to overvalue them for the Fere plus nobis videmur posse quam possumus. Senec.
de tranquil. c. 4.
measure and degree. Now it is meet in the choice of our Callings, we should
follow the surer guide: and therefore rather be led by our Metiri se quemque
suo modulo ac pede verum est. Horat. 1. Ep. 7.
Gifts, than by our Inclinations. The other Reason is; because our Inclinations
cannot so well produce Abilities, them. We say indeed, there is nothing hard to
a willing mind: and in some sense, it is true. Not as if a willing mind could
make us do more than we are able. A man can do no more, than he can do, be
he never so willing: but because a willing mind will make us exerere vires,
stir up our selves to do as much as we are able, which we use not to do in
those things we go unwillingly about. Willingness then may quicken the
strength we have: but it does not put any new strength into us. But Abilities
can produce Inclinations de novo; and make them, where they find them not. As
we see, every other natural thing inclinable to the exercise of those natural
faculties, that are in it: so certainly would every man have strongest
inclination to those things, whereto he has strongest abilities, if wicked and
untoward affections did not often corrupt our inclinations, and hinder them
from moving their own proper and natural way. It is best then, to begin the
choice of our Callings from our Abilities, which will fetch on Inclinations;
and not from our Inclinations, Abilities will not serve the turn.

. 36.
Concerning which gifts or abilities; what they are, and how to make true
judgment of them, and how to frame the choice of our Callings from them: to
speak punctually and fully, would require a large discourse. I can but touch at
some few points First, by gifts and abilities we are to understand not only
those of the Mind; Judgment, Wit, Invention, Memory, Fancy, Eloquence, etc.
and those of the Body; Health, Strength, Beauty, Activity, etc. but also those
which are without; Birth, Wealth, Honor, Authority, any thing, that may be of
use or advantage unto us for any employment. Secondly, abilities on the one
side, so on the other side all our wants and defects, which might disable us
more or less for any employment, are to be duly weighed and considered of: and
the one laid against the other; that we may know how to make as near as we can
a just estimate of our strength and sufficiency. Thirdly, it is the safer way
to undervalue, than to overprise our selves: lest ignorantly confident, we
affect a Calling above our strength; which were to fly with waxen wings, and
to owe the gifted us called us to it. Fourthly, in the judging of our
Abilities, we should have a regard to the outward circumstances of times and
places, and the rest. Those gifts, which would have made a sufficient Priest,
in the beginning of the Reformation, in that dearth of learning, and penury of
the Gospel; now the times are full of knowledge and learning, would be all
little enough for Parish-Clerk. Fifthly, something would be yielded to the
judgments of other men concerning our Abilities. It is either secret pride, or
base faintness of heart, or dull sloth, or some other thing, modesty in us: if
being excellently gifted for some weighty employment in every other man's
judgment, we yet withdraw our selves from it with pretensions of
unsufficiency. Sixthly, and lastly; let us resolve on that course, ( caeteris
paribus;) not only for which we are competently fit, but for which we are
absolutely fittest. A good Actor it may be could very sufficiently act any part
in the play; represent the majesty of a King, or the humor of a Swaggerer, or
the pranks of a Bedlam, or any thing: but yet if he be notedly excellent at
some part rather than another, he would not willingly be put from that, to act
another. Ergo histrio hoc videbit in scena, quod non videbit sapiens in vita?
Shame we to let these men be wiser in their generations, than we in ours. And
thus much for Abilities.

There is yet a doubt remains concerning a man's Inclination. In case we have
examined our gifts,. 37.
and find them in a good measure averse from it, and cannot by any possible
means work over our affections to any tolerable liking of it: in such a case,
what is to be done, or how shall we judge what Calling is fittest for us to
take? whether that whereto our Abilities lead us, or that whereto our
Inclinations draw us. As I conceive it, in such a case, we are to hold this
order. First, if our Inclinations cannot be won over to that course, for
which our Abilities lie fittest; we are to take a second surview of our
Abilities, to see if they be competently fit for that whereto our inclination
swayeth us: and if upon due unpartial Recte facit, animo quando ^bsequitur suo.
Quod omnes bomines facere oportet, ^um id modo fiu^ bono.

Plau^. in Amphi^r.


follow the sway of our Inclinations. The reason this. A man's inclination
cannot be forced. If it can be fairly won over, well and good: but violence
it cannot endure at any hand. And therefore if we cannot make it yield to us in
reason, there is no remedy, we must in wisdom yield to it, (provided ever it be
honest:) or else all is lost. What ever our sufficiencies be; things will not
fadge that are undertaken Male respondent coacta ingenia; reluctante natura,
irritus labor est. Senec. de tranquil. c. 9.
without an heart: there is no good to be done against the hair.

But then secondly,. 38.
if upon search we find our selves altogether unsufficient and unfit for that
Calling, whereunto our inclination is strongly and violently carried: we are to
oppose that inclination with a greater violence; and to set upon some other
Calling, for which we are in some mediocrity gifted, speedily and resolvedly,
and leave the success to Almighty God. The reason this. It being certain, that
God never calls any man but to that, for which he has in some competent
measure enabled him: we are to hold that for a pernicious and unnatural
inclina^ion at the least, if not rather for a wicked and Diabolical suggestion,
which so stiffly exciteth us to a function, whereto we may be assured God never
called us.

thirdly, (and I would commend it unto you as a principal good Rule,. 39.
and the fairest outlet of all other from amid these difficulties;) we should
do well to deal with these mutinous and distracting thoughts within us, as
wise Statists do when they have have to deal with men divided in opinions, and
factions, and ends. How is that? They use to bethink themselves of a middle
course, to reduce all the several opinions to a kind of temper; so as no side
be satisfied fully in the proposals they have tendered, and yet every side in
part: as we commonly hold those to be the Apud arbitrum neque nihil, neque
tantum quantum postulavimus, consequemur-Quis unquam ad arbitros quantum petit,
tantum abstulit? Cic. pro Rosc. Com.
justest arbitrators, and to make the best and the fairest end neither, please
both. So here, if our Educations, Abilities, and Inclinations look several
ways; and the Inclination be peremptory and stiff, and will not condescend to
either of the other two: it will be a point of good wisdom in us, if we can
bethink our selves of some such meet temper, as may in part give Inclinations,
and yet not leave our gifts and educations wholly unsatisfied. And that is
easily done by proposing the full latitude of our Educations and Abilities, as
the utmost bounds of our choice; and then leaving it to our Inclinations to
determine our particular choice within those bounds. For no man's education or
gifts run so Mathematically, and by the Line, to that point whereto they direct
him, but that there is a kind of latitude in them; and that for the most part
(By reason of the great variety and Nulla ^ars non alcerius artis, aut matter
aut propinqua est. Tert. de Idol. cap. 8.
affinity of offices and employments) very large and spacious. One instance
shall serve both to exemplify and illustrate Ministry, and for that end
brought up in the University, studieth there Philosophy, and History, and the
Arts, and the Tongues, and furnishes himself with general knowledge, which may
enable him, as for the work of the Ministry, so for the exercise of any other
profession, that has to do with learning: so as not only the Calling of the
Ministry, but that of the Lawyer too, and of the Physician, and of the Tutor,
and Schoolmaster, and sundry other besides these, do come within the latitude
of his Education and Abilities. Certainly if his mind would stand thereunto, no
course would be so the Ministry. But he proves obstinately averse from it,
and cannot be drawn by any persuasion of friends or reason to embrace it. It is
not meet to force his Inclination quite against the bent of it: and yet it is
pity his Abilities and Education should be cast away. This middle course
therefore is to be held; even to leave it free for him to make his choice of
Law or Physic, or teaching, or any other profession that belongs to a
Scholar, and comes within his latitude, which of them soever he shall find
himself to have the strongest Inclination and Propension unto. And the
Inclinations, which cannot be driven to the Center, may yet be drawn within the
Circumference of our Educations and Abilities. He that observes these Rules I
have hitherto delivered, with due respect to his Education, Abilities, and
Inclination; and deals therein faithfully and unpartially and in the fear of
God: may rest secure in his Conscience of his Inward Calling.

But there must be an Outward Calling too: else yet all is not right.. 40.
The general Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40.
[(...)] Let all things be enforces it. There are some Callings, which
conscionably discharged, require great pains and care; but yet the profits will
come in, whether the duties be conscionably performed, or no. Our calling of
the Ministry is such; and such are all those offices, as have annexed unto
them a certain revenue, or annual fee. Now into such Callings as these, every
unworthy fellow that wants maintenance and loves ease, would be intruding
(as we of the Clergy find it but too true:) and there would be no order kept
herein, if there were not left in some others a power to keep back unsufficient
men. There are again diverse Callings necessary for the public, which yet bring
in either no profits at all, (if not rather a charge) or at least profits
improportionable to the pains and dangers men must undergo in them: such as
are the Callings of Justice of Peace; the High Sheriff of a County, a
Constable, etc. Now from these Callings, men of sufficiency to avoid trouble
and charge would withdraw themselves; and so the King and Country should be
served either not at all, or by unworthy ones. Here likewise would be no order,
if there were not left in some others a power to impose those offices upon
sufficient men. It may be, those in whom either power resideth, may sometimes,
yea often abuse it; (for they are but men:) keeping back sufficient men, and
admitting unsufficient, into callings of the former; sparing sufficient men,
and imposing upon unsufficient, offices of the latter kind. This is not well:
but necessity of general inconveniences, if there should not be left a
possibility of particular mischiefs? And therefore it is needful, there should
be this power of admitting and refusing, of sparing and imposing, in Church and
Commonwealth, though it may happen to be thus mischievously abused; rather than
for want of this power, a multitude of unsufferable inconveniences (as needs
there must) should ensue. And from this power must every man have his warrant
for his Outward Calling to any office or employment in Church or Commonwealth.

case to either of these two sorts of Calling.. 14.
A man desires a lawful Calling, suppose the Ministry; not only his
Inclination bends him, but his Education also leads him, and his Gifts
encourage him that way: hitherto all things concur, to seal unto his
Conscience GODS Calling him to this function. But for so much as he has not,
(as it is not fit any man should have,) power to give himself either See Heb.
5.4.
Orders to be a Priest, or Institution into a Pastoral charge; he must, for his
admission into that holy function, depend upon those, to whom the power of
admitting or refusing in either kind is committed. He himself, and his Gifts to
examination; and modestly crave admission: which once obtained, he has no more
to do; his Calling is warranted, and his choice at an end. But if that be
peremptorily denied him, (whether reasonably, or no, it now mattereth not;) he
is to rest himself content a while; to employ himself at his study, or in some
other good course for the time, and to wait Gods leisure and a farther
opportunity. And if after modest importunity, he cannot yet hope to prevail: he
must begin to resolve of another course, submit himself to Authority and Order,
acknowledge Gods providence in it, possess his soul in patience, and think,
that for some secret corruption in himself, or for some other just cause, God
is pleased that he should not, or not yet, enter into that Calling.

On the other side, a Gentleman lives in his Country in good credit and
account;. 24.
known to be a sufficient man both for estate and understanding: thought every
way fit to do the King and the Commission of the Peace: yet himself, either
out of a desire to live at ease and avoid trouble, or because he thinks he
has as much business of his own as he can well turn him to, without charging
himself with the cares of the public, or possibly out of a privy Consciousness
to himself of some defect, (as, it may be, an irresolution in judgment, or in
See Syrac. 7.6.
courage, or too great a propension to foolish pity,) or for some other reason
which appears to him just, thinks not that a fit Calling for him, and
rather desires to be spared. But for so much as it is not fit a man should be
altogether his own judge (especially the Public) he must herein depend upon
those to whom the power of sparing or imposing in this kind is committed. He
may excuse himself by his other many occasions, allege his own wants and
insufficiencies, and what he can else for himself; and modestly crave to be
spared. But if he cannot by fair and honest suit get off; he must submit
himself to Authority and Order, yield somewhat to the judgment of others,
think that God has his secret work in it, and rest upon the warrant of this
Outward Calling.

The Outward Calling then, is not a thing of small moment, or. 43.
Sometimes (as in the Case last proposed,) it may have the chief and the
Casting voice: but where it has least, it has always a Negative; in every
regular choice of any calling or course of life. And it is this Outward
Calling, which (I say not principally, but) even alone must rule every ordinary
Christian in the judging of other men's Callings. We cannot see their hearts; we
know not how God might move them; we are not able to judge of their inward
Callings. If we see them too neglectfull of the duties of their Calling; if we
find their Gifts hold very short and unequal proportion with the weight of
their within. But yet (unless it be such as are in place of Authority and
Office, to examine men's sufficiencies, and accordingly to allow or disallow
them,) what has any of us to do to judge the heart, or the Conscience, or the
of our brother? So long as he has the warrant of an orderly outward Calling,
we must take him for such as he goes for: and leave the trial of his heart to
God, and to his own heart. And of this second general point the choice of a
Calling thus far.

Remains now the third and last point proposed; The Use of a Man's calling.
Let him Ver. 17. hic.
walk in it, verse. 17. Let him Ver. 20.
abide in it, ver. 20. Let him abide therein with God, here in my Text. At this
I aimed most, in my choice of this Text; and yet of this I must say least.
Preachers often times do with their proposals, Parents sometimes do with their
Children: though they love the later as well, yet the first go away with the
largest portions. But I do not well, to trifle out that little sand I have
left, in Apologies: Let us rather on to the matter; and see what Duties our
Apostle here requires of us, under these phrases of Abiding in our callings,
and abiding therein with God.

It may seem, he would have us stick to a course; and when we are in a Calling,
not to forsake it, nor change it,. 45.
no not for a better, no not upon any terms. Perhaps some have taken it so: but
certainly the Apostle never meant it so. For taking the Calling] in that extent
wherein he treats of it in this Chapter; if that were his meaning, he should
consequently teach that no single man might marry, nor any servant become free:
which are apparently contrary, both unto common Reason, and unto the very
purpose of the Chapter. But taking the word as we have hitherto specially
intended it, and spoken of it, for some settled Station and Course of Life,
whereby a man is to maintain himself, or wherein to do profitable service to
humane society, or both: is it yet lawful for a man to change it, or is he
bound to abide in it perpetually without any possibility or liberty to Lawful
to change it; so it be done with due caution. It is lawful: first, in higher,
but by the steps of an inferior Calling; there must needs be supposed a
lawfullness of relinquishing the inferior. How should we do for Generals for
the wars, if Colonels and Lieutenants and Captains and common Soldiers might
not relinquish their charges? and how for Bishops in the Church; if
beneficed-men and College-Governours were clench't and riveted to their Cures,
like a nail in a sure place, not to Priests in the Church of England, (since a
Priest must be a Deacon first) if a Deacon might not leave his station, and
become a Priest. But St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.13.
They that have used the office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree: and so in lower Callings it is, that men should give proof of their
worthiness for higher. It is lawful secondly, yea necessary; when the very
Calling it self, though in it good and useful, does yet by some accident
become unlawful or unusefull. As when some Manufacture is prohibited by the
State; or when some more exact device of later invention, has made the
thirdly, when a man by some accident becomes unable for the duties of his
Calling: as by age, blindness, maim, decay of estate, and sundry other
impediments which fourthly, where there is a want of sufficient men, or not a
sufficient number of them in some Callings, for the necessities of the State
and Country: in such cases, Authority may interpose, and cull out men from
other Callings, such as are fit, and may be spared, to serve in those. Not to
branch out too many particulars, it is lawful generally; where either absolute
Necessity enforces it, or lawful Authority enjoyneth it, or a concurrence of
weighty circumstances faithfully, and soberly, and discreetly laid together,
seems to require it.

. 46.
But then it must be done with due cautions. As first, not out of desultory
lightness. Some men are ever Nullam mentem animi habeo. ubi sum, ibi non sum;
ubi non sum, ibi est animus. Plaut. in Cistel.
restless; as if they had Wind-mills in their heads: every new crotchet
puts them into a new course. But these rolling stones carry their curse
gather moss: and who prove many Conclusions, it is a wonder, if their last
Conclusion prove not Beggary: If thou art well, (...). apud Stob. Sermon.
keep thy self well: lest thinking to meet with better, thou find worse. Nor
secondly, out of the greediness covetous or ambitious lust. Profit and Credit,
are things respectively amongst other things, to be considered both in the
choice and change: but not principally, and above all other things, certainly
not wholly, and without, or against all other things. Thirdly, nor out of
fullennesse, or a discontednesse at thy present condition. Content the mind,
not from the condition: and therefore the Calling, the mind unchanged, will
either not afford content, or not long. Thy new broom, that now sweepeth clean
all discontents from thee, will soon grow stubbed; and leave as much filth
behind to annoy thee, as the old one thou flungest away. Either learn with
Saint Paul, in whatsoever state Phil. 4.11.
thou art, to be therewithal content: or never hope to find content in
whatsoever thou shall be. Much less fourthly, out of an evil eye against thy
neighbor that lives by thee. There is not a baser sin than envy: nor a fouler
mark of envy, than to forsake thine own trading, to justle thy neighbor out of
his. Nor fifthly, out of degenerous false-heartednesse. That man would soon
dare to be evil, good. And he that flincheth from his Calling, at the first
frown; who can say he will not flinch from his conscience, at the next? In an
upright course, fear not the face of man: neither Eccl. 10.4.
Leave thy place, though the spirit of a Ruler rise up against thee. Patience
will conjure down again that spirit in time: circle. But sixthly, be sure
Calling be of that nature, that it may not be changed. Some degrees of
Magistracy seem to be of that nature: and therefore some have noted it, rather
as an act of impotency in Charles the fifth, than a fruit either of Humility,
or Wisdom, or Devotion, that he resigned his Crown, to betake himself to a
Cloister. But our Calling of the Ministry is certainly such. There may be a
change of the station, or degree, in the Ministry upon good cause and with due
circumstances: but yet still so, as that the main Calling it self remain
unchanged. This Calling has in it something that is sacred, and singular, and
different from other Callings. As therefore things once dedicated and hallowed
to religious services, were no more to return to common uses; (for that were to
profane them ipso facto, and to make them unclean:) so persons once set apart
for the holy work of the Ministry, Acts 13.2. whence (...). Romans 1.1.
( separate me Paul and Barnabas,) and invested into their calling with solemn
collation of Joh. 20.22.
the holy Ghost in a special manner; if any more they return to be of that lump
from which they are separated, they do as it were puff the blessed breath of
Christ back into his own face, and renounce their part in the Holy Bethink thy
self well therefore beforehand, and consider what thou art in doing, when thou
beginnest to reach forth thine hand toward this spiritual Plow: know, when it
is once there, it may not be pulled back again, no not for a Dictatorship. That
man can be no less than disorderly at the least, that forsakes his orders.
You see I do but point at things as I go, which would require further
enlarging; because I desire to have done.

This then, that we should persevere in our callings until death, and not
leave or change them upon any consideration whatsoever;. 47.
is not the thing our Apostle means by abiding in our Callings. Christian
duties, concerning the use of our Callings. I will but touch at them, and
conclude. The first is contentedness: that we neither repine at the meannesse
of our own, nor envy at the eminence of another Calling. Ver. 21. hic.
Art thou called being a servant? care not for it, says this Apostle, but a
little before my Text. All men cannot have rich, or easy, or honorable
Callings: the necessity of the whole, requires that some should drudge in
baser and meaner offices. 1 Cor. 12.17.
If all the body were Eye, where were the Hearing? And if there were none to
grind at the Mill, there would soon be none to sit upon the Throne. Salomons
Temple had 3 King. 5.15.
burden-bearers and laborers, as well as curious workers in stone, and brass,
and gold. There should be no shame in that, whereof there can be no want: nay 1
Cor. 12.22.
Much more; those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are
necessary. Grudge not then at thine own lot; for not the meanest Calling, but
has a promise of Gods blessing: neither envy another lot; for not the
greatest Calling, but is attended vexations. Whatsoever thy Calling is, therein
abide: be Content with it.

. 48.
The second is faithfulness, and Industry, and Diligence. What is here called
Abiding in it, is at v. 17 called Ver. 17. hic.
Walking in it; and in Romans 12. Waiting on it, Romans 12.7.
( Let him that has an office, wait on his office.) 1 Cor. 4.2.
It is required in stewards that a man be found faithful: and every man in his
Calling, is 1 Pet. 4 10,
a Steward. He that professes a Calling, and does nothing in it; does no more
abide in it, than he that leaves it, or he that never had it. Spartam quam
nactus es, orna. Whatsoever Calling thou have undertaken, therein abide: be
painful in it.

. 49.
The third is sobriety; that we keep our selves within the proper bounds and
limits of our Callings. For how does he abide in his Calling, that is ever and
anon flying out of it, or starting beyond it? like an extravagant soldier,
that is always breaking rank. 2 Samuel 6.6.
Uzza had better have ventured the falling, than the fingering of the Ark,
though it tottered. It is never well, when the Ne Suitor ultra crepidam, v.
Plin. 35. Not. hist. 10.
Cobbler looks above the Ankle; nor when Laymen teach us what, and how, we
should teach them. The Pope should have done well, to have thrown away his
keys, (as they say one of them once did,) before he had taken the sword into
his hands: and Midwives well, to Mat. 28.19.
go before they baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. Let it be the singular absurdity of the Church of Rome, to
allow Vicars to dispose of Crowns, and Women of Sacraments. As for thee,
whatsoever thy calling be, therein abide: keep within the bounds of it.

But yet abide with God. That clause was not added for nothing: it teaches
thee also some duties,. 50.
First; so to demean thy self in thy particular Calling, as that thou do
nothing but what may stand with thy general Calling. Magistrate, or Minister,
or Lawyer, or Merchant, or Artificer, or whatsoever other thou art; remember
the jam illa objici solita vox, Non habeo aliud quo vivam. Tertul. de Idol.
cap. 5. v. ibid. cap. 12. pulchre.
necessities of thy particular Calling to any breach of the least of those
Laws of God, which must rule thy general Calling. God is the author of both
Callings: of thy General Calling, and of thy Particular Calling too. Do not
think he has called thee to service in the one, and to liberty in the other;
to Justice in the one, and to Cousenage in the other; to Simplicity in the one,
and to Dissimulation in the other; to Holiness in the one, and to
Profaneness in the other; in a word, to an entire and universal Obedience in
the one, and to any kind or degree of Disobedience in the other.

. 51.
It teaches thee secondly; not to ingulfe thy self so wholly into the
businesses of thy particular Calling, as to abridge thy self of convenient
opportunities for the exercise of those religious duties, which thou art bound
to perform by virtue of thy general Calling; Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving,
Meditation, etc. God allows thee to serve thy self; but he commands thee,
to serve him too. Be not thou so all for thy self, as to forget him: but as
thou art ready to embrace that liberty, which he has given thee, to serve thy
self; so make a conscience to perform th^se duties which he has required of
thee for his service. Work, and spare not: but yet pray too, or else work not.
Prayer is the means, to procure a blessing upon thy labors, from his hands;
who never fails to serve them, that never fail to serve him. Did ever any
man Job. 1.9.
serve God for naught? A man cannot have so comfortable assurance, that he the
Alpha and Omega of his endeavors; by beginning them in his name, and directing
them to his glory. Neither is this a point of Duty only, in regard of Gods
command; or a point of Wisdom only, to make our labors successful: but it
is a point of Justice too, as due by way of Restitution. We make bold with his
day, and dispense with some of that time which he has sanctified unto his
service, for our own necessities. It is equal, we should allow him at least as
much of ours, as we borrow of his; though it be for our necessities, or lawful
comforts. But rob him of some of his time, (as too often we do,) employing it
in our own businesses, without the warrant of a just necessity: we are to know
that it is theft, yea theft in the highest degree, sacrilege; and that
therefore we are bound, at least as far as petty thieves were in the Law, to a
Exodus 22.1. 2 Samuel 12.6.
fourfold restitution. Abide in thy Calling, by doing thine own part, and
laboring faithfully; but yet so, as Gods part be not forgotten, in serving him
daily.

It teaches thee thirdly;. 52.
to watch over the special sins of thy particular Calling. Sins I mean, not
that cleave necessarily to the Calling; for then the very Calling it self
should be unlawful: but sins, unto the temptations whereof the condition of
thy Calling lays thee open, more than it does unto other sins, or more than
some other Callings would do unto the same sins; and wherewith, whilst thou
art stirring about the businesses of thy Calling, thou may be soonest
overtaken, if thou do not heedfully watch over thy self and them. The
Magistrates sins, Partiality and Injustice; the Ministers sins, Sloth and
Flattery; the Lawyers sins, Maintenance and Collusion; the Merchants sins,
Lying and Deceitfulness; the Courtiers sins, Ambition and Dissimulation; the
Great Man's sins, Pride and Oppression; the Gentleman's the officers sins,
Bribery and Extortion; the Country man's sins, Envy and Discontentednesse;
the Servants sins, Tale-bearing and Purloyning. In every State and condition
of life, there is a kind of opportunity to some special sin: wherein if our
watchfulness be not the greater, mainly to oppose it, and keep it out; we
cannot abide therein with God.

All that I have done all this while, in my passage over this the Necessity of
having a Calling; laid down directions for the Choice and trial of our
Callings; and showed, what is required of us in the use of our Callings for the
abiding therein with God. And having thus dispatched my Message, it is now time
I should spare both your ears, and my own sides. God grant that every one of
us may remember so much of what has been ^aught, as is needful for each of
us; and faithfully apply it unto our own souls and consciences; and make a
profitable and seasonable use of it in the whole course of our lives: even for
Jesus Christ sake, his blessed Son, and our alone

Paul's Cross London, Nov. 21. 1624.
1 Timothy 4.4. For every Creature of God is good: and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with Thanksgiving.


OF that great and Universal Apostasy,. 1.
which should be in the Church through the tyranny and fraud of Antichrist;
there are elsewhere in the Scriptures more full, scarce any where more plain
predictions, than in this passage of Saint Paul, whereof my Text is a part. The
Quality of the Doctrines foretold Verse 1. Contrary to the Faith, E^roneous,
Devilish; Verse. 1.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall ] The
Quality of the Doctors foretold, verse 2. Liars, Hypocritical, Unconscionable;
Verse. 2.
[ Speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot
Iron.] But lest these generalities should seem not sufficiently distinctive;
each side charging other, (as commonly it happens where differences are about
Religion) with Apostasy, and Error, and Falsehood, and Hypocrisy: Antichristian
Doctors more distinctly, by specifying some particulars of their devilish
Doctrines. For which purpose he gives instance in Ver. 3.
two of their Doctrines: whereof he makes choice, not as being simply the
worst of all the rest, (though bad enough) but as being more easily discernable
than most of the rest; viz. a Prohibition of Marriage, and an Injunction of
abstinence from certain meats. Which particulars, being so agreeable to the
present Tenets of the Romish Synagogue, do give even of themselves alone, a
strong suspicion, that there is the seat of Antichrist. But joined unto 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, etc.
Saint Paul, and Apoc. 13.11, etc.
Saint John, in other places, make it so unquestionable; that they who will
needs be so unreasonably charitable, as to think the Pope is not Antichrist,
may at the least wonder, (as Moulins accomplishment in the Preface.
one says well) by what strange chance it fell out, that these Apostles should
draw the picture of Antichrist in every point and limb, so just like the Pope,
and yet never think of him.

. 2.
The words of the Text, are the ground of a Confutation; indeed properly and
directly of the later of these two Errors only, concerning Abstinence from
certain meats: but yet so, as it strongly Marriage; and in truth generally, all
other superstitious Precepts, or Prohibitions, of like Nature. Marriage being
the holy Ordinance of God, as Meats are the good Creatures of God: and neither
Marriage, nor Meats, nor any other Creature or Ordinance, being to be refused
as upon tie of Conscience; provided ever, they be received with such
thankfulness, and such other requisite conditions, as become Christian men.
For every Creature of God is good; and nothing to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving.

. 3.
Which words give us occasion to consider of Three points, First, the Quality of
Gods Creatures, as they come from him, and are given to us: [Every Creature of
God of Gods Creatures, consisting in their lawfulness unto us, and our liberty
unto them: [And nothing to be a Condition necessary on our parts, lest the
Creatures otherwise good and lawful, should become unto us evil and hurtful;
and that is Thankfulness: [If it be received with Thanksgiving.] The two first
set out the bounty of God toward us; who has made a world of Creatures, and
all good, and has not envied the use of any of them: and the third, contains
our duty unto God in regard thereof; viz. to return unto him, for the free use
of all his good Creatures, the tribute of our Thanks. Of these three points it
is my purpose, by Gods grace, and with your patience, to speak in such manner,
as shall be most for our edification; measure as the usual hours will allow;
and in such Order as the Text gives them: and first of the First, from the
first clause thereof; Every Creature of God is good.

By Creature understand,. 4.
not only such as are appointed for nourishment: but even all kind of created
Beings; the Genesis 1.1.
Heaven and the Earth, and Exodus 20.11.
all things therein contained Col. 1.1^
visible and invisible, with all their several Properties and Accidents. Of all
and each of these the Apostles assertion is true; Every Creature of God is
good. He concludes all kinds of meats to be good; because, they are the
Creatures of God: which argument were not good, if every were not good. And by
Goodness understand, not only that goodness ad intra, whereby every thing is
simply and metaphysically good, in regard of the Nature, perfection, and being
thereof: but that goodness ad extra too, whereby every thing is in the kind
and in some measure endowed with an ability to do some good without and beyond
it self. You may call them an V. Scalig. exer. 307. sect. 27.
absolute, and a Relative Goodness. And every Creature has both of these.
There being in the meanest and basest of Gods Creatures, not only an Absolute
Goodness, whereby it is perfect in its proper kind, Qua Ens, as it has a
being and existence; but also a Relative too; and that twofold. One respecting
God the Creator: whose glory more or less it serves to show forth, Qua
Creatura, as it is the Work of his hands. Another, respecting its (...). Plat.
in Protag. and in Menon.
fellow creatures: to some of whom it is some way or other serviceable, Qua
pars Mundi, as it is a part of the Whole; but especially serviceable unto Man,
for whose service (next under the glory of God) the whole was Created. The
sum is. Every Creature which God has made is good. Good, absolutely and in
it self; as a Thing: Good, in that it sets forth the Glory of him that made
it, as a Creature: Good, as a part of the World, for the service

Hereof we need neither further, nor other testimony, than Gods own approbation
registered in the story of the Creation,. 5.
Genesis 1. Where we may see Gods allowance stamped, both upon the several
Creatures of each several day, that they were Genesis 1.4, 12, 18, 21, 25.
good: and also upon the whole frame of the Creatures, when the work was
finished; that behold they were Ibid. v. 31.
Exceeding good. Et nusquam in toto corpore menda fuit. In this goodly systeme
and fabric of Nature that which is beyond all, is, the harmony and conjuncture
of the Parts, exceeding in goodness, beauty, and perfection: one part is
superfluous or unprofitable; or if considered singly and by it self, destitute
of its proper goodness and usefulness. As in the Natural Body of a Man; not
the least member, or string, or sinew, but has his proper office and
comeliness in the body: and as in the artificial Body of a Clock or other
engine of motion, not the least wheel, or pin, or notch, but has his proper
work and use in the Engine. God has given to every thing he Wisd. 11.20.
number, weight, and measure of perfection and goodness, which he saw fittest
for it unto those ends for which he made it. Every Creature of God is good.

. 6.
A truth so evident; that even those among the Heathen Philosophers, who either
denied or doubted of the worlds Creation, did yet, by making (...). Arist. 1
Ethic. 6.
Ens and Bonum terms convertible, acknowledge the goodness of every Creature.
It were a shame then for us, who Heb. 11.3.
Through Faith understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God; if
our assent unto this truth should not be by so much firmer than theirs, by how
much our evidence for it is stronger than the thing; we the ground also: they
saw, it was so; we, why it is so. Even because it is the work of God; A God
full of goodness; a God who is nothing but goodness; a God Pars naturae little
est esse bonos. (De Diis) Senec.
essentially and infinitely good, yea very Goodness it self. As is the
Workman; such is his (...). Pla. in Timaeo.
workmanship. Nor for degree, (that is here impossible;) but for the truth of
the Quality: not alike good with him, but like to him in being good. In every
Creature there are certain tracks and footsteps, as of Gods Essence, whereby it
has its Being: so of his goodness too, whereby it also is good. The Sea Aug.
passim in scriptis contr. Manichaeos.
Manichees saw the strength of this Inference: the Creatures, as to repute some
of them evil; yet durst not be so absurd, as to charge the true God to be the
cause of those, they so reputed. Common reason taught them, that from the good
God could not proceed any evil thing: no more than Darkness could from the
light of the Sun, or Cold from the heat of the fire. And therefore so to defend
their Error, as to avoid this absurdity; they were forced to maintain another
absurdity (indeed a greater, though it seemed to them the less of the two,)
viz. to say, there were two Gods, a Good God, the Author of all good things;
and an Evil Good, the Author of all evil things. If then we acknowledge, that
there is but 1 Cor. 8.6.
one God, and that one God good; (and we do all so acknowledge;) unless we
will be more absurd than those most absurd Heretics, we must withal
acknowledge all the Creatures of that one and good God to be also good. He is
so the causer of all that is good; (for Jam. 1.17.
Every good gift and every perfect giving descends from above from the Father
of lights:) as that he is the causer only of what is good (for with him is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning, says S. James.) As the Sun, who is
Pater Luminum, the fountain and Father of lights, (whereunto S. James in that
passage does apparently allude) gives light to the Moon, and Stars, and all
the lights of heaven, and causes light wheresoever he shines, but no where
causes darkness: So God the Father, and fountain of all goodness, so
communicates goodness to every thing he produces, as that he Errat, si quis
putet illos (Deos) nocere velle, qui non possunt. Senec. Epist. 95. Nec dant
ma^u^, nec habe^t. Ibid.
cannot produce any thing at all, but that which is good. Every Creature of God
then is good.

. 7.
first (to raise some Inferences from the premises for our farther instruction
and use) certainly I say; Sin, and Death, and such things as are evil and not
good, are not of Gods making, they are none of his Creatures: for all his
Creatures are good. James 1.13.
Let no man therefore say when he is tempted and overcome of sin, I am tempted
of God: neither let any man say when he has done evil, it was Gods doing. God
indeed preserves the Man, actuateth the Power, and orders the Action to the
glory of his Mercy or Justice: but he has no hand at all in the sinful defect
and obliquity of a wicked action. There is a natural, transcendental)
Goodness, Bonitas Entis, as they call it, in every Action, even in that
whereto the greatest sin adhereth: and that Mali author non est, qui omnium
quae sunt author est: quia in quantum sunt, in tantum bona sunt. Aug. 83.
Quaest. 21.
Goodness is from God, as that Action is his Creature. But the Evil that
cleaves unto it, is wholly from the default of the Person that commits it;
and not at all from God. And as for the Evils of Pain also; neither are they of
Gods making. Wisd. 1^.16.
Deus mortem non fecit, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, God made not
death, neither does he take pleasure in the destruction of the living: but
wicked men by their words, and works have brought it upon themselves: Ose. 13.9.
Perditio tua exte Israel, Osea 13. O Israel, thy destr^ction: that is, both
thy sin, whereby thou destroyest thy self, and thy Misery whereby thou art
destroyed, is only and wholly from thy self. Certainly God is not the Cause of
any Evil, either of Sin or Punishment. Conceive it thus: not the Cause of it (
formally, and) so far forth as it is Evil. For otherwise, we must know, that (
materially considered) all Evils of Punishment are from God: for, Amos 3.6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. In
Evils of sin, there is no other, but only that Natural or Transcendental
goodness (whereof we spoke) in the Action: which goodness though it be from
God, yet because the Action is Morally bad, God is not said to do it: But in
Evils of there is, over and besides that Natural Goodness, whereby they exist,
a kind of Moral Goodness, (as we may call it, after a sort; improperly, and by
way of reduction,) as they are Instruments of the Justice of God: and
whatsoever may be referred to Justice, may so far forth be called good: and
for that very goodness, God may be said in some sort to be the Author of these
evils of punishment, though not also of those other evils of Sin. In both, we
must distinguish the Good from the Evil: and ascribe all the Good whatsoever it
be, ( Transcendental, Natural, Moral, or if there be any other,) to God alone;
but by no means any of the Evil. unthankful, if we impute any good, but to
him: and we are unjust, if we impute to him any thing but good.

Secondly, from the goodness of the least Creature,. 8.
guess we at the Wisd. 13.1, etc.
excellent goodness of the great Creator. A. Gell. 1. Noct. Attic. 1.
Ex pede Herculem. God has imprinted, as before I said, some steps and
footings of his goodness in the Creatures: from which we must take the best
perfections that are in him. There is no beholding of the body of this Sun, who
dwells in such a 1 Timothy 6.16
Glorious light as none can attain unto; that glory would dazzle with blindness
the sharpest and most Eagly eye that should dare to fix it self upon it, with
any steadfastness: enough it is for us, from those Tanta haec formarum varietas
in r^bus conditis, quid nisi quidam sunt radii Deitatis: demonstrantes quide^
quod vere sit a quo sunt; non tamen quid fit, prorsus definientes. Bern. Ser.
31. in Cant
rays and glimmering beams which he has scattered upon the Creatures, to
gather how infinitely he exceeds them in brightness and glory. Bern. Ibid.
De ipso vides, sed non ipsum: We see his, but not Him. His Creatures, they are
our best, indeed our only revealed word teach us, what we should never have
learned from the Creatures without it: yet, (fitted to our capacity,) it
teaches no otherwise, than by resemblances taken from the Creatures. Romans
1.19, 20.
(...), as Saint Paul calls it, Romans 1. the whole Latitude of that, which may
be known of God, is manifest in the Creatures: and the invisible things of God
not to be understood but by things that are made. St. Basil therefore calls
the world Basil.
(...), the very School where the knowledge of God is to be learned: and there
is a double way of teaching, a twofold method of trayning us up into that
knowledge in that school: that is to say, Aquin. 1. qu. 12.12.
Per viam negationis, and per viam Eminentiae. First, (...). Damasc. 1. de fid.
Orthod. 4.
Via negationis: look whatsoever thou find in the Creature, which ^avoureth
of defect or imperfection; and know God is not such. Are they not limited;
subject to change, composition, decay, etc? Remove these from God; and learn
that he is infinite, simple, unchangeable, eternal. Then Via Eminentiae: look
whatsoever perfection there is in the Creature in any degree; and know that the
same but (infinitely and incomparably) more eminently, is in God. Is there
Wisdom, or Knowledge, or Power, or Beauty, or Greatness, or Goodness, in any
kind or in any measure, in any of the Creatures? Affirm the same, but without
measure, of God: and learn that he is infinitely wiser, and skilfuller, and
stronger, and fairer, and greater, and better. In every good thing so
differently excellent above and beyond the Creatures; as that, though yet they
be good, yet compared with him they deserve not the name of good, Mark. 10.18.
There is none good but one, that is God, Mar. 10. None good, as he: simply,
and absolutely, and essentially, and of himself such. The creatures that they
are good, they have it from him; and their goodness depends upon him: and
they are good but in part, and measure, and in their own kinds. Whenever
therefore we find any good from, or observe any goodness in any of the
creatures: let us not bury our meditations there, but raise them up by those
stairs (as it were) of the Creatures, to contemplate the great goodness of him
their Creator. We are unhappy truants; school of GODS good creatures; we have
not learned from them at the least so much knowledge of him and his goodness,
as to admire and love, and depend upon it and him. Look upon the workmanship,
and accordingly judge of the workman: Every Creature of God is good: surely
then the Creator must needs excel in goodness.

Thirdly; there is in men,. 9.
amongst other cursed fruits of self-love, an aptness to measure things, Non ex
sui natura, sed ex suo commodo, vel incommodo. August. 12. de Civit. 4.
not by the level of exact truth, but by the model of their own apprehensions.
Who is there, that cannot fault another work? The Plin. 35. Not. Hist. 10.
Cobbler could espy something Apelles his masterpiece; because the picture was
not drawn just according to his fancy. If a thousand of us hear a Sermon, scare
one of that thousand, but he must show some of that little wit he has in
disliking something or other: There the Preacher was too elaborate, here too
loose: that point he might have enlarged, contracted this; he might have been
plainer there, showed more learning here; that observation was obvious, that
exposition enforced, that proof impertinent, that illustration common, that
exhortation needless, that reproof unseasonable: one misliketh his Text,
another his Method, a third his style, a fourth his voice, a fifth his memory;
every one something. A fault the works of men, like our selves; and Lucian in
Hermotimo.
Momus-like we did not quarrel the works of God also, and charge many of his
good Creatures, either with manifest ill, or at leastwise with
unprofitableness. See Sirac. 39.16, 17, etc.
Why was this made? or why thus? what good does this, or what use of that? It
had perhaps been beter, if this or that had never been; or if they had been
otherwise. Thus we sometimes say or think. To Ne tanti artificis opus in aliquo
reprehendere vani^ate humanae temeritatis audeamus. Aug. 12. de. Civit. 4.
rectify this corruption, remember this first clause of my Text, Every
Creature of God is good. Perhaps thou see not, what good there is in some of
the creatures? like enough so: but yet consider, there may be much good which
thou see not. Say, it gives thee no nourishment: Possibly it may do thee
(...). Damasc. 2. de fid. Orthod. 12.
service in some other kind. Say, it never yet did that: yet it may do
hereafter. Later times Quam multa animalia hoc primum cognovimus s^culo? and
quidem multa venientis aevi populus igno^a nobis, sciet. Senec. 7. Not. qu. 31.
have found out much good use of many Creatures, whereof former ages were
ignorant: and why may not after times find good in those things which do us
none? Say, it never did, nor ever shall do service to man, (although who can
tell that?) yet who knows but it has done, or may do service to some other
Creature, that does service to man? Say, good thou may reap even from such
Creatures, as seem to afford none; to take Utitur quihusdam assumendis and
respuendis, ad valetudinem; quibusdam tolerandis, ad patientiam; quibusdam
ordinandis, ad justitiam; quibusdam considerandis, ad aliquod veritatis
documentum. August. 83. quaest. 25.
knowledge of thine own ignorance, and to humble thy self thereby, who art so
far from comprehending the essence, that thou can not comprehend the very
works of God. The most unprofitable Creatures profit us, Bern. Sermon 5. in Cant.
Visu, si non usu, as Bernard speaks; if not to use them, yet to see in them
as in a glass Gods wisdom, and our own ignorance. And so they do us good; if
not Ibid.
cedendo in cibum, if not exhibendo ministerium, in feeding and serving us; yet
exercendo ingenium, as the same Bernard speaks; in exercising our wits, and
giving us a sight of our ignorance.

But yet those creatures, which are apparently hurtful to us; as Serpents,. 10.
and Wild-beasts, and sundry poisonous plants; but above all, the Devils, and
cursed Angels: May we not say, they are ill, and justly both blame and hate
them? Even these also are good, the creatures of God, and the workmanship of
his hands. It is only through sin, that they are evil: either to us, as the
rest; or in themselves, as the Devils. These (now wicked) Angels were glorious
Creatures at the first: by their own voluntary transgression it is, that they
are now the worst, and the basest. And as for all the other creatures of God,
made to do us service; they were at first, and still are good in themselves:
if there cleaves to them any evil, whereby they become hurtful to us, that is
by accident; and we have to thank none but our selves for that. For who, or
what could have harmed us, if we had been Romans 8.20.
not of their own accord, but through our sinfullness, that the Creatures
became subject unto vanity, and capable either to do, or to suffer ill. They
had been still harmless, if we had been still faultless: it was our (...).
Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 25.
sin, that at once forfeited both our innocence, and theirs. If then we see any
ill in them, or find any ill by them; let us not lay the blame, or wreak our
hatred upon them: let us rather bestow our blame and hatred where it is most
due; the blame upon our selves, the hatred upon our sins. If Balaam had done
justly, he should have spared the Number. 22.27, etc.
Ass, and have corrected himself: but the false Prophet does the fault, and
the poor beast must bear both blame and strokes. When we suffer, we curse, or
at the easiest blame the Creatures: this weather, that flood, such a storm,
has blasted our fruits, sanded our grounds, shipwrackt our wares, and undone
us. When alas these have neither heart nor strength against us, but what our
selves put into them by our sins. Every sense of evil thereof in or from the
Creatures, should work in us a sense of our disobedience unto God; should
increase in us a detestation of the sins we have committed against God; should
teach us by condemning our selves, to acquit the good Creatures of God: good
in themselves, so should they have been ever and only good unto us, if we had
been true to our selves, and continued good and faithful servants unto God.
They are all good: do not thou accuse any of them, and say they are evil: do
not thou abuse any of them, and make them evil.

the first point, the goodness of the Creatures, [Every Creature of God is
good.] Follows the second, which is their Use: consisting in their
lawfullness unto us, and our liberty unto them; every Creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused. [Nothing.] That is, most agreeably to the argument
of the former verse, nothing fit for food: but more generally, (and so I rather
think the Apostle intends it) no Creature of God, whereof we may have use or
service in any kind whatsoever. Nothing, which may yeed us any comfortable
content for the support of this life, in point of health, ease, profit,
delight, or otherwise (with sobriety, and other requisite conditions;) nothing
is to be refused. By which Refusal the Apostle means not a bare forbearance
of the things; (for that we both may, and in many cases ought, so to refuse
some of the Creatures shall anon appear:) but the thing he forbids is, the
forbearance of the Creature, as upon immediate tie of Conscience; viz. either
out of a superstitious opinion of the unlawfullnesse of any creature, for some
supposed natural or legal uncleanesse in it; or out of a like superstitious
opinion of some extraordinary perfection, or operative and effectual holiness
in such refusal. The point is this. All the Creatures: so as it is against
Christian liberty, either to charge the use of them with sin, or to place
holiness in the abstaining from them.

Our Apostle often teaches this Point. In Romans 14. at verse. 20. Romans 14.20.
[ All things are pure:. 12.
] and at verse. 14. there he delivers it as a certain truth, and upon
knowledge, Ibid. 14.
[ I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
it self:] and therefore he imputes it as an error and weakness in judgment,
to them that refused some kind of meats out of a superstitious opinion, or but
timorous fear, of their unlawfullness, at ver. Ibid. 2.
[ One believes he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eats herbs:]
And in 1 Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 10.25.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for
Conscience sake:] and anon Ver. 27. Ibid. 27.
[ If an unbeleever bid you to a feast, and you be disposed to go; Whatsoever
is set before you, eat, asking no question for Conscience sake.] And to the end
we might know the liberty he there gives, to extend to all other Creatures; as
well as meats, he pronounces of them all universally at v. 23 Ibid. 23.
[(...), All things are lawful for me.] And so he does in Titus 1.15.
universally too; Tit. 1.15.
[ Omnia munda mundis, To the pure all things are pure.] From all which
Testimonies unlawfulness or impurity in any of the Creatures, but that we may
with security of conscience, freely use them without sin. If we use them
doubtingly against Conscience, or indiscreetly against Charity, or otherwise
inordinately against Sobriety; they become indeed in such cases sinful unto
us: But that is through our default, not theirs, who sinfully abuse that, which
we might lawfully use. And that abuse of ours, neither Romans 14.14.
defiles the things themselves; nor ought to 1 Cor. 10.29, 30.
prejudice

. 13.
And as there is no sin in the use: so neither is there any religion or
perfection to be placed in the refusal of any of Gods Creatures. Rather on the
contrary, to abstain from any of them, out of a conceit of any such perfection
or holiness, is it self a sinful superstition. Our Apostle ranketh it with
Idolatrous Col. 2.16, etc.
Angel-worship, and condemns it as sinful and superstitious, Colos. 2. from
Verse 16. to the end of the Chapter. The subjecting of our selves to those and
such like ordinances, Touch not, Taste not, Handle though it may have a show of
wisdom in Will Worship, and in a voluntary humility and neglecting of the body,
yet it is derogatory to that liberty wherein Christ has set us free, and a
reviving of those rudiments of the world, from which we are dead with Christ.
Every Creature of God is good; and nothing to be refused, out of a
superstitious either fear of unlawfullnesse, or opinion of holiness.

. 16.
Now the Ground of this our Right or Liberty unto the Creatures is double: the
one, Gods ordinance at the first Creation; the other, Christ's purchase in the
work of Redemption. At the Creation, God all things for man's use, as he did man
for his own service; and as he reserved to himself his absolute Sovereignty
over Man; so he gave unto man a kind of limited Genesis 1.26.
Sovereignty over the Creatures in Genesis 1. Psalm. 8.6. -- quod nos in hoc
putch^rrimo domicilio voluerunt (Dii) secundas sortiri, quod terrenis
praefecerunt, Sen. 2. de ben. 19.
He has put all things in subjection under our feet, says David, Psalm. 8.
Which dominion over the Creatures was one special branch of that glorious Genesis
1.27.
Image of God in us, after which we were created: and therefore was not, nor
could be absolutely Bonis naturae mala adventitia dum non succedunt, sed
accedunt, ^urpant utique ea, non exterminant, contu^bant, non deturbant. Bern.
in Cant. Sermon. 82.
lost by sin; but only decayed and defaced, and impaired, as the other
branches of that Image were. So that, albeit man by sin lost a great part of
his Sovereignty, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 9.
((...), as speaks Saint Chrysostom,) especially so far as the Creatures
being now rebellious and noisome unto Man, and unanswering his commands and
expectations: yet the Right still remains even in corrupt nature; and there
are still to be found some tracings and Characters, as in man of superiority,
so in them of subjection. But those (...) Damas. 4. de. ^id. Orthod. 4.
dim, and confused, and scarce legible: as in old Marbles, and Coins, and
out-worn Inscriptions, we have much ado to find out what some of the letters
were.

. 15.
But if by sin we had lost all that first title we had to the Creature wholly
and utterly: yet as God has been pleased graciously to deal with us, we are
fully as well as before. God the Father has the Son has acquired us, and
God the Holy Ghost has sealed us a new Patent. By it, whatsoever Defect is, or
can be supposed to be, in our old Evidence, is supplied; and by virtue of it,
we may make fresh challenge, and renew our claim unto the Creatures. The
blessed Son of God Col. 1.20.
Having made peace through the blood of his Cross, has reconciled us to his
Father; and therein also reconciled the Creatures both to us and him:
reconciling by him (says our Apostle, Col. 1.20.) (...), all things, (not men
only) unto himself. For God having given us his Son Heb. 1.2.
the heir of all things; has he not Romans 8.32.
with him given us all things else? has he not permitted us the free use of
his Creatures in as ample Right as ever? Joh. 8.36.
If the And as verily as Christ is Gods, so verily (if we be Christ's) all
things are ours. This Apostle sets down the whole series and form of this
spiritual Hierarchy, (if I may so speak,) this subjection and subordination of
the Creatures to Man, of Man to Christ, of Christ to God, 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 3.22
23.
All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Strengthened with this double title,. 16.
what should hinder us from possession? Why may we not freely use that liberty,
which was once given us by God, and again restored us by Jesus Christ? Why Gal.
5.1
stand fast in, and contend earnestly for the maintenance of that liberty,
wherewith Christ has set us free: by rejecting all fancies, opinions, and
Doctrines, that any way trench upon this our Christian prerogative; or seek
either to shorten, or to corrupt, our freedom unto, and power over the
Creatures? First, if any shall oppose the legal Prohibitions of the Old
Testament; whereby some Creatures were Levit. 11.
forbidden the Jews, pronounced by God himself unclean, and decreed unlawful:
it should not trouble us. For, whatever the principal reasons were, for which
those prohibitions were then made unto them (as there be diverse reasons given
us. The Church, during her nonage and pupillage, (though she were Gal. 4.1, 2.
heir of all, and had right to all; yet) was to be held under Tutors and
Governors, and to be trained up under the law of Ceremonies as Gal. 3.24, 25.
under a Schoolmaster, during the appointed time. But Gal. 4.4.
When the fullness of the time appointed was come, her wardship expired, and
livery sued out (as it were;) by the coming and suffering of Christ in the
flesh: the Church was then to enter upon her full royalties, and no more to be
burdened with those (...). Gal. 4.9.
beggarly rudiments of legal observances. The Col. 2.14.
handwriting of Ordinances was then blotted out; and the muddy Ephesians. 2.14.
partition wall broken down; and the legal impurity of the Creatures scowred
off, by the (...). Damas. 4. de sid. Orthod. 4.
blood of Christ. They have little to do then, but withal much to answer; who,
by seeking to bring in Judaism again into the Christian Church, either in whole
or in part, do thereby as much as lies in them, (though perhaps unawares to
themselves, yet indeed and in truth) Gal. 5.2, 4, 11.
evacuate the Cross of Act. 10.11, 15.
large sheet of the Creatures, which reaches from Heaven to the Earth,
whatsoever we find, we may freely kill and eat, and use every other way to our
comforts without scruple. God having cleansed all; we are not to call or esteem
any thing common or unclean: God having created all good, we are to refuse
nothing. If any shall oppose secondly, the seeming morality of some of these
prohibitions; as being given Genesis 9.4.
before the Law of Ceremonies, pressed from Lev. 17.11, 14.
Moral reasons, and confirmed by Acts 15.20, 29.
Apostolical Constitution since; upon which ground some would impose upon the
Christian Church this, as a perpetual yoke, to abstain from blood: or thirdly,
the profanation which some Creatures Idolatrous worship, whereby they become
Anathema, and are to be held as execrable things; as Josh. 7.1.
Achans wedge was, and the 4 King. 18.4^
Brazen Serpent which Hezekiah stamped to powder; upon which ground also some
others have inferred an utter unlawfulness to use any thing in the Church,
which was abused in Popery, by calling them rags and relics of Idolatry:
neither this, nor that ought to trouble us. For although neither my aim, (which
lies another the time, will permit me now to give a just and full satisfying
answer to the several instances, and their grounds: yet the very words and
weight of my Text, do give us a clear resolution in the general, and
sufficient to rest our Consciences, and our judgments and practice upon; that,
notwithstanding all pretensions of reason to the contrary, yet these things,
for so much as they are still good, ought not to be refused. For the Apostle
has here laid a sure foundation, and impregnable: in that he groundeth the Use
upon the Power; and from the Goodness of the Creature infers the lawfulness
of it. [ Every Creature of God is good; and ] He concludes; it is therefore
not to be refused, because it is good. So that look whatsoever Goodness there
is in any Creature; that is, whatsoever natural Power it has, which either
immediately and of it self is, or may by the improvement of humane Art and
industry be taught to be, of any use unto man, for necessity, nourishment,
service, lawful delight or otherwise: the Creature, wherein such goodness or
power is to be found, may not be refused as upon tie of Conscience; but that
power and goodness it has, may lawfully be employed to those uses, for which
it is meet in regard thereof. Ever provided, we be careful to observe all
those requisite conditions, which must guide our Consciences, practice, in the
use of all lawful and indifferent things. They that teach otherwise, lay
burdens upon their own consciences which they need not, and upon the
consciences of their brethren which they should not; and are injurious to that
liberty which the blessed Son of God has purchased for his Church, and Spirit
of God has asserted in my Text.

Injurious in the second place,. 17.
to this branch of our Christian liberty, is the Church of Rome: whom Saint
Paul in this passage has branded with an indeleble note of infamy; in as much
as those very doctrines, wherein he gives instance as in doctrines of Devils,
are the received Tenets and Conclusions of that Church. Not to insist on other
prejudices done to Christian liberty, by the intolerable usurpation of 2 These.
2.3.
the man of sin, who exercises a spiritual Tyranny over men's Consciences, as
opposite to Evangelical liberty, as Antichrist is to Christ: let us but a
little see how she has fulfilled Paul's prediction in teaching lying and
Devilish doctrines, and that with seared consciences and in Hypocrisy, in the
two specialties mentioned in the next former Ver. viz. forbidding to Marry, and
commanding to abstain from Meats.

Marriage, the holy Ordinance of God,. 18.
instituted in the Genesis 2.18.
place and estate of innocence, honored by John 2,2.
Christ's presence at Cana in Galilee; the seed-plot of the Church, and the 1
Cor. 7.2.
sole allowed remedy against incontinency and burning lusts; by the Apostle
commended as Heb. 13.4.
honorable in all men, and commanded in case of 1 Cor. 7.9.
ustion to all men: is yet by this Rev. 17.13
purple strumpet forbidden, and that sub mortali, to Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Clergy (as they extend that title) both Secular and Regular.
Wherein besides the Devilishness of the Doctrine, in contrarying the Ordinance
of God, and in denying men subject to sinful lusts the lawful remedy, and so
casting them upon a necessity of sinning; see if they do not teach this lie
with seared consciences? For with what Conscience can they make the same thing
a Sacrament in the Lay, and Bellarm. de Monach. ca. 34.
Sacrilege in the Clergy? With what conscience permit stews: and forbid
Marriage? With what conscience allege Scriptures for the Priests; and yet
confess it to be an Aquin. 22. qu. 88.2. Bellar de Cler. cap. 18. Becan. 1
man. Controv. 13. n. 11.
ordinance only of Ecclesiastical and not of Divine right? With what conscience
confess fornication to be against the Law of God, and Priests marriage only
against the Law of holy Church: and yet make marriage in a Priest a Coster.
Enchirid. cap. 20. prop. 9.
far fouler sin than fornication, or incest? With what conscience exact a
vow of continency from Clerks, by those ^anons, which Ca. li. qu. did. 34. c.
12. qu. 1. ca. Dilectissimis.
defend their open incontinency? With what conscience forbid lawful marriages
to some; and yet by dispensation allow unlawful marriages to others?

And is not the like also done in the other particular, concerning Meats? The
laws of that Church forbidding some Benedictines and Carthusians.
Orders of men, some kinds of meats perpetually;. 19.
and all men some meats upon certain days: and that not for Civil respects;
but with opinion of satisfaction, yea merit, yea and supererogation too. In
which also, besides the Devilishness of the Doctrine, in corrupting the
profitable and religious exercise of fasting, and turning it into a
superstitious observation of Days and Meats: judge if they do this lie also,
as the former, with seared consciences. For with what conscience can they allow
an ordinary Confessor to absolve for Murder, Adultery, Perjury, and such petty
crimes; but reserve the great sin of Eating flesh upon a Friday or Ember day to
the censure of a Penitentiary; as being a matter beyond the power of an
ordinary Priest to grant absolution for? With what Conscience make the tasting
of the coarsest flesh a breach of the Lent fast; and surfeiting upon the
delicatest fishes and confections, none? With what Conscience forbid they such
and such meats, for the taming of the flesh: when they allow those that are
far more nutritive of the flesh, and incentive of fleshly lusts? With enjoin
such abstinence for a penance, and then presently release it again for a penny?
Indeed the Gloss upon the Did. 84. ca. Presbyter.
Canon, that does so, has a right worthy and a right wholesome note: Note,
says the Gloss. Ibid.
Gloss, that he who gives a penny to redeem his fast, though he give money for
a spiritual thing, yet he does not commit Simonie, because the contract is made
with God. If these men had not seared up their consciences: would they not
think you, feel some check at the broaching of such ridiculous and inconsistent
stuff, as flows from these two heads of Devilish Doctrines; of forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats?

. 20.
I deny not, but the bawds of that strumpet, the Doctors of that Church, have
their colorable pretenses wherewith to blanch over these errors: else the
lies would be palpable; and they should not otherwise fill up the measure of
their Apostasy, according to the Apostles Prophecy, in teaching these lies in
Hypocrisy. But the colors, though never so artificially tempered, and never
so handsomely laid on, are yet so thinn; that a steady eye, not bleered with
prejudice, may discern the lie through them, for all the Hypocrisy. As might
easily be shown; if my intended course led the third place, (that we might
know our own freehold with better certainty, and keep our selves within our
due bounds;) to enquire a little what is the just extent of our Christian
liberty unto the Creatures, and what restraints it may admit. A point very
needful to be known for the resolution of many doubts in conscience, and for
the cutting off of many questions and disputes in the Church: which are of very
noysom consequence, for want of right information herein. I have other matter
also to Positions following.

first,. 21.
Our Christian liberty extends to all the Creatures of God. This arises
clearly from what has been already delivered: and the testimonies of Scripture
for it are express. Romans 14.20.
All things are pure; 1 Cor. 10.23.
All things are lawful; 1 Cor. 3.22.
All are yours; elsewhere: and here, Nothing to be refused.

The second Position. Our Christian liberty equally respects the using, and
the not using of any of Gods creatures.. 22.
There is no Creature, but a Christian man by virtue of his liberty, as he may
use it upon just occasion, so he may also upon just cause refuse it. 1 Cor. 6.12
All things are lawful for me, says S. Paul, but I will not be brought Where
he establishes this liberty in both the parts of it: liberty to use the
Creatures, or else they had not all been lawful for him; and yet liberty not
to use them, or else he had been under the power of some of them. Whence it
follows, that all the Creatures of God stand in the nature of things
indifferent: that is, such as may indifferently be either used or not used,
according as the rules of godly discretion, circumstances duly considered,
shall direct.

The third Position.. 23.
Our Christian liberty for the using or not using of the creature, may without
prejudice admit of some restraint Ab illicitis semper, quandoque, and a
licitis; I think it is S. Gregory's; A Christian must never do unlawful; nor
yet always, lawful things. St. Paul had liberty to eat flesh, and he used
that liberty, and ate flesh; yet he knew there might be some cases, wherein to
abridge himself of the use of that liberty so far, as 1 Cor. 8.13.
not to eat flesh whilst the world stands. But what those Restraints are, and
how far they may be admitted without prejudice done to that liberty, that we
may the better understand, let us go on to

The fourth Position. Sobriety may and ought to restrain us in the outward
practice of our Christian liberty. For our Dye^;. 24.
all Bread and herbs: but may we therefore with thriftless prodigality and
exquisite riot fare deliciously and sumptuously every day, under pretense of
Christian liberty? Likewise for our Apparel; all stuffs and colors, the
richest silks, and furrs, and dies, are as lawful for us, as cloth, and
leather, and sheeps russet: Christian liberty extends as well to one as
another. But do we think that liberty will excuse our pride, and vanity, and
excess, if we ruffle it out in silks and scarlets, or otherwise in stuff,
color, or fashion years, sex, calling, estate or condition? In all other
things of like nature; in our buildings, in our furniture, in our retinues, in
our disports, in our recreations, in our society, in our Marriages, in other
things: we ought as well to consider, what in Christian sobriety is meet for us
to do; as what in Christian liberty may be done. Scarce is there any one
thing, wherein the Devil puts slurrs upon us more frequently, yea and more
dangerously the uttermost of our freedom in the use of indifferent things. It
therefore concerns us so much the more, to keep a sober watch over our selves
and souls, in the use of Gods good Creatures: lest otherwise under the fair
title and habit of Christian liberty, we yield our selves over to a carnal
licentiousness.

. 25.
The fifth position. As Sobriety: so Charity also may, and ought to restrain us
in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty. Charity, I say, both to our
selves, and others. First, to our selves: for regular charity begins there.
If we are to Mat. 5.29, 30.
cut off our right hand, and to pluck out the right eye, and to cast them both
from us, when they offend us: much more then ought we to deny our selves the
use of such outward lawful things, as by experience we have found, or have
otherwise cause to suspect to be hurtful either to our bodies, or souls. So a
man may, and should refrain from meats, which may endanger his bodily health:
But how much more then from every thing, that may endanger the health of his
soul? If thou find thy self enflamed with lust, by dancing; if enraged with
choler by game; if tempted to covetousness, pride, uncleanness, superstition,
cruelty, any sin, by reason the Creatures: it is better for thee to make a
covenant with thine eyes and ears, and hands, and senses (so far as thy
condition and calling will warrant thee) not to have any thing to do with such
things: than by gratifying them therein, cast both thy self and them into hell.
Better by our voluntary abstinence, to depart with some of our liberty unto the
Creatures: than by our voluntary transgression forfeit all, and become the
Devils captives.

But Charity, though it begin at home, yet it will abroad; and not resting at
our selves,. 26.
reaches to our brethren also: of whom regard in our use of the Creatures. An
argument wherein St. Paul often enlarges himself: as in Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8.
the whole Chapters throughout, and in a great part of 1 Cor. 10. The resolution
every where is, that 1 Cor. 14.26.
all things be done to edification; that things lawful become 1 Cor. 10.23.
inexpedient, when they offend rather, than edify: that though Romans 14.20.
all things indeed are pure, yet it is evil for that man which uses them with
offense: that albeit flesh and wine and other things be lawful, yet Ibid.
verse. 21.
it is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do any thing
whereby a man's brother stumbleth, or is offended, Hitherto appertains that
great and difficult commonplace of scandal, so much debated and disputed of by
Divines. The Questions and Cases are manifold; not now to be rehearsed, much
less resolved, in particular: But the Position is plain in the general, that in
case of scandal, for our weak brothers lawful Liberty.

Besides these two, Sobriety and Charity, there is yet one restraint more,. 27.
which arises from the duty we owe to our Superiors, and from the bond of
Civil obedience: which if it had been by all men as freely admitted, as there
is just cause it should, how happy had it been for the peace of this Church?
Concerning it, let this be our Sixth position; The determination of Superiors
may and ought to restrain us in the outward exercise of our Christian liberty.
We must 1 Pet. 2.13, 15, 16.
submit our selves to every Ordinance says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. and it is
necessary we should do so: for so is the will of God, Ver. 15. Neither is it
against Christian liberty if we do so; for we are still as free as before:
rather if we do not so, we abuse our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, as
it follows there, ver. 16. And St. Paul tells us we Romans 13.5.
must needs be subject, not only for fear, because the Magistrate Ibid. ver. 4.
carries not the Sword in vain, but also for Conscience sake because Ibid.
ver. 1.
the powers that are, are ordained of God. This duty, so fully pressed and so
uniformly by these two grand Apostles, is most apparent in private societies.
In a family, the Master, or Pater familias, petty Monarch there, has authority
to prescribe to his children and servants in the use of those indifferent
things; whereto yet they, as Christians, have is much liberty as he. The
servant, though he be 1 Cor. 7.22.
the Lords freeman, yet is limited in his diet, lodging, livery, and many
other things by his Master: and he is to submit himself to his Masters
appointment in these things, though perhaps in his private affection he had
rather his Master had appointed otherwise: and perhaps withal in his private
judgment, does verily think it fitter his Master should appoint otherwise. If
any man under color of Christian liberty, 1 Timothy 6.3, 5.
teach otherwise, and exempt servants from the obedience of their Masters in
such things: S. Paul in a holy indignation inveigheth against such a man, not
without some bitterness, in the last Chapter of this Epistle, as one that is
proud, and knows nothing, as he should do, but doateth about questions and
strife of words, etc. ver. 3, 5.

Now look what power the Master has over his servants for the ordering of his
family; no doubt the same at the least,. 28.
if not much more, has the supreme Magistrate over his subjects, for the
peaceable ordering of the Commonwealth: the Magistrate being Pater as the
Master is Pater familias. Whosoever then shall interpret the determinations of
Magistrates in the use of the Creatures to be contrary to the liberty of a
Christian: or under that color shall exempt inferiors from their obedience to
such determinations, he must blame Saint Paul; nay he must blame the Holy
Ghost, and not us; if he hear from us that he is proud, and knows nothing,
and doateth about unprofitable Questions. Surely, but that experience shows
us it has been so, and the Scriptures have foretold us that 1 Cor. 11.19.
it should be so: that there should be differences, and sidings, and
part-takings in the Church: a man would wonder how it should ever sink into the
hearts and heads of sober understanding men, to deny either the power in
Superiors to ordain, or the necessity in Inferiors to obey Laws and
constitutions, so restraining us in the use of the Creatures.

. 29.
Neither let any man cherish his ignorance herein: by conceiting, as if there
were some difference to be made between Civil and Ecclesiastical Things, and
Laws, and Persons in this behalf. liberty is equal in both: the power of
Superiors for restraint equal in both, and the necessity of obedience in
Inferiors equal to both. No man has yet been able to show, nor I think ever
shall be, a real and substantial difference indeed, between them to make an
inequality. But that still, as civil Magistrates have sometimes, for just
politic respects, prohibited some trades, and manufactures, and commodities,
and enjoined other-some, and done well in both: so Church Governors may upon
good considerations, (say it be but for order and uniformities sake,) prescribe
the times, places, vestments, gestures, Ceremonial Circumstances to be used in
Ecclesiastical Offices and assemblies. As the Apostles in the first Council
holden at Jerusalem in Acts 15. laid upon the Churches of the Gentiles for a
time, a Acts 15.28, 29.
restraint from the eating of blood, and things sacrificed to Idols, and
strangled.

. 30.
Thus we see our Christian liberty unto the Creatures, may without prejudice
admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it: and namely from the
three respects, of Christian Sobriety, of Christian Charity, and of Christian
Duty and Obedience. But now in the comparing of these together; when there
seems to be a repugnancy scandal and disobedience together, when there
seems to be a repugnancy between Charity and Duty. As for example. Suppose in
a thing which simply and in it self we may lawfully according to the Liberty we
have in Christ, either use or forbear; Charity seems to lay restraint upon us
one way, our weak brother expecting we should forbear, and Duty a quite
contrary way, Authority requiring the use: in such a case what are we to do?
It is against Charity to offend a brother; and Duty, to disobey a superior.
And yet something must be done: either we must use, or not use; forbear, or not
forbear. For the untying of this knot, (which, if we will but lay things
rightly together; has not in it so much hardness as it seems to have;) let
this be our seventh Position. In the use of the Creatures, and all indifferent
things, we ought to bear a greater regard to our public Governors, than to
our private Brethren; and be more careful to obey them, than to satisfy
these, if the same course will not in some mediocrity satisfy both. Alas, that
our brethren who are contrary minded, would but with the spirit of sobriety
admit common Reason to be umpire in this case: Alas, that they would but
consider, what a world of Contradictions would follow upon the contrary
opinion, and what a world of confusions upon the contrary practice. Say what
can be said, in the behalf of a Brother; all the same, and more may be said for
a Governor. For a Governor Brother too, and something more: and Duty is
Charity too, and something more. If then I may not offend my Brother, then
certainly not my Governor: because he is my Brother too, being a man, and a
Christian, as well as the other is. And the same Charity, that binds me to
satisfy another Brother, equally binds me to satisfy this. So that, if we
go no farther, but even to the common bond of Charity, and relation of
Brotherhood; that makes them equal at the least: and therefore no reason, why
I should satisfy one that is but a Private Brother; rather than the public
Magistrate, who (that public respect set aside) is my Brother also. When the
Scales hang thus even, shall Si tantopere cavenda sunt scandala p^r vulorum,
quanto amplius praelatorum? Bernard. de Praecept. and disp.
Magistracy to common Brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common Charity in me,
be enough to cast it clear for the Magistrate? Shall a servant in a Family,
rather than offend his fellow servants, disobey his Master? And is not a double
scandal against Charity and Duty both (for Duty implies Charity) greater than
a single scandal against Charity alone? If private men will be offended at our
Obedience to public Governors; we can but be sorry for it: We Prudenter
advertat qui hoc cogitat, scandalum scandalo non been emendari. Qualis
emendatio erit, si ut aliis scandalum tollas, alios scandalizas? Bern. de
Praec. and disp.
may not redeem their offense by our disobedience. He that takes offense where
none is given, sustaineth the giver and the taker. If offense be taken at us,
there is no woe to us for it, if it do not come by us; Man. 8.7.
Woe to the man by whom the offense comes: and it does not come by us, if we
do but what is our duty to do. The Rule is certain and equitable; The respect
of private scandal cease, where lawful authority determines our liberty:
and that restraint which proceeds from special Duty, is of superior reason
to that which proceeds but from Common Charity.

Three Moderatours then of our Christian liberty to the Creatures Sobriety,
Charity, and Duty:. 31.
unto every of which a just regard ought to be had. Neither need we fear, if we
suffer Sobriety on one side, and Charity on another, and Duty on a third, thus
to abridge us in the use of our Christian liberty; that by little and little it
may be at length so pared away among them, that there may be little or nothing
left of it. To remove this suspicion; let this be our Eighth and last Position.
No respect whatsoever inward freedom of the conscience to any of the Creatures.
And this inward freedom is it, wherein especially consists our Christian
liberty to the Creature. This freedom we are all bound to maintain to the
utmost of our powers; and not to suffer our selves to be made 1 Cor. 7.23.
the servants of men, (otherwise than in Gal. 5.13.
serving one another by love:) but to Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has set us free. Now this liberty
consists in a certain resolution of judgment, and a certain persuasion of
conscience arising thence, that all the Creatures of God are in themselves
lawful, and free for us either to use or refuse, as the use nor the
forbearance of them, does of it self either commend or discommend us unto God;
or any way either please him as a part of his worship, or offend him as a
transgression of his Law. Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, says Saint Paul: 1 Cor. 8.8.
Neither if we eat, are we the better; neither the worse, if we do not eat;
nor on the contrary. Now here is the wickedness, and the usurpation of the
High Priest of Rome; that he challenges to himself a spiritual power over the
consciences of men, which is the greatest tyranny that ever was, or can be
exercised in the world: laying impurity upon the things forbids; and
annexing operative holiness, and power both satisfactory, and meritorious, to
the things he injoyneth. Which usurpation, whosoever hates not in him with a
perfect hatred, is justly unworthy of, and shamefully unthankful for, that
liberty and freedom, which the blessed Son of God has purchased for his Church.

. 32.
But this inward freedom once established in our hearts; and our consciences
fully persuaded thereof: let us thenceforth make no scruple to admit of such
just restraints in the outward exercise of it, as Christian Sobriety, Charity,
and Duty shall Liberty of a Christian is not in eating, and wearing, and doing,
what and when, and where and how he list; but in being assured that it is all
one before God, (in the things themselves barely considered,) whether he eat or
not eat, wear or not wear, do or not do, this or that: and that therefore, as
he may upon just cause eat and wear, and do; so he may upon just cause also
refuse to eat, or wear, or do this thing or that. Indeed otherwise, if we well
consider it, it were but the empty name of liberty, without the thing: for how
is it liberty, if a man be determinately bound the one ad alterum partem
contradictonis precisely: and not left indifferent and equal to either? If then
the regards of Sobriety, Charity, or Duty, do not require a forbearance, thou
know every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused: thou have thy
liberty therefore, and may according to that liberty freely use that
Creature. But if any of those former respects require thou should forbear;
thou know that the Creature still is good, and as not to be refused, so not
to be imposed: thou have thy liberty therefore here, as before, and ought
according to that liberty, freely to abstain from that Creature. Both in using
and refusing, the Conscience is still free: and as well the use as the refusal,
and as well the refusal as the use, do equally and alike belong to the true
liberty of a Christian.

We have seen now, what liberty God has allowed us: and therein we may see
also his great goodness and bounty Creatures,. 33.
and all of them good; [Every Creature of God is good;] and not envying us the
free use of any of those good Creatures; [ Nothing to be refused.] But where is
our Duty, answerable to this Bounty? Where is our thankfulness,
proportionable to such receipts? Let us not rejoice too much in the Creatures
goodness, nor glory too much in our freedom thereunto: unless there be in us,
withal, a due care and conscience to perform the Condition, which God
requires in lieu thereof; neither can their goodness do us good, nor our
freedom exempt us from evil. And that condition is, the Duty of expressed in
the last clause of the verse [ If it be received with thanksgiving.] Forget
this proviso, and we undo all again, that we have hitherto done, and destroy*
all that we have already established concerning both the goodness of the
Creature, and our liberty in the use thereof: for without thanksgiving, neither
can we partake their goodness, nor use our own liberty, with comfort. Of this
therefore in the next place: wherein the weight of the duty considered,
together with our backwardness thereunto, if I shall spend the remainder of my
time, and meditations; I hope my labor (by the blessing of God, and your
prayers,) shall not be unprofitable, allowance in your judgments, at least in
your Charity Excuse. To speak of which Duty of thanksgiving in the full extent,
and by way of common place; were to enter into a spacious field, indeed a very
sea of matter without bottom. For mine own ease therefore and yours, I shall
confine my self to that branch of it, which is most immediately pertinent to my
Text, viz. that tribute of Thanks, which we owe unto God for the free use of
his good Creatures: forbearing to meddle with the other branches thereof,
otherwise than as they fall within the reach of this, by way either of
Proportion Inference.

And first we are to know, that by Thanksgiving in my Text is not meant only
that subsequent act,. 34.
whereby we render unto God praise and thanks for the Creature, after we have
received it, and enjoyed the benefit of it; which yet is most properly
Thanksgiving: but we are to extend the word farther, even to those precedent
acts of prayer and Benediction, whereby we beseech God to the Creature, and to
sanctify the use of it to us. For what in this verse is called Thanksgiving,
is in the next verse comprehended under the name of Verse. 5. hic.
Prayer. And we shall accordingly find in the Scriptures elsewhere, the words
(...), and (...), the one whereof signifies properly Blessing, the other
Thanksgiving, used oftentimes promiscuously the one for the other. The blessing
which our blessed Savior Jesus Christ used at the consecration of the
Sacramental bread, Luke 22.17, 19.
S. Luke and 1 Cor. 11.24.
S. Paul express by the word (...): Man. 26.27.
S. Matthew. and Mark 14.22, 23.
S. Mark, by (...). And the Prayer of blessing, used before the eating of
common bread, is by Mat. 15.36. Mark 8.6. John 6.11. Acts 27.35.
every of the four Evangelists in some places described by the word (...): And
by three of them in other some places, by (...). And the name See Casaub.
ezercit. 16. in Baron. sect. 33.
(...) is sometimes found in the writings of the Ancients, for the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; the more usual name whereof is (...), or the holy Eucharist.
Mat. 14.19. Mark 6.41. Luke 9.16.
And we in our ordinary manner of speech, call as well the Blessing before
meat, as the Thanksgiving after, by the common name of Grace, or saying of
Grace. Both these then together, Grace before meat, and Grace after meat; a
Sacrifice of Prayer before we use any of the good Creatures of God, and a
Sacrifice of Praise after the Blessing wherewith we bless the Creature in the
Name of God, and the Blessing wherewith we bless the Name of God for the
Creature: both these I say together, is the just extent of that Thanksgiving,
whereof my Text speaks, and we are now to entreat.

. 35.
Concerning Meats and Drinks, unto which our Apostle has special reference in
this whole passage: this duty of Thanksgiving, has been ever held so congruous
to the partaking thereof, that long and ancient custom has established it in
the common practice of Christians; not only with inward thankfulness of heart
Gods goodness to them therein, but also outwardly to express the same in a
vocal solemn form of Blessing or Thanksgiving, that which we call Grace, or
saying of Grace. Which very phrases, whether or no they have ground, (as to me
it seems they have,) from those words of our Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 10.30.
( For if I by Grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of, for that for which
I give thanks.) I say, howsoever it be with the phrase; sure we are the thing
it self has sufficient ground from the examples of Christ, and of his holy
Apostles. From whom, the custom of giving Thanks at meals, seems to have
Christ himself we read often, and in every of the Evangelists, that he blessed
and gave thanks in the name of himself and the people, before meat; in the 14.
and 15. of Mat. 14.19. and 15.36.
Matthew, in 6. and 8. of Mark 6.41. and 8.6*
Mark, in 9. of Luke 9.16.
Luke, and in 6. of Joh. 6.8.
John. And in Matthew after meat also, when Supper was ended, he and his
Disciples (...). Mat. 26.30.
sang an hymn, before they departed the room. And S. Luke relates of S. Paul,
Acts 27. when he and his company in the ship, who were well toward 300 persons,
were to refresh themselves with food after a long fast, that he took bread, and
first Acts 27.35.
Gave thanks to God in the presence of them all, and then after brake it, and
began to eat: yea S. Paul himself so speaks of it, Romans 14. as of the known
practice of the Church among Christians of all sorts, Weak, and Strong. He that
was strong in the faith, and knew the liberty he had in Christ to eat
indifferently of all kinds of meats, thanks for all. The weak Christian too,
who made scruple of some kinds of flesh or other meats, and contented himself
with herbs and such like things, yet gave God thanks for his herbs, and for
whatsoever else he durst eat. Romans 14.6.
He that eats, eats to the Lord (says he there, at verse 6.) for he gives
God thanks: and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God
thanks too. Notwithstanding they differed in their judgments and opinions, and
consequently in their practice, concerning the lawful or unlawful use of some
meats: yet they consented most sweetly, and agreed judgment and practice, in
the performance of this religious service of Thanksgiving.

So then giving of Thanks for our meats and drinks before and after meals, in
an outward and audible form, is an ancient,. 36.
a commendable, an Apostolical, a Christian practice: ordinarily requisite as
an outward testimony of the inward thankfulness of the heart; and therefore
not to be omitted ordinarily, neither but in some few cases. There being the
like necessity of this duty, in regard of inward thankfulness, as there is of
vocal prayer, in regard of inward Devotion; and of outward Confession, in
regard of inward belief: and look what exceptions those other outward duties
may admit; mutandis mutatis, and in their proportion, are to be admitted here.
But not only meats and drinks, but every other good Creature also of God,
whereof we may have use, ought to be received with a due measure of
thankfulness. And if in these things also, so often as in good discretion it
may seem expedient for the advancing of Gods glory, the benefiting of his
Church, or the quickening of our own Devotion, we shall make some outward and
sensible expression of the thankfulness of our hearts for them: we shall
therein do an acceptable service unto God, and comfortable to our own souls.
For, for this cause God instituted of old among feasts and sacrifices, together
with the Sanctifying of the first fruits, and of the first born, and diverse
other ordinances of that nature: as on the other side to be fit remembrancers
unto them of their duty of thankfulness; so to be as well good testimonies,
and fit expressions of their performance of that duty.

37.
But if not always, the outward manifestation thereof; yet God inward
thankfulness of the heart, for the use of his good creatures. Col. 3.17.
Whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks unto God and the Father by him, Col. 3. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful for notbing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God, Phil. 4. Psalm. 103.1, 2.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, (says David in Psalm. 103.) and all that is within
me, praise his holy name; Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. Forget not all his benefits: as much as to say, by an ordinary
Hebraism, forget not any of all his benefits. He summoneth all that is in him,
to all he has from him: he thought it was necessary for him, not to receive
any of the good Creatures of God, without Thanksgiving. Which necessity of
Thanksgiving will yet more appear; if we consider it, either as an act of
Justice, or as an act of Religion: as it is indeed and truly both.

. 38.
It is first, an Act of Justice. The very law of Nature, which contains the
first seeds and principles of Justice, binds every man that receives a
benefit, to a thankful acknowledgement of it first, and then withal ( ability
and opportunity supposed,) to some kind of retribution. The best Philosophers
therefore make gratitude Cic. 2. de invent. 13. and 36.
a branch of the Law of Nature; and so account of it as of a thing, than which
there is Quid tam contra officium, quam non reddere quod acceperis? Ambro. 1.
Offi 31. Nullum officium refe^enda gratia magis necessarium ^st. Cic. 1. de
Offic.
not any office of virtue more necessary: as nor any thing on the contrary more
detestable, than Ingratitude. You cannot lay a Erunt homicidae, tyranni, fures,
adulteri, raptores, sacrilegi, proditores: infra ista omnia ingratus est.
Senec. 1. de benef. 10.
fouler imputation upon a man, nor by any accusations in the world render him
more odious to the opinions of all men; than by charging him with
unthankfulness. Ingratum dicas, omnia dixeris: do but say, he is an
unthankful wretch; you need say no more, you can say no worse, by any mortal
creature. Verily, every benefit carries with it the force of an obligation;
and we all confess it: if we receive but some bound to him for it. Indeed when
we say so; we often speak it but of course, and think it not: but yet when we
do so; we speak more truth than we are aware of. For, if it be in truth a
kindness in him, we are in truth and equity bound to him thereby. The common
saying is not without ground, Qui beneficium accepit, libertatem vendidit. Some
men therefore refuse kindnesses and courtesies at other men's hands; because
forsooth they will not be beholden to them. Which though it be a perverse and
unjust course, and indeed a high degree of unthankfulness, unthankfulness, as
well in Non solum is gratus debet esse, qui accepit beneficium; verum etiam is,
cui potestas accipiendi fuit. Cic. de Provinc. Consul. Tam teneor dono, quam si
demittar onustus. Horat. 1. Epist. 7.
not accepting a kind offer, as in not requiting a good turn;) and therefore
also a high degree of folly, (for it is a foolish thing for a man, out of the
bare fear of unthankfulness one way, to become wilfully unthankful another?)
though I say, it be a fond and perverse course the equity of that principle of
Nature and Justice, which binds men that receive benefits, ad (...), to a
necessity of requital and retribution. Truth it is; to God our heavenly Father
first, and then to our earthly Sirac. 7.28.
Parents, none of us can reddere paria: none is able to make a full requital to
either of them; especially not to God. But that freeth us not from the debt of
thankfulness, as not to our Parents, so neither to God: it rather binds us
the faster thereunto. The same Law of Nature, which teaches us to requite a
good turn to the uttermost, where there is wherewithal to do it, and ability
or opportunity, to endeavor by the best convenient means we can to testify at
least the thankfulness of our hearts, and our unfeigned desires of requital.
Which In beneficio reddendo, plus animus, quam census operatur: magisque
praeponderat benevolentia, quam possibilitas referendi muneris. Ambros. 1.
offic. 32.
desire and endeavor, if every ingenuous man, and our earthly Parents, do
accept of, where they find it, as of the deed it self: can we doubt of Ut
desint vires, tamen est laudanda voluntas: Hac ego contentos auguror esse Deos.
Ovid. de Pont.
Gods acceptance of our unfeigned desire herein, though infinitely and without
all proportion short of a just requital and retribution? David knew right well,
that when a man has done all he can, he is but Luke 17.10
an unprofitable servant, and Job 22.^.
cannot be profitable unto God, and his neighbors; and that Ps. 16.2, 3. Nulla
ex nobis utilitas Deo speranda est. Senec. 4. de ben. cap. 3. Nec ille collato
eget, nec nos (...) quicquam confer possumus. Ibid. cap. 9.
his goodness, though it might be pleasurable to the Saints that are on the
earth, yet it could not extend unto the Lord. All this he knew: and yet knowing
withal that God accepts the will for the deed, and the desire for the
performance; he doubted not to raise up his language to that key, in Psalm. 116.
Quid retribuam? What requital shall I make? What shall I render unto the Lord,
for all his benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord. This thankful heart he knew God valued as a
Sacrifice: nay, Psalm. 11^.12, 13.
preferred before Sacrifices. For having rejected Verse 8. (...). X^noph* 1.
(...).
[ I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, etc.] He exacteth this at Verse.
14. of Psalm. 50. [ Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc.] God respects not so
much the Calves out of our stalls, or the fruits from off our grounds: as these
Psalm 50.8, 14.
Vitulos labiorum, these calves of our lips, as the Prophet; and these Osee
14.2.
Fructus labiorum, these fruits of our lips, as the Apostle calls them. [ Let
us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his Name, Heb. 13.] More than this, in his Mercy he will
not desire: less than this, in all reason we cannot give. Thankfulness is an
Act of Justice: we are unjust, if we receive his good Creatures, and not return
him thanks for them.

It is not only an Act of Justice: it is an act of Religion too; and a branch
of that service whereby we do God worship and honor.. 39.
Heb. 13.15.
Psalm. 50.23.
Who so offers praise, he honors me, Psalm. 50. ver. last. Now honor we
give unto God, it all redoundeth to our selves at the last with plentiful
advantage; 1 Samuel 2.30*
[ Them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.] Here then is the fruit of
this religious Act of thanksgiving; that it sanctifies unto us the use of the
good Creatures of God, which is the very reason Saint Paul gives of this
present speech in the next verse. Every Creature of God is Good, says he here,
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving: for, says he
there, Ver. 5. hic.
it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Understand not by the word of
God there, his written word, or the Scriptures; as some yet give the sense, not
without violence to the the words, and pertinently to the drift and scope of
our Apostle therein, understand rather the word of his eternal counsel and
decree, and of his power and providence, whereby he orders and commands his
Creatures in there several kinds, to afford us such service and comforts, as he
has thought good. Which sanctifying of the Creatures by the word of Gods
decree and providence, implies two things: the own, respecting the Creatures,
that they do their kindly office to us; the other, respecting us, holy comfort
from them. For the plainer understanding of both which; instance shall be given
in the Creatures appointed for our nourishment: and what shall be said of them,
we may conceive of, and apply unto, every other Creature in the proper kind
thereof.

. 40.
First then, the Creatures appointed for food are sanctified by the word of God;
when together with the Creatures, he gives his blessing, to go along with it:
by his powerful word, Commanding it, and by that command enabling it, to feed
us. Which is the true meaning of that speech in Deuteronomy. 8. alleged by our Savior
against the Deuteronomy. 8.3. Matthew. 4.4.
[ Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.] Alas, what is Bread to nourish us without his word? unless he
say the word, and command the Bread to do it, there is no more sap or strength
in Bread, than in stones. The power and nutritive virtue which the Bread has,
it has from his decree; because the word is already gone out of his mouth,
that Psalm. 104 15.
bread should strengthen man's heart. As in the first Creation, when the
Creatures were produced in actu primo, had their beings given them, and natural
powers and faculties bestowed on them, all that was done by the word of Gods
powerful decree, Psalm. 33.9.
[ He spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded, ] So in all their
operations in actu secundo, when they do at any time exercise those natural
faculties, and do those Offices for which they were created; all this is still
done, by the same powerful word and decree of God, Heb. 1.3.
[ He upholdeth all things by the word of his power.] As we read of bread, so
we Levit. 26.26. Psalm. 105.16. Ezekiel. 4.16. Firmamentum panis. Vulg.
the staff of bread: God sometimes threatens he will break the staff of bread.
What is that? Bread indeed is the staff of our strength; it is the very stay
and prop of our lives: if God break this staff, and deny us bread, we are gone.
But that is not all, bread is our staff: but what is the staff of bread?
Verily, the Word of God, blessing our bread, and commanding it to feed us, is
the staff of this staff: sustaining that virtue in the bread, whereby it
sustaineth us. If God break this staff of bread, if he withdraw his blessing
from the bread, if by his countermaund he inhibit or restrain the virtue of the
bread; we are as far to seek with bread, as without it. If sanctified with Gods
word of blessing; a little pulse Dan. 1.12, 15.
and water, hard and homely fare shall feed Daniel as fresh, and fat, and fair,
as the Kings dainties shall his Companions: a 3 Kin. 19.6, 8*
cake and a cruse of water, shall suffice Eliah nourishment enough to walk in
the strength thereof forty days and nights: a few Joh. 6.9, 12.
barley loaves and small fishes shall multiply to the satisfying of many
thousands, eat while they will. But if Gods Word and Blessing be wanting; Genesis
41.20, 21.
the lean Kine may eat up the Fat, and be as thin, and hollow, and ill-liking
as before: and we may, as the Prophet Haggai speaks, Agg. 1.6.
eat our fills and not be filled.

This first degree of the Creatures sanctification by the word of God,. 41.
is a common and ordinary blessing upon the Creatures; whereof, as of the
Matthew. 5.45.
light and dew of Heaven, the wicked partake as well as the godly, and the
thankless as the thankful. But there is a second degree also, beyond this;
which is proper and peculiar to the Godly. And that is, when God not only by
the word of his Power bestows a blessing upon the Creature: but also causes
the Echo of that word to sound in our hearts by the voice of his Holy spirit,
and gives us a sensible taste of his goodness to us therein: filling our
hearts not only Acts 14.17.
with that joy and gladness, which arises from the experience of the effect,
viz. the refreshing of our natural strength, but also joy and gladness more
spiritual and sublime than that, arising from the contemplation of the prime
cause, viz. the favor of God toward us in the face of his Son; that which
David calls the Psalm. 4.6.
light of his countenance. For as it is the kind welcome at a Friends Table,
that makes the cheer good, rather than the quaintness or variety of the
dishes, Ovid. Metamorph. 8.
( Super omnia vultus Accessere boni;) so as that Pro. 15.17.
a dinner of green herbs with love and kindness, is better entertainment than a
stalled Ox with bad looks: so the light of Gods favorable countenance,
shining upon Psalm. 4.6, 7.
puts more true gladness into our hearts; than does the corn, and the wine,
and the oil themselves, or any other outward thing that we do or can partake.
Now this sanctified and holy and comfortable use of the Creatures, arises also
from the word of Gods decree; even as the former degree did: but not from the
same decree. That former issued from the decree of common providence; and so
belonged unto all, as that Providence is common to all. But this later degree
proceeds from that special word of Gods decree, whereby for the merits of
Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 15.45.
the second Adam, he removes from the Creature that Genesis 3.17.
curse, wherein it was wrapped through the sin of the first Adam. And in this
the wicked have no portion; as being out of Christ: so as they cannot partake
of Gods Creatures, with any solid or sound comfort; and so the Creatures
remain, (in this degree) unsanctified unto them. For this reason, the
Scriptures style the Heb. 12.23.
Faithful Primogenitos, Deuteronomy. 21.17.
a double portion: and Romans 4.13.
Haeredes mundi, heirs of the world; as if none but they had any good right
thereunto. And S. Paul deriveth our Title to the Creatures, from God, but by
Christ; 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
[ All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods:] As if these
things were none of theirs, who are none of Christ's. And in the verse before my
Text, he says of meats, that Verse. 3. hic.
God has created them to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe,
and know the truth: as if those that wanted faith and saving knowledge, did but
usurp the bread they eat. And indeed it is certain, the wicked right to the
Creatures of God, in such ample sort, as the Godly have. A kind of Right they
have, and we may not deny it them; given them by Gods unchangeable ordinance at
the Creation: which being a branch of that part of Gods Image in man, which was
of natural and not of supernatural grace, might be, and was foulely defaced by
sin; but was not, neither could be wholly lost, as has been See before. 14.
already in part declared. A Right then they have: but such a right, as
reaching barely to the use, cannot afford unto the user true comfort, or found
peace of Conscience, in such use, of the Creatures. For, though nothing be in,
and of it self unclean; Every Creature of God is good: yet to them that are
unclean, ex accidenti every Creature is unclean and polluted, because it is not
thus sanctified unto them by the Word of God. And the very true cause of all
this, is the impurity of their hearts, by reason of unbelief. The Holy Ghost
expressly assigns this cause, Tit. 1.15.
To the pure all things are pure: but to them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure: but even their mind and Conscience is defiled. As a Sincerum
est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis acescit. Horat. 1 Epist. 2.
nasty Vessel sowreth all that is put into it: so a Conscience not Fide
purificans* corda. Acts 15.9.
purified by faith, casts pollution upon the best of Gods Creatures.

But what is all this to the may some say: or what to the point?. 24.
What is all this to the Duty of Thanksgiving? Much every manner of way: or
else blame Saint Paul of impertinency; whose discourse should be incoherent and
unjoynted, if what I have now last said were beside the Text. For since the
sanctification of the Creature to our use, depends upon the powerful and
good word of God, blessing it unto us: that duty must needs be necessary to a
sanctified use of the Creature, without which we can have no fair assurance
unto our consciences, that that word of blessing is proceeded out of the mouth
of God. And such is this duty of Thanksgiving: appointed by God, as the
ordinary means, and proper instrument, to procure that word of blessing from
him. When we have performed this sincerely and faithfully; our hearts may then,
with a most cheerful, but yet humble confidence, say Amen, So be it: in full
assurance that GOD will join his Fiat to ours; Crown our Amen with his; and to
our So be it of Faith and Hope, add his of Power and Command: blessing his
Creatures unto him for them; and sanctifying their use to our comfort, when we
magnify his goodness for the receipt. You see therefore how, as unseparable
and undivided companions, the Apostle joyneth these two together: the one, as
the Cause, the other, as the Means of the Creatures sanctification: [ It is
sanctified by the word of God, and Prayer:] By the Word of Gods powerful
decree, as the sole efficient, and sufficient Cause: and by the Prayer of
Thanksgiving (for such Prayer he means, as either has Thanksgiving joined
with it, or else is a part of Thanksgiving, Thanksging a part of it:) by Prayer
I say and Thanksgiving, as the proper Means to obtain it. This is the blessed
effect of Thanksgiving, as it is an Act of Religion. And thus you have heard
two grand Reasons, concluding the necessity of Thanskgiving unto God, in the
receiving and using of his good Creatures. The one, considering it as an Act of
Justice: because it is in the only acceptable discharge of that obligation of
debt, wherein we stand bound unto God for the free use of so many good
Creatures. The Other, considering it is an Act of Religion: because it is the
most proper and convenient means to procure from the mouth of God a Blessing,
to sanctify the Creatures to the uses of our lives, and to the comfort of our
consciences. This Thanksgiving being an Act both of Justice and Religion:
whenever we either receive or use any good Creature of GOD; without this, we
are unjust in the Receipt, and in the Use profane. It is now high time, we
should from the premises infer something for our farther use and Edification.

And the first Inference may be, shall I say for Trial; or may I not rather
say, for Conviction? since we shall learn thereby,. 43.
not so much to examine our Thankfulness, how true it is; as to discover our
unthankfulness, how foul it is. And how should Unjustice and Profaneness,
when we shall find our selves guilty of so many failings in the performance of
such a necessary Duty both of Justice and Religion? But we cannot abide to hear
on this ear: We unthankful to God? far be that from us: we scarce ever speak
of any thing we have, or have done, or suffered; but we send this clause after
it, I thank God for And how are we unthankful, seeing we do thus? It is a true
saying, which one says; Thanking of God, is a thing all men do, and yet none
do, as they should. It is often in udo, but seldom in imo: it swimmeth often
upon the tip of our tongues, but seldom sinketh into the bottom of our
hearts. I thank God for it, is, as many use it, rather a Usu quodam magis quam
sensu vel affectu, personare in ore multorum gratiarum actionem advertere est.
Bern. in Cant. sermon. 13.
Byword, than a Thanksgiving: so far from being an acceptable service to God,
and a magnifying of his name; that it is rather it self a grievous sin, and a
taking of his holy name in vain. But if we will consider duly and aright, not
so much how near we draw unto God with our lips, as how far our hearts are from
him when we say so: we shall see what small reason we have, upon such a slender
lip-labor to think our selves discharged either of the bond of thankfulness,
or from the sin of unthankfulness. Quid verba audiam, facta cum videam! Though
we say, I thank God, a thousand and a thousand times over, yet if in our Deeds,
we bewray foul unthankfulness unto him, it is but Protestatio contraria facto:
and we do thereby but make our selves the greater and deeper liars.

. 44.
Every sin is spacious and diffused, and spreads into a number of branches:
this of Ingratitude not least. Yet we will do our Recognition, Estimation,
Retribution. He that has received a benefit from another, he ought first,
faithfully to acknowledge it; secondly, to value it worthily; thirdly, to
endeavor really to requite it. And who so fails in any of these, is (so far
as he fails) unthankful more or less. And do not some of us fail in all; and
do not all of us fail in some of these? For our more assured, whether
Examination, or Conviction; let us a little consider how we have and do behave
our selves in each of the three respects; In every two kinds; and so we shall
have six degrees of Ingratitude: still holding our selves as close as we can to
the present point, concerning our Thankfulness or Unthankfulness, as it
respects the use we have of, and the benefit we have from, the good Creatures
of God.

. 45.
And first, we fail in our Recognition, and in the due acknowledgement of Gods
blessings. And therein first, and let that be the first degree of our
unthankfulness; in letting so many blessings of his slip by us, without any
regard, or so much as notice taken of them: Whereas knowledge must ever go
before acknowledgement, Apprehension before Confession. There is a twofold
Confession to be made unto God: the Confessio gemina est: aut Peccati, aut
Laudis. Aug. exp. 2. in Ps. 29. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 93.
one of our sins; the other, of goodness. That belongs to Repentance; this
to Thankfulness. Both of them consist in an Acknowledgement: and in both, the
acknowledgement is most faithful, when it is most punctual: and in both, we
come to make default, for want of taking such particular information, as we
ought, and might. In our Repentance, we content our selves commonly with a
general Confession of our sins: or at the most, possibly sometimes make
acknowledgment of some one or a few grosser falls, which gall our Consciences,
or which the world cries shame of: and if we do that, we think we have made
an exellent Confession. So in our Thanksgivings, general acknowledgement, of
Gods goodness and mercies to us; or sometimes possibly recount some one or a
few notable and Beneficia quaedam magnitudo non patitur excidere: sed^umero
pluria, and temporibus diversa effluunt. Senec. 3. de benef. 5.
eminent favors, such as most affect us, or whereof the world takes notice:
and this is all we do. But we do indeed in both these, deal unfaithfully with
God, and with our own souls. If we desire to show our selves truly penitent, we
should take knowledge (so far as possibly we could) of all our sins, small and
great (at least the several species and kinds of them, for the inviduals are
infinite:) and bring them all before GOD in the Confession of Repentance. And
thankful; we should take notice (so far as possibly we could, and in the
species at least,) of all Gods blessings, small and great; and bring them all
before him in the Confession of praise. We should even Ioh. 6.12*
Colligere fragmenta, gather up the very broken meats, and let nothing be lost,
those Colligere fragmenta, ne pe^^ant, id est nec minima beneficia oblivisci.
Bernard in Cant. sermon. 51.
small petty blessings, as we account them, and as we think, scarce worth the
observation. Did we so: how many baskets full might be taken up, which we daily
suffer to fall to the ground, and be lost? Like Swine under the Oaks, we grouze
up the Akecornes, and snouk about for more, and eat them the tree that shed
them. Every crum we put in our mouths, every drop wherewith we cool our
tongues, the very air we continually breath in and out through our throats and
nostrils, a thousand other such things whereof the very commonness takes away
the observation, we receive from his fullness: and many of these are renewed
every morning, and some of these are renewed every minute: And yet how seldom
do we so much as take notice of many of these things? How justly might that
complaint the unthankful Israelites, be taken up against us? Esaias. 1.3.
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel does not
know, my people does not consider.

The second degree of our Unthankfullness to God, and that also for want of
faithful Acknowledgement, is:. 46.
in ascribing the good things he has given us to our own deserts, or
endeavors, or to any of Creature, either in part or in whole, but only to him.
Such things indeed we have, and we know it too (perhaps but too well) but we
bestirred our selves for them, we beat our brains for them, we got them out of
the fire, and swet for them; we may thank our good friends, or we may thank our
good selves for them. Thus do we Hab. 1.16.
Sacrifise unto our own nets, and burn incense to our drag, as if by them our
portion were fat, and our meat plenteous. And as Luke 13.1.
Pilate mingled the blood of the Galileans with their own sacrifices: so into
these spiritual Psalm. 50.14.
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving, which we offer unto GOD, we infuse a quantity of
our own our own wit and forecast, of our own power and friends, still some one
thing or other of our own; and so rob God, if not of all, yet of so much of his
honor. This kind of unthankfulness God both foresaw and forbad in his own
people, Deu. 8. warning them to take heed, verse 17. lest when they abounded in
all plenty and prosperity, Deuteronomy. 8.14.17.
They should forget the Lord, and say in their hearts, my power and the might
of my hand has gotten me this wealth. The very saying or thinking of this was
a forgetting of God. Ibid. 18.
But (says Moses there) Thou shall remember the Lord thy God: for it is he
that gives thee power to get wealth, etc. The warn-word against
unthankfulness. All Est super bia, and de^ictum maximum, uti datis tanquam
inuatis; and in acceptis beneficiis gloriam usu^pare beneficii. Bernard de
dilig. Deo.
glorifying in our selves, all vain boasting of the gifts of God, or bearing
our selves high upon any of his blessings, is a kind of smothering of the
receipt; and argues in us a kind of loathness to make a free acknowledgement
of the Givers bounty: and so is tainted with a spice of unthankfulness in this
degree. 1 Cor. 4.7.
If thou did receive it; why do thou glory, as if thou had not received
it? says my Apostle elsewhere. He that glorifieth in that, for which he even
gives thanks; does by that glorying, as much as he dares, reverse his thanks.
The Pharisee, who Luke 18.11.
thanked God he was not like other men; did even then, and by those very
thanks, but bewray his own wretched unthankfulness.

Besides a faithful Recognition, in freely acknowledging the benefit
received;. 47.
there is required unto thankfulness a just Estimation of the benefit, in
valuing it, as it deserves: Wherein we make default, if either we value it not
at all, or under value it. The third Degree then of our Ingratude unto God, is
the Forgetfulness of his benefits. When we so easily Apparet illum non saepe
de reddendo cogitasse, cui obrepsit oblivio. Senec. 3. de ben. 1. Perveniunt eo
quo, ut ego existimo, pessimus quisque and ingratissimus pervenit; ut
obliquiscantur. Ibid. 5.
forget them, it is a sign we set naught by them. Every man readily remembers
those things, he makes any reckoning of: insomuch that although old age be
forgetful, yet Nec vero quenquam senum audivi oblitum, quo loco thesaurum
ob^uisset: Omnia, quae curant meminerunt: vadimonia constituta, qui sibi,
quibus ipsi debeant. Cic. de Senect.
Tully says, He never knew any man so old, as to forget where he had hid his
gold, or to whom Deuteronomy. 8. Moses warns the people, (as you heard) to Deuteronomy.
8.14.
beware, lest being full they should forget the Lord that had fed them: and
David stirs up his soul in Psalm. 103. to Ps. 103.2.
bless the Lord, and not to forget any of his benefits. We all condemn
Pharaohs Butler of unthankfulness to Joseph, (and so we may well do; for he
afterward Genesis 41.9
condemned himself for it:) in that having received comfort from Joseph, when
they were Fellow Prisoners, he yet Genesis 40.23.
forgot him when he was in place where, and had power and opportunity to
requite him. How inexcusable are we, that so condemn him? seeing wherein we
judge him* we condemn forgot Joseph, who was but a man like himself: we forget
God. He had received but one good turn: we many. It is like he had none about
him to put him in mind of Joseph; for as for Joseph himself, we know he lay by
it, and could have no access: we have God himself daily rubbing up our
memories, both by his word and Ministers, and also by new and fresh benefits.
He, as soon as a fair occasion presented it self, confessed his fault, and
remembered Joseph; thereby showing his former forgetfulness to have proceeded
rather from negligence than Wilfulness: we after so many remembrances and
blessed opportunities, still continue in a kind of wilful and confirmed
resolution, still to forget. Well may we forget these private and smaller
blessings; when we begin to grow but too forgetful of those great and public
Deliverances GOD has wrought for us. Two great Deliverances in the memory of
many of us, has God in his singular mercy wrought for us of this Land; such as
I think, take both together, no Christian age or Land can parallel: One
formerly, from a foreign Invasion abroad; another since that, from an hellish
Conspiracy at home: both such, as we would all have thought, when they
forgotten. And yet, as if this were Terra Oblivionis, the land where all things
are forgotten, how does the memory of them fade away, and they by little and
little grow into forgetfulness! We have lived to see Eighty-eight almost quite
forgotten, and buried in a perpetual Amnesty, ( God be blessed who has
graciously prevented, what we feared herein!) God grant that we, nor ours, ever
live to see Novembers fifth forgotten, or the solemnity of that day silenced.

A fourth Degree of unthankfulness is, in undervaluing Gods. 48.
A fault whereof the murmuring Israelites were often guilty: who although they
were brought into a (e) good Land, flowing with milk and honey, and abounding
in all good things both for necessity and delight; yet as it is in Psalm. 106.24.
Psalm. 106. They thought scorn of that pleasant Land: and were ever and anon,
and upon every light occasion repining against God and against Moses; always
receiving good things from discontent at something or other. And where is there
a man among us that can wash his hands in innocence, and discharge himself
altogether from the guilt of unthankfulness in this kind? Where is there a man
so constantly and equally content with his portion; that he has not sometimes
or other either grudged at the leanness of his own, or envied at the fatness
of another lot? We deal with our God herein, as Hiram did with Solomon.
Solomon gave him twenty Cities in the land of Galilee: but because the Country
was low and deep (and so in all likelihood the more fertile for that,) Reg.
29.11, 13.
they pleased him not; and Cabul; that is to say, dirty. So we are witty to
cavil and to quarrel at Gods gifts; if they be not in every respect such, as we
in our vain hopes, or fancies, have ideated unto our selves. This is dirty;
that barren: this too solitary; that too populous: this ill-wooded; that
ill-watered; a third ill-ayred; a fourth ill-neighboured. This (...) Jude 16.
grudging and repining at our portions, and faulting of Gods gifts, so frequent
among us, argues but too much the unthankfulness of our hearts.

The last thing required unto Thankfulness, (after a faithful Acknowledgement
of the receipt,. 49.
and a just Valuation of the thing received:) is Retribution and Requital. And
that must be real, if it be possible: but at the least, it must be votal, in
the Desire and Endeavor. And herein also (as in both the former,) there may be
a double-fail: if, having received a benefit, we requite it either not at all,
or ill. Not to have any care at all of Requital, is the fifth degree of
Unthankfulness. To a Requital (as you See before,. 38.
heard) Justice binds us: either to the party himself that did us the good
turn, if it may be, and be either expedient or needful; or at the least, to
his. David retained such a grateful memory of Ionathans his friends, that he
might requite Ionathans love by some kindness to them. [ 2 Samuel 9.1.
Is there yet any left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for
Jonathans sake?] and surely he were a very unthankful wretch, that having been
beholden to the Father, as much as his life and livelihood is worth, would
suffer the Son of so well-deserving a Father to perish for want of his help;
and would not strain himself a little even beyond his power (if need were) to
succor him. Indeed to God, as we heard, we can render nothing Requital: we
must not so much as think of that. But yet somewhat we must do, to express the
true and unfeigned thankfulness of our hearts: which, though it be nothing
less, yet it pleases him for Christ's sake to interpret as a Requital. And
that to Him, and His: To Him, by seeking his glory; His, by the fruits of our
Christian Charity. We adventure our states and lives, to maintain the honor
and safety of our Kings in their just wars; from whom perhaps we never
received particular favor or benefit, other than the common benefit and
protection of subjects. And are we not then foulely ungrateful to God, to
whose goodness we owe all that we have or are; if for the advancement of his
glory, and the maintenance of his truth, we make dainty to spend the best and
most precious things we have, yea though it be the dearest heart-bloud in our
bodies? But how much more ungrateful, if we think much, for his sake to
unthankfulness, than to grudge him a small, who has given us all? In these,
yet peaceable times of our Church and state (God be thanked) we are not much
put to it: but who knows how soon a heavy day of trial may come, (we all know
it cannot come sooner, or heavier, than our sins have deserved;) wherein woe,
woe to our unthankfulness, if we do not freely and cheerfully render unto GOD
of those things he has given us, whatsoever he shall require of us. But yet
even in these peaceable times there want not opportunities, whereon to exercise
our Thankfulness; and to requital: though not to him, yet to his. To his
servants and children in their afflictions; to his poor distressed members in
their manifold necessities. These opportunities we never did, we never shall
want, according to our Saviors prediction, (or rather promise,) Mat. 26.11.
Pauperes semper habebitis, The poor you shall always have with you, as my
Deputy-receivers; but me (in person) ye shall not have always. And what we do,
or not do, to Mat. 25.50
these, whom he thus constituted his Deputies, he takes it as done or not done
unto himself. If when God has given us prosperity, distressed, and comfort
them not; or victuals, to perish, and feed them not; or clothing, to starve,
and cover them not, or power, to be oppressed, and rescue them not; or ability
in any kind, to want it, and relieve them not: Let us make what shows we will,
let us make what profession we will of our thankfulness to God, what we deny
to these, we deny to him; and as we deal with these, if his case were theirs,
(as he is pleased to make their case his,) we would so deal with him. And what
is to be unthankful, if this be not?

And yet behold unthankfulness, more and greater than this:. 50.
sixth, and last, and highest, and worst degree. We requite him evil for good.
In that other we were unjust; not to requite him at all: but injurious also in
this, to requite him with ill. It sticks upon King Ioash as a brand of infamy
for ever, that he slew 2 Chr. 24.22, 23.
Zachary the son of Iehoiada the High Priest, who had been true and faithful
to him both in the getting of the kingdom, and in the administration of it:
recorded to Chron. 24. Thus Ioash the King remembered not the kindness which
Iehoiada the Father had done him, but slew his son: and when he died, he
said; The Lord look upon it, and require it. And it was not long, before the
Lord did indeed look upon it, and require it: the very next verse begins to
lay down the vengeance that God brought upon him for it. And yet compared with
ours, Ioash his ingratitude was nothing. Iehoiada was bound as a subject to
assist the right heir: God is not bound to us; he is a debtor to none. Ioash
had right to the Crown before Iehoiada set it on his head: we have no right at
all to the Creature, but by Gods gift. Ioash though he dealt not well with the
son, yet he evermore esteemed the father so long as he lived, and was advised
by him in the affairs of his Kingdom: we rebel even against God himself, and
cast all his counsels behind our backs. Ioash slew the son; but he was a mortal
man and his subject, and he had given him (at least as he apprehended it) some
affront and provocation: we by our sins and disobedience crucify the son
of God, Symb. Nicen.
the Lord and giver of life, by whom, and in whom, and from whom we enjoy all
good blessings, and of whom we are not able to say Israel (whom God calls
Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Ieshurun, and compares to an Heifer fed in large and fruitful pastures,)
going always at full bit, grew fat and wanton, and kicked with the heel: so
we, the more plentifully God has heaped his blessings upon us, the more
wantonly have we followed the swinge of our own hearts, and the more
contemptuously spurned at his holy Commandments. It was a grievous bill of
complaint, which the Prophet in the name of God preferred against Israel in
Osee 2. that his Osee 2.8.
corn, and wine, and oil, and the silver and gold which Baal an abominable
Idol. If when God gives us wit, wealth, power, authority, health, strength,
liberty, every other good thing; in stead of using these things to his glory,
and the comfortable relief of his servants, we abuse them, some or all, to the
service of those Idols which we have erected to our selves in our hearts; to
the maintenance of our pride and pomp, making Lucifer our God; of our pelf and
profits, making Mammon our God; of our swinish pleasures and sensuality, making
our Phil. 3.9.
Belly our God: Are we not as deep in the bill as those Israelites were? as
unjust, as they? as profane, as they? as unthankful every way, as they?
Flatter we not our selves: Obedience to Gods Commandments, and a sober and
charitable use of his Creatures, is the best, and surest evidence of our
thankfulness to God, and the fairest requital we can make for them. If we
withdraw our obedience, and fall into open rebellion against God; if we abuse
them, in making them either the occasions or instruments God, and damage of his
servants: we repay him ill and unworthily for the good we have received, and
are guilty of unthankfulness in this foulest and highest degree.

Now we have seen what we are:. 51.
let us say the worst we can by unthankful ones; call them wretches,
caytiffes, churles, any thing; load them with infamies, disgraces, contumelies;
charge them with injustice, profaneness, Atheism; condemn them, and with them
the vice it self, Unthankfulness to the pit of Hell: do all this, and more,
and spare not; and as David did at Nathans parable, ingratitude in any of the
former degrees, whether really done, or but in a parable, pronounce sentence
upon the guilty, 1 Samuel 12.5
The man that has done this thing shall surely dye. But withal let us
remember, when we have so done, that our hearts instantly prompt us what Nathan
told David, Ibid. 7.
Thou art the man. We, we are the men, We are these unthankful ones:
Unthankful to God, first in passing by so many of his blessings without taking
any consideration of the^; Unthankful secondly, In ascribing his blessings
wholly or partly to our selves, or any other but him; Unthankful, thirdly, In
valuing his blessings so lightly as forget them; Unthankful, fourthly, In
diminishing the worth of his blessings, and repining at our portion therein;
Unthankful, fifthly, In not rendering to him and his according to the good he
has done for us; but sixthly, and most of all unthankful in requiting him
evil for good, and hatred for his good will. Dealing thus with him, let us not
now marvel, if he begin to deal something strangely, and otherwise than he was
wont with us. If he deny us his Creatures, when we want them; if he take them
from us when we have them; if he withhold his blessing from them, that it shall
not attend them; if we find small comfort in them, when we use them; if they be
unanswering our expectations, when we have been at some pains and cost with
them; if as the Prophet speaks, Agg. 1.6.
We sow much and bring in little, we eat and have not enough, we drink and are
not filled, we cloth us and we are not warm, and the wages we earn we put into
a bag with holes: if any of these things befall us; let us cease to wonder
thereat: our selves are the causers of all our woe. It is our great
unthankfulness that blasteth all our endeavors; that leaveneth with
sowernesse whatsoever is sweet, and turns into poison whatsoever is wholesome
in the good Creatures of God. It is the Ver. 5. hic.
word of God, and Prayer that sanctifies them to good, when they are received
with thanksgiving? so long as we continue unthankful; we are vain if we look
for any sanctification in them, if we expect any good from them.

I have now done with my first Inference, for trial,. 52.
or rather Conviction: I add a second of Exhortation. The duty it self being
so necessary as we have heard Necessary, as an Act of Justice for the receipt
of the Creature: and necessary, as an Act of Religion for the sanctifying of
the Creature: how should our hearts be enflamed with an holy desire, and all
our powers quickened up to a faithful endeavor, conscionably to perform this
so necessary a duty? One would think that very necessity, together with the
consciousnesse of our former unthankfulness, should in all reason be enough to
work in us that both desire and endeavor. In all reason, it should so: but we
are unreasonable; and much ado there is to persuade us to any thing that is
good, even when we are persuaded. Wherefore to enforce the exhortation more
effectually, I must have Inducements, and important Considerations.

Consider first, the Excellency of the Duty. There are but three heads,. 53.
whereto we refer all that is called good; Iucundum, Utile, Honestum; Pleasure,
Profit and Honesty. There is nothing desirable or lovely, but in one or other
of these three respects. Each of these singly we account good, but that
excellently good, wherein they all concur. We love things that will give us
delight; sometimes when there is neither profit, nor credit in them: we love
things that will bring us profit; though possibly neither delightful greatly,
nor seemly: and we love things that we think will do us honesty, oftentimes
without regard either of pleasure or profit. How should we then be affected to
this duty of giving thanks, and singing praises unto our GOD; wherein all these
do jointly concur, and that also in an excellent measure? David has wrapped
them all together in one verse, in the beginning of Psalm 147, Psalm. 147.1.
Praise ye the Lord, for it is good; yea it is a pleasant thing, and praise is
comely. It is good, it will bring you profit; it is pleasant, it will afford
you delight; and it is comely, it will do you honesty: and what can heart wish
more? Again, many good virtues expire together with us: which though they be
eternal in their fruit and reward, yet are not so as to their proper Acts;
which after this life shall cease, because there shall be neither need, nor use
of them then, 1 Cor. 13.3.
Whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail; or whether there be tongues,
they shall cease: or whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. There
shall be no use of taming the flesh by Fasting, or of supplying the want either
of others by Alms, or of our selves by Prayer. Nay even Faith and Hope
themselves shall have an end: for we shall not then need to believe, when we
shall see: nor to expect, when we enjoy. But giving of Thanks, and praise, and
honor, and glory unto God, shall remain in the Kingdom of heaven and of
glory. It is now the continual blessed Rev. 4.8.11. and 7, 11, 12.
exercise of the glorious Angels and Saints in Heaven: and it shall be ours,
when we shall be translated thither. O that we would learn often to practice
here, what we hope shall be our eternal exercise there! O that we would
accustom* our selves, being Ephesians. 5.18, 20.
Filled in the spirit to speak to our selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
Songs, singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord: giving thanks
always for all things unto God and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ: as speaks our Apostle, Ephesians. 5.

Consider secondly, the multitude and variety and continuance of Gods
blessings: and let that provoke thy thankfulness.. 54.
If thou had received but one or a few benefits: yet thanks were due even for
those few, or for that one, more than thou art able to return. unthankfulness:
when his mercies are renewed every morning, nay every Omni momento me tibi
obligas, dum omni momento mihi tua magna beneficia praestas.

August. Solil. ca. 18. Tot munera, quae sine intermissione diebus (Dii)
fundunt. Senec. 4. de benef. 3.


moment; when he is ever Psalm. 145.16.
opening his hand, and pouring out his blessings, and Psalm. 68.29.
loading and even overwhelming thee with his benefits: as if he did vye with
thee, and would have thee see, how easily he can overcome thy evil with his
goodness, and infinitely outstrip thine infinite ingratitude with his more
infinite munificence! His Angels are about thee, though thou know it not:
from a thousand unknown dangers he delivers thee, which thou suspectedst not:
he still continues his goodness unto repriveth thy destruction, though thou
deservedst it not. What should I say more, thy very life and being thou owe
to him. Acts 17.28.
In whom we all live and move, and have our being: thence resolve with holy
David, to sing praise unto the Lord, Psalm. 104.33.
As long as thou live; and to sing praise unto thy God, whilst thou have thy
being. Many and continual receipts, should provoke many and continual thanks.

Consider thirdly, thy future necessities. If thou were sure of that thou
have,. 55.
that thou and it should continue together for ever, and never part; and that
thou could make pretty shift the Old stock hereafter, and never stand in need
to him for more: there might be so much less need to take care for giving
thanks for what is past. But it is not so with any of us: of what we have, we
are but Tenants at Courtesy, and we stand continually upon our good behavior,
whether we should hold of him any longer, or no: and much of our future
happiness stands upon our present thankfulness. And with what face can we
crave to have more, (and yet more we must have, or we cannot subsist,) if we be
not thankful for what we have? Bern. Ser. 77.
Peremptoria res est ingratitudo, says Saint Bernard, it cutteth it of all
kindness. August. Soliloq. c. 18.
Ventus urens and exiccans: like that Exodus 14.21. Gratiarum cessat decursus,
ubi recursus non fuerit. Bern. sermon. 50.
strong East-winde which in a night dried up the Red Sea; it holds off the
streams of Gods bounty from flowing, and dries up those Channels whereby his
mercies were wont to be conveyed unto us. Certainly this is one special cause
why God so often says us Nay, and sends us away empty when we ask; even
because we are so little thankful to him for former receipts. The Eccl. 1.7
suae reddantur. origini fluentae gratiae, ut uberius fluant. Bern. ser. 89*
Rivers return the Sea feeds them again, and so by a continual fresh supply
preserves them in perpetual being and motion. If they should Alioquin, nisi ad
fontem redeant, exic^^ntur. Bern. Ibid.
withhold that tribute, the Sea would not long suffice them nourishment. So we
by giving, receive: and by true paying the old debt, get credit to run upon a
new score; and provoke future blessings, by our thankfulness for former: as
the Earth by sending up vapors back to Heaven from the dew she has received
thence, fills the bottels of Heaven with new moisture, to be ^owred down upon
her again in due season in kindly and plentiful showers. By our Prayers and
Thanksgiving, Ladder, like that which Genesis 28.12.
Jacob saw, whereon the Angels ascended and descended; we preserve a mutual
intercourse betwixt Heaven and earth; and we maintain a kind of continual
trading as it were betwixt God and us. The Commodities are brought us in, they
are Gods blessings: for these we traffic by our Prayers and Thanksgivings.
Let us therefore deal squarely, as wise and honest Merchants should do. Let us
keep touch, and pay: it is as much as our credit is worth. Let us not think to
have commodities still brought us in, and we send none out, Horat. 1. Epist. 1.
omnia te advorsum this dealing cannot hold long. Rather let us think, that the
quicker and speedier and more returns we make, our gains will be the greater:
and that (...) Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 26. (...). Ibid. hom. 25.
the oftener we pray and praise God for his blessings, the more we secure unto
our selves both the continuance and the increase of them.

. 56.
Consider fourthly thy misery, if thou should want those things which God has
given thee. (...). Tum den^que homines nostra intelligimus bona, Quum, quae in
potestate habuimus, ea amisimus. Plaut. in Captiv. 1.2.
Carendo magis quam fruendo. Fools will not know that true worth of things but
by wanting, which wiser men had rather learn by having them. Yet this is the
common folly of us all: We will not prise Gods blessings as we should, till he
for our unthankfullness take them from us, and teach us to value them better
before we have them again. We repine at Gods great blessings; we grudge at his
gentle corrections,: judging these too heavy, those too light. We think our
very peace a burden, and complain of plenty as some scarcity; and undervalue
the blessed liberty we have of treading in his Courts, and partaking his holy
Ordinances: and all this, because by his great goodness we have so long enjoyed
them: and this is our guise in every other thing proportionably. Did we but
feel a while the miseries of our Neighbor Countries, who want the blessings
which we thus slight; or could we but fore-think what our misery should be, if
we (as they) had our Throats ever before the sword, or were wasted with extreme
famines and pestilences, or lived either in thick darkness, without the Gospel,
or under cruel persecution for it. Did we thus; though our hearts were as hard
and cold as stones, it could not be but those thoughts would foften them, and
inflame them to magnify and bless the holy name of God for our long and
present peace, for that plenty what ever it be which we yet have, and for the
still continued liberty of his glorious Gospel and sincere worship among us.
God grant, that from our wretched unthankfulness, he take not just occasion, by
taking these great blessings from us, to teach us at once both how to use them
better, and how to value them better.

Consider fifthly, thy Importunity with God,. 57.
when thou want any thing, and according to that, proportion thy thanks when
thou have it. I remember what Bernard writes of the Popes servants and
Courtiers in his time: Bern. lib. 4. de consid. ad Eugen.
Importuni ut accipiant When Suitors come to the Popes Court with their
businesses, the Courtiers and Officers lie in the wind for them, greedily
offering their service, and never quiet with them till they have got something:
but by that they have got the money, they have forgot the man; and having first
served their own turn, they then leave the business to go which way it will.
Not much unlike is our dealing with God. When we Multos videmus usque hodi^
satis importue petentes, quo ^ sibi deesse cognoverint; sed paucos ad modum
novimus qui dignas super acceptis beneficiis gratias agere videantur. Bernard.
sermon. de diversis. 27.
would have something, some outward blessing conferred, or some outward
calamity removed, (for thankless devotions seldom look farther, than after
these outward things;) we are as Saint Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. in Psalm.
137.
(...) very eager and earnest with God, we must have no Nay; we wrestle with
him, and that stoutly, as if we would outwrestle Genesis 32.25, 26.
Jacob for a blessing, and we will not let him go till we have obtained it. But
(...), says Chrysostom there. When our turn is served, and we have what we
would have, by and by, all our devotion is at an end; we never think of thanks.
All the ten Lepers begged hard of Christ for a cleansing: the Text says, Luke
17.13, 17.
They lift up their voices; they were all loud enough, whilst they were
suitors. Sed ubi novem? there returned not to give God thanks for their
cleansing, of the whole ten any more than barely one single man. It is our case
just. When we want any of the good Creatures of God for our necessities, we
Psalm. 81.10.
open our mouths wide, till he Psalm. 145.16.
open his hand, and fill them with plenteousness: but after, as if the filling
of our mouths were the stopping of our Throats, so are we speechless and
heartless. Shame we to be so clamorous, when we crave from him; and so dumb
when give him thanks.

. 58.
Consider lastly, how freely God has given thee, what he has given thee. Bern.
in Psalm. Qui habitat. Sermon. 14.
Dupliciter gratis, says Bernard: Sine merito, sine labor. Freely both ways:
freely without thy desert; and freely without so much as thy pains. Freely
first, without thy desert. Jacob, a man as well deserving as thou, yet confessed
himself. Genesis 32.10.
Not worthy of the least of all Gods mercies. And Saint Paul cutteth off all
challenge of desert, by that interrogatory, Romans 11.35.
Who has first given him, and it shall be recompensed him? as who should say,
No man can challenge God, as if he owed him ought. debtor to us by his Promise,
(and indeed he has so made himself a debtor to us,) yet that is still gratis,
and for nothing: because the promise it self was free, without either Nulla Deo
dandi beneficii causa est Sen. 4. de bene^. 3. Ego rebar spontanias esse
numinum benign^a es ultroque ab his fluere inexpectata benevolentiae munera.
Arnob. conr. Gent. lib. 3. Deus nulli debet aliquid: quia omnia gratui^o
praestat. Et si quisquam dice^, ab illo aliquid deberi m^ritis suis, certe ut
esset non ei debebatur: non enim erat, cui deberetur. Aug. 3. de lib. arb. 16.
debt in him, or desert in us. Nay more, God has been good to us, not only
when we had not deserved it; but (which still more magnifieth his bounty, and
binds us the stronger to be thankful,) when we had deserved the quite
contrary. And how is it possible we should forget such his unspeakable
kindness, in giving us much good, when we had done none, nay in giving much
good, when we had done much ill? And as he gave it sine merito; so sine labor
too; the Creature being freely bestowed on us, as on the one side not by way of
reward for any desert of ours; so neither on the other side by way of wages,
for any labor of ours. To show that God gives not his blessings for our
labor merely: he sometimes gives them not, where they are labored for; and
again he gives them sometimes, where they are not labored for. If in the
ordinary dispensation of his Providence, he bestow them upon them that labor,
as Solomon says, Prove. 12.24. and 13.4.
The diligent hand makes rich; and seldom otherwise, for 2 These. 3.10.
( He that will not labor, it is fit he should not eat:) yet that labor is to
be accounted but as the means, not as a sufficient cause thereof. And if we dig
to the root, we shall still find it was gratis: for even that power to labor
was the gift of God; Deuteronomy. 8.18.
It is God that gives thee power to get wealth. Yea in this sense, see before.
Ser. 3. ad Cler.
nature it self is grace; because given gratis and freely, without any labor,
preparation, disposition, desert, or any thing at all in us.

. 18.
All these considerations; the Excellency of the Duty, the Continuance of Gods
blessings, our future Necessity, our Misery in wanting,. 59.
our Importunity in Craving, his free Liberality in bestowing, should quicken
us to a more conscionable performance of this so necessary, so just, so
religious a Duty. And thus having seen our u^thankfullness discovered in six
points: and heard many Considerations to provoke us to thankfulness: it may be
we have seen enough in that to make us hate the fault, and we would fain amend
it; and it may be we have heard enough in this to make us affect the duty, and
we would fain practice it, may some say; but we The Duty being hard, and our
backwardness great; what good course might be taken, effectually to reform this
our so great backwardness, and to perform that so hard a Duty? And so you see,
my second Inference for exhortation: breeds a third, and that is for
direction; which for satisfaction of those men that pretend willingness, but
plead ignorance, I should also prosecute, if I had so much time to spare.
Wherein should be discovered, what be the principal causes of our so great
Unthankfulness; which taken away, the effect will instantly and of it self
cease. Now those Causes are especially, as I conceive, viz. 1. Pride, and
Self-love; 2. Envy, and Coffeehouse; 3. Riotousness, and Epicurism; 4.
Worldly Carefulness, and immoderate desires; 5. Carnal Security, and
foreslowing the time. Now then, besides the application of that which has
already been spoken in the former Discoveries and Motives; (for every Discovery
of a fault, does virtually contain some means for the correcting of it; and
every true Motive to a duty, does virtually contain some helps unto the
practice of it:) besides these, I say, I know not how to prescribe any better
remedies against unthankfulness, or helps unto thankfulness; than faithfully
sins, and the subduing of those Corruptions in us, which cause the one, and
hinder the other. But because the time, and my strength are near spent; I am
content to ease both my self and you, by cutting off so much of my provision,
as concerns this Inference for Direction: and desire you that it may suffice
for the present, but thus to have pointed at these Impediments, and once more
to name them. They are Pride, Envy, Epicurisme, Carfulness, Security.. 60.


I place Pride, where it would be; the foremost, because it is of all other
Maxim facit ingratos nimius sui suspectus, and infitum mortalitati vitium se
suaque mirandi. Se^ec. 2. de benef. 26.
the principal impediment of Thankfulness. Pride, that makes men unthankful.
He that would be truly thankful, must have his eyes upon both; the one eye
upon the Gift, and the other upon the Giver: and this the proud man never has.
Either through Caecus amor sui. Horat. 1. Carm. od. 18.
self-love he is stark-blind, and sees neither: or else through Partiality, he
winketh on one eye, and will not look at both. Sometimes he sees the Gift, but
too much, and boasts of it: but then he forgets the Giver; he 1 Cor. 4.7
boasts, as if he had not received it. Sometimes again he over-looketh the
Gift, as not good enough for the Giver, as if he had not given him according to
his worth. Either he undervalueth the Gift, or else he overvalueth himself; as
if he were himself the Giver, or at least the deserver: and is in both
unthankful. To remove this Impediment, who ever desires to be thankful, let
him humble himself, nay empty himself, nay deny himself, and all his deserts;
confess himself with Jacob Genesis 32 10.
less than the least of Gods mercies, and condemn Sacrilegus invasor gloriae
tuae. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 13.
sacrilege, if it dare but think the least thought tending to rob God of the
least part of his honor.

Envy follows Pride; the Superbiae prima soboles inanis gloria -- mox
invidiam gignet. Greg. 31. Mor. 31.
Daughter the Mother: a second Non potest quisquam, and invide^e, and gratias
agere Senec. 3. de benef. 3.
great impediment of thankfulness.. 61.
The fault is, that men not content only to look upon their own things and the
present; but Vehemens, and importunum malum Invidia: quae nos inqu^etat, dum
comparat. Hoc mihi praestit^t: sed illi plus, sed illi maturitis. Senec. 2 de
benef. 28.
comparing these with the things of other men, or times: instead of giving
thanks for what they have, Ill^s (...) tam ^ucundum est, multos post se vldere;
quam grave, aliquem an ^ sc. Senec. Epist. 73.
repine that others have more or better; or for what they now have, complain
that it is not with them as it has been. These the tranquillity of the mind:
breeding many discontents, and much unthankfullness; whilst our Matthew. 20.15.
eyes are evil, because God is good to others, or has been so to us. To
remove this impediment; who ever desires to be truly thankful, let him look
upon (...). Plutarch. de tranquil. anim. Nul^^ ^d aliena respicienti, sua
placent. Senec. 3. de Ira ^0.
his own things, and not on the things of other men; and therein consider, not
so much what he wants, and fain would have, as what he has, and could not
well want. Let him think, that what God has given him, came from his free
bounty, he owed it not; and what he has denied him, he withholds it either
in his Justice Mercy for his farther good: that God gives to no man all the
desire of his heart in these outward things, to teach him, not to look for
absolute contentment in this life, least of all, in these things. If he will
needs look upon other men's things, let him compare himself rather Quo^^que
aliena ^^p^lla (...), Tabescat, ^^que se majori ^au^^riorum Turbae comparet?
Horat. 1. Sermon. Satyr. 1* (...). Plutarch* ubi supra.
with them that have less, than those that have more: and therein withal
consider, not so much what Nec ea in^uemur, quae nos aliis praeposuere, sed
easola quae fortuna praec^^entium o^ endat. Senec. 3. de benef. 3.
himself wants which some others have, as what he has which many others
want. If a few, that enjoy Gods blessings in these outward things in a greater
measure than he, be an eyesore many others, that have a scanter portion, make
him acknowledge that God has dealt liberally and bountifully with him. We
should do well to understand that saying of Christ, not barely as a Prediction,
but as a kind of Promise too, (as I have partly intimated See. 49.
before,) The Matthew. 26.11.
poor you shall always have with you: and to think that every Beggar that
seeks to us, is sent of God, to be as well a Glass wherein to represent Gods
bounty to us, as an Object whereon for us to exercise ours. And as for former
times: let us not so much think how much better we have been, as how well we
are; that impute it to our former unthankfulness; and fear, unless we be more
thankful for what we have, it Popery secretly stealing in upon us, and as a
leprosy spreading apace under the skin; and penury, and poverty, as an
ulcerous sore, openly breaking out in the very face of the Land. Should we
murmr at this; or repiningly complain that it is not with us, as it has
been? God forbid: that is the way, to have it yet, and yet worse. Rather let us
humble our selves for our former unthankfulness, whereby we have provoked GOD
to withdraw himself in some measure from us: and bless him for his great
mercy, who yet continues his goodness in a comfortable and gracious measure
unto us, notwithstanding our so great unworthiness, and unthankfulness.
Thousands of our brethren in the world, as good as our selves, how glad would
they be, how thankful to God, how would they rejoice and sing, if they enjoyed
but a small part of that peace and prosperity in outward things, and of that
liberty of treading in Gods and partaking of his ordinances, which we make so
little account of, because it is not every way as we have known it heretofore?

The third Impediment of Thankfulness, is Riot,. 62.
and Epicurism: that which the Prophet reckons in the Catalogue of Sodoms
sins, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness. This is both a Cause and a Sign
of much unthankfulness. (...), and (...), Fullness, and Forgetfulness; they
are not more near in the sound of the words, than they are in the sequel of the
things: Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11.
When thou have eaten, and art full, Then beware lest thou forget the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 8. It much argues, that we make small account of the good Creatures
of God, if we will not so much as take a little pains to get them: but much
more, if lavishly and like prodigal fools we make waste and havoc of them. He
that has received some token from a dear friend, though perhaps of little
value in it self, and of less use to him; yet if he retain any grateful
memory of his friend, he will Quod non me movet astimatione: Ver^m est (...).
mei sodalis* Catull.
value it the more, and set greater store by it, and be the more careful to
friends sake: but if he should make it away causelessly, and the rather, because
it came so easily, (as the Ding-thrifts proverb is, Lightly come, lightly go;)
every man would interpret it as an evidence of his unfriendly and unthankful
heart. But riot is not only a sign; it is also a Cause, of unthankfulness: in
as much as it makes us value the good things of God, at too low a rate. the
worth of things, proportionably to their use; judging them more or less good,
according to the good they do us, be it more or less. And how then can the
Prodigal or Riotous Epicure, that consumes the good Creatures of God in so
short a space, and to so little purpose; set a just price upon them, seeing he
reapeth so little good from them? A pound, that would do a Poor man that takes
pains for his living a great deal of good, maintain him and his family for
some weeks together, perhaps put him into fresh trading, set him up on his
legs, and make him a man for ever; what good does it to a prodigal Gallant,
that will set scores and hundreds of them flying at one afternoones sitting in
a Gaming-house? Shall any man make me believe, he valueth these good gifts of
God as he should do, and as every truly thankful Christian man would desire to
do; that in the powdering and perfuming of an excrement that never grew from
his own scalp, in the furnishing of a Table for the pomp and luxury of a few
hours, in making up a rich Suit to case a rotten carkase in, in the pursuit of
any other lustful vanity or delight, expendeth beyond the proportion of his
revenue condition, and the exigence of just occasions? To remedy this, whoever
would be truly thankful, let him live in some honest Vocation, and therein
bestow himself faithfully and painfully, bind himself to Sober, discreet, and
moderate use of GODS Creatures; remember that CHRIST would not have the very
broken meats lost; think that if for every word idly spoken; then by the same
proportion for every penny idly spent, we shall be accountable to GOD at the
day of Judgment.

Immoderate Care, and Solicitude for outward things is Non patitur aviditas
quenqua^ esse gratum* Senec. 2. de benef. 27. Nullum habet malum cupiditas
majus, quam quod est ingrata. Id Epist. 73.
impediment of Thankfulness.. 63.
Under which title I comprehend Covetousness especially, but not only:
Ambition also, and Voluptuousness, and every other vice, that consists in a
desire and expectation of something Novis semper cupiditatibus occupa^^, non
quid habeamus, sed quid petamus, inspicimus. Quicquid domi est, vile est.
Sequitur autem, ut ubi quid acceperis leve novorum cupiditas fecerit, author
quoque eorum non sit in pretio. -- Ideoque Cadu^a memoria est, futuro
imminentium. Id. 3. de benef. 3.
for the future. Which desire and expectation if inordinate, must needs in the
end determine in unthankfulness. For the very true reason, why we desire
things inordinately, is, because we promise to our selves more comfort and
content from them, than they are able to give us; this being ever our Error,
when we have any thing in chase, to sever the good the inconveniences that go
therewith, and looking only upon that, never so much as to think of these. But
having obtained the thing we desired, we find the one as well as the other; and
then the inconveniences we never thought of before, Nihil aeque adeptis, and
concupiscentibus gratum. Plin.
abateth much of the weight and the price we formerly set thereupon, and takes
off so much from the estimation we had of the good: whereby it comes to pass,
that by how much we overvalued it in the pursuit, by so much we undervalue it
in the possession. And so instead of giving thanks to God for the good we
complain of the inconveniences that adhere thereunto, and so much underprise
it, as it falls short of our expectation: and look how far we do underprise
it, so far are we unthankful for it. To remove this Impediment: who ever
would be thankful, let him moderate his desires after these outward things;
forecast as well the inconveniences that follow them, as the commodities they
bring with them; lay the one against the other, and prepare as well to digest
the one, as to enjoy the other.

The last Impediment of thankfulness is Carnal security joined Delays and
Procrastinations.. 64.
When we receive any thing from God, we know we should give him thanks* for it,
and it may be we think of doing such a thing: but we think withal another day
will serve the turn, and so we put it off for the present, and so forwards from
time to time, till in the end we have quite forgotten both his benefit, and our
own Duty, and never perform any thing at all. My Text does after a sort meet
with this corruption: for here the Apostle says, the Creature should be
received with thanksgiving; as if the thanks should go with the receipt, the
Qui gratus futurus est. statim dum accepit, de reddendo cogitat. Sen. 2. de
benef. 25.
receipt and the Impediment: consider, how in every thing delays are hurtful
and dangerous; how our affections are best and hottest at the first, and do in
process of time insensibly deaden, and at last dye, if we do not take the
opportunity, and strike (as we say) whilst the iron is hot; how that, if
pretensions of other businesses or occasions may serve the turn to put off the
tendering of our devotions, and rendering of our thanks to God, the Devil will
be sure to suggest enough of these pretensions into our heads, and to prompt us
continually with such allegations, that we shall seldom serve God, and to give
him thanks.

Let us remember these five Impediments,. 65.
and beware of them; Pride, Envy, Epicurism, Worldly Carfulness, and Delay.
All which are best remedied by their contraries. Good helps therefore unto
thankfulness are, 1. Humility, and Self-denial; 2. Contentedness, and
Self-sufficiency; 3. Painfulnesse, Sobriety; 4. The Moderation of our desires
after earthly things; 5. Speed and Maturity. And so much for this third
Inference of Direction. I should also have desired, if the time would have
permitted, although my Text speaks of our Thanksgiving unto God precisely as
it respects the Creature; yet to have improved it a little farther by a
fourth Inference: that if we be thus bound to give God thanks for these outward
blessings, how much more ought we then to abound in all thankfulness unto him
for his manifold Ephesians. 1.3.
Spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ; for Grace and Election, for
Mercy and Faith and Iustication, for Obedience and Sanctification, for Hope and
Glorification. If we ought to pray for, and to give thanks for our Matthew. 6.11.
daily bread, which nourishes but our bodies, and then is Matthew. 15.17.
cast into the draught, and both it and our bodies perish: how much more for
that Joh. 6.51.
Bread of life which came down from Heaven, and feeds our Souls unto eternal
life, and neither they nor it can perish? If we must say for that, Give us this
day our daily bread: shall we not much more say for this, Joh. 6.34.
Lord evermore give us this bread. But I have done. Beseech we now Almighty the
free use of his good Creatures; that keeping our selves within the due bounds
of Sobriety, Charity, and civil Duty, we may in all things glorify God: and
above all things, and Ephesians. 5.20.
for all things give thanks always unto God and the Father in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. To which our Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed Son of God,
together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, and one only
wise, gracious, and everliving God, be ascribed (as is most due) by us and his
whole Church, all the Kingdom, the Power, and the both now and for evermore.
Amen. Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON AD POPVLVM. Paul's Cross London, April. 15. 1627.
GENESIS 20.6. And God said unto him in a dream; Yea, I know that thou


FOr our more profitable understanding of which words,. 1.
it is needful we should have in remembrance the whole story of this present
Chapter; of which story these words are a part. And thus it was. Abraham
comes with Sarah the Philistims in Gerar: covenanteth with her beforehand,
thinking thereby to provide for his own safety, because she was beautiful,
that they should not be to know that they were any more than Brother and
Sister. Abimelech King of the place hears of their coming, and of her
beauty; sends for them both; enquireth whence and who they were; hears no
more from them, but that she was his Sister; dismisseth him; takes her into
his House. Hereupon God plagueth him and his House with a strange Visitation;
threatens him also with Death; gives him to understand, that all this was for
taking another man's Wife. He answers for himself: GOD replyeth. The Answer is
in the two next former Verses: the Reply in this, and the next following Verse.

. 2.
His Answer is by way of Apology: he pleads first Ignorance; and then, and
thence, his Innocence. Verse 4, 5.
[ And he said, Lord will thou slay also a righteous Nation? Said not he unto
me, She is my Sister? and she, even she her self said, He is my Brother: in the
integrity ] That is his Plea. Now God replyeth: of which reply, let^^ng pass
the remainder in the next Verse, which concerns the time to come, so much of
it as is contained in this Verse, has reference to what was already done and
past; and it meets right with Abimilechs Answer. Something he had done; and
something he had not not done: he had indeed Verse 2.
taken Sarah into his House, but he had Verse 4.
not yet come near her. For that which he had done, in taking her; he thought
he had a just excuse, and he pleads it: another man's Wife; and therefore, as
to any intent of doing wrong to the Husband, he was altogether Innocent. But
for that which he had not done, in not touching her; because he took her into
his House with an unchaste purpose; he passes that over in silence, and not so
much as mentions it. So that his Answer, so far as it reached, was just: but,
because it reached not home, it was not full. And now Almighty God fitteth it
with a Reply, most convenient for such an Answer: admitting his Plea, so far as
he alleged it, for what he had done, in taking Abraham's Wife, having done it
simply out of ignorance, Yea I know thou did this in the integrity of thy
heart:] and withal supplying that which Abimelech had omitted, for what he had
not done, in not touching her; by assigning the true cause thereof, viz. his
powerful restraint, [ For I also withheld thee from sinning against me,
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

. 3.
In the whole Verse we may observe, First the manner of the Revelation; namely,
by what means it pleased God to conveigh to Abimelech the knowledge of so much
of his will, as he thought good to acquaint him withal: it was even the same,
whereby he had given him the first information, at Verse 3. it was by a And God
said unto him in a dream:] and then after, the substance of the Reply; whereof
again the general parts are two. The former, an Admission of Abimelechs Plea,
or an Acknowledgement of the integrity of his heart, so far as he alleged it,
in that which he had done, [ yea I know that thou did it in the integrity of
thine heart.] The later, an Instruction or Advertisement to Abimelech, he had
not done: it was God that over-held him from doing it, [ For I also withheld
thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.]

By occasion of those first words of the Text, [ And God said unto him in a
dream;] if we should enter into some enquiries,. 4.
concerning the nature and use of divine Revelations in general, and in
particular of Dreams: the Discourse as it would not be wholly impertinent, so
neither altogether unprofitable. Concerning all which these several Conclusions
might be easily made good. First, revealed himself and his will frequently in
old times, especially before the sealing of the Scripture-Canon (...). ^eb. 1.1.
in sundry manners: as by Visions, Prophecies, Extacies, Oracles, and other
supernatural means, and namely, and among the rest, by Numb. 12.6. Joel 2.28.
Job 33.14, 16. (...) Homer. Isiad. ^.
Dreams. Secondly, that God imparted his Will by such kind of supernatural
Revelations, not only to the godly and faithful (though to them most
frequently, and especially:) but sometimes also to Hypocrites within the
Church, as to 1 Samuel 10.10.
Saul and others: yea and sometimes even to Infidells Genesis 41.25, 28, 18, 45.
Pharaoh, Nunb. 14.2, 4. etc.
Balaam, Dan. 2.28, 45.
Nebuchadnezzer, etc. and here to Abimelech. Thirdly, that since the the
Scripture-Canon sealed, and the Christian Church by the preaching of the Gospel
become Ecumenical; dreams, and other supernatural Revelations, (...) also
other things of like nature, as Miracles, and whatsoever more immediate and
extraordinary manifestations of the will and power of God, have ceased to be of
ordinary and familiar suspect delusion in them, than to expect direction from
them. Fourthly, that although God Esa. 8.20.
tied us to his holy written word, as unto a perpetual infallible Rule, beyond
which we may not expect, and against which we may not admit, any other
direction, as from God: yet he has no where abridged himself of the power and
liberty, even still to intimate unto the sons of men the knowledge of his
will, and the glory of his might, by Dreams, Miracles, or other like
supernatural manifestations; if at any time, either in the want of the ordinary
means of the Word, Sacraments, and Ministry, or for the present necessities of
his Church, or of some part thereof, or for some other just cause perhaps
unknown to us, he shall see it expedient prescribed us: but he has not limited
himself. Fifthly, that because the Devil and wicked spirits may suggest Dreams,
probably foretell future events foreseen in their work many strange effects in
nature, applicando activa passivis; which because they are without the sphere
of our comprehension, may to our seeming have fair appearances of Divine
Revelations or Miracles, when they are nothing less: for the avoiding Dreams,
Prophecies, or Miracles, as Divine, until upon due trial there shall appear,
both in the End whereto they point us, a direct tendance to the advancement of
GODS Glory; and in the Means also they propose us, a See Deuteronomy. 13.1, etc.
conformity unto the revealed Will of GOD in his written word. Sixthly, that so
to observe Contra onirocriticos, See Aquin. 2.2. qu. 95.6. Ioh. Sarisb. 2.
Polyer. 17. Petr. Bles. Epist. 65.
divine or foretell of future contingents, or to forecast therefrom good or
ill-luck (as we call it) in the success of our affairs; is a silly and
groundless, but withal an unwarranted, and therefore an unlawful, and
therefore damnable superstition. Seventhly, that there is yet to be made a
lawful, yea and a very profitable use, even of our ordinary Dreams, and of the
observing thereof: and that both in Physic and Divinity. Not at all by
foretelling particulars of things to come: but by taking from them, among other
things, some reasonable conjectures in the general, of the present estate, both
of our Bodies and Souls. Of our Bodies first. For since the predominancy of
Secundum morum and humorum varietates, variantur and somnia. Alia namque vident
sanguinei, alia Cholerici, alia flegmatici, alia melancholici. Auctor. de spir.
and anim. cap. 25. apud. August in. Tom. 3.
Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy; as also the differences of strength, and
health, and Iuxta etiam infirmitatum diversitates, diversa accidunt somnia.
Ibid.
diseases, and distempers, either diet or passion or otherwise, do cause
impressions of different forms in the fancy: our (...). Arist. cap. 1. de
divinat. ex insom.
ordinary dreams may be a good help to lead us into those discoveries, both in
time of health, what our natural constitution, complexion, and temperature is;
and in times of sickness, from the ranckness and tyranny of which of the
humors the malady springs. And as of our Bodies; so of our Souls too. For
since our Dreams, for the most part A dream comes through the multitude of
business, Eccles. 5.2. Res, quas in vita usurpant homines, cogitant, curant,
vident, Qu^que agunt vigilantes, agitan^que ^a si cui in somnis accidant, minus
mirum est. Aretius. Quaecunque mentis agitat infestus vigor, Ea per quietem
sacer and arcanus refert Veloxque sensus. Senec. in Octav. Act. 4. See Dealt.
ibid.
look the same way, which our freest thoughts incline; as the Voluptuous beast
dreameth most of pleasures, the Covetous wretch most of profits, and the proud
or ambitious most of praises, preferments, or revenge: Dreams may be of good
use for us unto that discovery, which of these three is our Master sin (for
unto one of the three every other sin is reduced,) 1 John ^.16.
The Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the eyes, or the Pride of Life.

. 5.
But concerning Revelations and Dreams, it shall suffice to have only proposed
these few Conclusions without farther enlargement: manner of Gods revealing his
will here to Abimelech by Dream, being but an incidental circumstance upon the
bye, and not belonging to the main of the present story. We will therefore
without more ado proceed to the substance of Gods reply, in the rest of the
verse: and therein begin with the former general part, which (...)

Revelations and Dreams, it shall suffice to have only proposed these few
Conclusions without farther enlargement: the manner of Gods revealing his will
here to Abimelech by Dream, being but an incidental circumstance upon the bye,
and not belonging to the main of the present story. We will therefore without
more ado proceed to the substance of Gods reply, in the rest of the verse: and
therein begin with the former general part which is Gods admission of
Abimelechs Plea and Apology for himself. The ground of whose Plea was
Ignorance, and the thing he pleaded, his own Innocence, and the integrity of
his heart: and God allows the allegation, and acknowledges that integrity, [
Yea I know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart.]

The (...)
Original word here translated Integrity, is rendered by some (...) Targ. Chald.
Truth, by others (...). Septuag.
Purity, and by others Simplici cord. Vulgar.
Simplicity: and it will bear them all, as signifying properly In the
perfection of thy heart. H. A.
Perfection or Innocence. You would think by that word, that Abimelech had in
this whole business walked in the sight of God with a pure, and upright, and
true, and single, and perfect heart. But alas, he was far from that. God Ver.
17.18.
plagued him and his, for that he had God does not use to punish the carcass
for that, wherein the heart is single. Again, God withheld him, or else he
would have done more and worse: and it is a poor perfection of heart; where the
active power only is restrained, and not the inward corruption subdued.
Besides, Sarah was taken into the house, and there kept for lewd purposes: and
how can truth and purity of heart consist with a continued resolution of sinful
uncleanness? Abimelech then cannot be defended, as truly and absolutely
innocent: though he plead Innocence, and God himself bear witness to the
Integrity of his heart. For had his heart been upright in Sarah, he would never
have taken her into his house at all, as he did. But that he pleads for
himself is; that in this particular, wherewith it seemed to him God by so
threatening him did charge him, in wronging Abraham by taking his wife from him,
his conscience could witness the Innocence of his heart; how free he was from
any the least injurious purpose or so much as thought, that way. It was told
him by them both, that she was his Sister; and he knew no other by her than so,
when he took her into his house, supposing her to be a single Woman: if he had
known she had been any man's Wife, he would not for any good have done the man
so foul an injury, nor have sinned against his own soul, by defiling another
bed: In the integrity of his heart, and innocence of his hands he did, what he
had done. This is the substance of his allegation: and God approves the
integrity of his heart so far; viz. as free in this particular from any intent,
either to injure Abraham, or to sin against the light of his own Conscience, by
committing adultery

The meaning of the words thus cleared: we may observe in three things. First,
the fact for which Abimelech pleads; and that was, the taking of Sarah, who
was another wife, into Secondly, the ground of his plea; and that was his
Ignorance: he knew not when he took her, that she was another Thirdly, the
thing he pleads upon that ground; and that was his Innocence and the
Integrity of his heart. Each of these three will afford us some observable
instruction for our use. And the first thing we will insist upon from these
words shall be, The hateful even in the judgment of those men, who made small
or no conscience at all of Fornication. See how this is raised from the Text.
Abimelechs heart never smote him for taking Sarah into his house, so long as he
supposed her to be but a single Woman: led with the common blindness and
custom of the Gentiles, he either knew not, or considered not, that such
fornication (though in a King) was a Sin. But the very frame of his Apology
shows, that if he had known her to be another man's Wife; and yet had taken
her, he could not then have pretended the integrity of his heart, and the
innocence his own heart would have condemned him for it, and he should therein
have sinned grossly against the light of his own Conscience.

It cannot be doubtful to us, who by the good blessing of God upon us, have his
holy word to be Psa. 119.105.
A light unto our feet, and a lanthorn unto our paths, from the evidence
whereof we may receive more perfect and certain information, than they could
have from the glimmering light of depraved Nature; I say, it cannot be
doubtful to us, but that all fornication, how simple soever, is a sin foul and
odious in the sight of God, and deadly to the committer. first being opposite
directly to that 1 These. 4.3, 4.
holiness and honor and sanctification, which God prescribes in his will.
Secondly, Prove. 5.10; 6.26. Job 31.12.
estate, rottenness of Prove. 5.11.
bones, and loss of Prove. 6.33. Pro. 7.22, 23.
good-name. Thirdly, Hos. 4.11.
stealing away the heart of those that are once ensnared therewith, and
bewitching them even unto perdition, in such powerful sort, that it is seldom
Fourthly, putting over the Heb. 13.14.
immediate judgment of God himself; who for this sin slew of the Israelites in
one day 1 Cor. 10.8.
23 or Number. 25.9.
24 fifthly one singular deformity above all 1 Cor. 6.18.
against a man's own body; in depriving it (by making it the instrument of
filthiness, and the 1 Cor. 6.15.
members of an harlot,) of that honor whereunto 1 Cor. 6.15.
member of Christ, and 1 Cor. 6.19.
the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

But yet of this foul sin the Gentiles made no reckoning: So long as they
abstained from Viri licito se errare credunt, si solo abstineant adulterio:
meritricios autem usus tanquam legi naturae suppetere putant. Ambros. 2. de
Abrah. 11. Solo stupro atque adulterio condemnato, passim per lupanaria and
ancillulas libido permittitur.

Hieronym. Epist. 30. Usum scor^orum terrena civitas licitam turpitudinem fecit.

Augustine. 14. de Civitat. 18.


married persons, it never troubled their Consciences to defile themselves with
those that were single by fornication; because they esteemed it either as no
sin, or as one of the least. It was not only the fond speech of an indulgent
and doting old Father in the excuse of his licentious son in the Comedy, Mitio
apud Terent. in Adelph. 1.2.
Non est flagitium mihi creed adolescentulum scortari; (and yet he spoke but as
the generality of them then thought:) but Roman Orator, in the behalf of his
Client, in open Court, before the severity of the sage and Reverend bench of
Judges, Cicer. pro Coelio.
Quando hoc non factum est? quando reprehensum? quando non permissum? and,
Datur omnium concessu, etc. 1 These. 4.5.
Nor in the lust of concupiscence, (says St. Paul) as the Gentiles which know
not God. An error, so universally spread, and so deeply rooted in the minds
and in the lives of the Gentiles; who Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
having their understanding darkened through the ignorance that was in them,
because of the blindness of their hearts, wrought such uncleanness not only
without remorse, but with greediness: that the Apostles had much ado with
those men, whom by the preaching of the Gospel they had converted from
Gentilism to Christianity, before they could reclaim them from an Error so
inveterate both in the judgment and practice. Saint Paul therefore, as it both
became and concerned him being Romans 11.13; Gal. 2.7; 1 Timothy 2.7; and 2 Timothy
1.11.
the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles, often touches upon this string in his
As Romans 1.29; and 13.13. 2 Cor. 12.31; Gal. 5.19; Ephesians. 4.19; and 5.3. etc.
Col. 3.5; 1 These. 4.3, etc.
Epistles written unto the Churches of the Gentiles. But no where does he set
himself more fully and directly, with much evidence of reason and strength of
argument, against this Sin and error, than in the 1 Cor. 51.9. -- 11; 6.9. --
18; 7.1, etc. 10.8.
first Epistle he wrote to the Corinthians: because among them this sin, was
both it self most rife in the practice, (the Hinc (...) pro scortari. Hadr.
Jun. in Adag. and (...) habet. Aristoph. in Pluto. Act. 1. Sc. 2. Quas supra
mill prostare ad fanum Veneris quoth. est in Corintho scribit Strab. 8. Geograph.
Atque hinc natam paroemiam. (...). Bourdin. in Comment. ad Aristoph. Thesmophor.
Corinthians being notedly infamous for lust and wantonness;) and it was also
as much -- Libidinis, quae nusquam gentium regnabat i^ punitiu^, quam Corinthi.
slighted there as any where: many of them thinking that the Erasm. Paraphras.
in 1 Corinthians. in Argumen.
body was made for fornication, as the belly for meats; and that fornication
was as fit and convenient for the body, as meats for the belly. Out of which
consideration, the Apostles in that first General Council holden at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. thought it needful by Ecclesiastical Canon, among some other
indifferent things for the Churches peace, to lay this restraint upon the
converted Gentiles, that they should Act. 15.28, 29.
abstain from Fornication. Not, as if Fornication indifferent thing, as those
other things were; nor, as if those other things were in themselves and simply
unlawful, as Fornication was: but the Apostles did therefore join Fornication,
and those other indifferent things together in the same Canon; because the
Gentiles accounted fornication a thing as indifferent, as what was most
indifferent. Some remainders of the common error there were, it seems, among
some Christians in S. Augustines days: who both Quod aliquando qui (...),
nescio qua perversitate contemnunt; and nescio unde sibi testimonia nulla and
vana conqui^unt, dicentes, Peccata carnis Deus non curat. August. Sermon. 16. de
verb. Domin. cap. 1. Ista pu^^enda and nimium gravia mala, ideo a multis vi^^s
sine ullo timore Domini committun^ur, quia ita a pluribus in consu^tudinem
missa sunt, and ita vilia vel levia ducuntur, ut nec jam inter gravia crimina
puten^ur. Sermon. de Temp. 143.
relates the opinion, and confuteth it. And some in the Popish Church have not
come far behind herein: so many of them I mean as hold that Durand. 4.
distinct. 33. q. 2 and ali^.
simple fornication is intrinsecally, and in the proper nature of it, a sin
against the Law of Nature; but only made such, by divine positive Law. A
strange thng it is, and to my seeming not less than a Mys^^^ium iniquitat^s 2
These. 2.7.
mystery, that those men that speak so harshly of Marriage which God has
ordained, should withal speak so favorably of fornication which God has
forbidden: preposterously preferring the disease which springs from our
corruption, before the 1 Cor. 7.2.
remedy which God himself has prescribed in his word. But howsoever, if some
Christians have spoken, and written, and thought so favorably of fornication,
as (to their shame) it appears they have done: the less Abimelech, a King
and an Infidel, allow himself the liberty to continue in the sin of Understand
that in this passage concerning Abimelech, I use the word Fornication, as it
does include Concubinatum also.
Fornication; and yet notwithstanding such allowance, stand so much upon his
own innocence, and integrity as he does.

God forbid any man that hears me this day, should be so either ignorant or
uncharitable, as to conceive all, or any of that I Fornication or any
uncleanness, which Saint Paul would not have so much as Ephesians. 5.3.
named among the Saints; -- not named with allowance, not named with any
extenuation, not named but with some detestation. But the very thing for which
I have spoken all this, is to show, how inexcusable the Adulterer is: when even
those of the Gentiles, who (by reason of the Ephesians. 4.18.
darkness of their understandings, and the want of Scripture Light,) could
espy no obliquity in Fornication; could yet through all that darkness see
something in Adultery, deservedly punishable (even in their judgments) (...).
Basil.
spark of the light of nature which was in them, nor Romans 1.18.
hold back the truth of God in unrighteousness: as not by the glimpse thereof,
to discern a kind of reverend Majesty in Gods holy ordinance, of Wedlock;
which they knew might not be Heb. 13.4.
dishonored, nor the defiled by Adultery, without guilt. They saw Adultery was
a mixed crime, and such as carried with it the face of Injustice as well as
Uncleanness; nor could be committed by the two offending parties, without
wrong done to a third. And therefore if any thing might be said colourably to
excuse Fornication, (as there can be nothing said justly;) yet if any such
thing could be said for Fornication, it would not reach to excuse Adultery:
because of the injury that cleaves thereunto. Against Fornication God has
ordained 1 Cor. 7.2.
Marriage as a Remedy: what a beast then is the Adulterer, and what a Monster,
whom that remedy does no good upon? the marriage knot, there is some expression
and representation of the Love-covenant betwixt Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ, and his Church: but what good assurance can the Adulterer have that he
is within that Covenant, when he breaks this Knot? Every married person has
ipso facto surrendered up the right and interest he had in and over 1 Cor. 7.4.
his own body, and put it out of his own into the power of another: what an
arrant Thief then is the Adulterer, that takes upon him to dispose at his
pleasure that which is none of his? But I say too well by him, when I compare
him but to a thief, Solomon makes him worse than a Thief. [ Prove. 6.30, etc.
Men do not despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul, when he is
hungry, etc. But who so commits etc.] Where he makes both the injury
greater, and the reconcilement harder, in and for the Adulterer, then for the
Thief. Nay God himself makes him worse than a Thief in his Law: in his Moral
Law, next after murder placing Ex. 20.13, 15.
Adultery before Theft, as the greater sin; and in his Judicial Law, punishing
Ex. 22.1, etc.
Theft with a mulct, but Lev. 20 10. Deuteronomy. 22.22.
Adultery with Death, the greater Punishment. To conclude this first point:
Abimelech, an Heathen man, who had not the knowledge of the true God of Heaven
to direct him in the right way; and withal a King, control him if he should
transgress: would yet have abhorred to have defiled himself knowingly by
Adultery with another man's Wife, although the man were but a stranger, and the
woman exceeding beautiful. Certainly Abimelech shall one day rise up in
judgment, and condemn thy filthiness and injustice, whosoever thou art, that
committest, or causest another to commit adultery: Romans 1.32.
Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which do such things are worthy of
death, either do the same things thy self, or have pleasure in them that do
them; or being in place and office to punish incontinent easy commutations of
public penance for a private pecuniary mulct, do at once both beguilty thine
own conscience with sordid Bribery, and embolden the adulterer to commit that
sin again without fear, from which he has once escaped without shame, or so
much as valuable loss.

And thus much for that first Observation. The next thing, we Gods approving of
Abimelechs answer, and acknowledgement of the integrity of his heart, is, That
some Ignorance has the weight of a just excuse. For we noted before, that
Ignorance was the ground of his Plea. He had indeed taken Sarah into his house,
who was another man's Wife: but he hops that shall not be imputed to him as a
fault, because he knew not she was a married woman; the parties themselves
(upon inquiry) having informed him otherwise. And therefore he appealeth to God
himself, the trier and judger of men's hearts, whether he were not innocent in
this matter: and God gives sentence with him, [ Yea ] Where you see his
ignorance is allowed for a sufficient excuse.

For our clearer understanding of which point, (that I may not wade farther
into that great question so much mooted among Divines, than is pertinent to
this story of Abimelech, and may be useful for us thence, viz. whether or no,
or how far, Ignorance and Error may excuse, or lessen sinful Actions
proceeding therefrom, in point of Conscience,) let us first lay down one
general, certain, and fundamental ground, whereupon indeed depends especially
the resolution of almost all those difficulties, that may sin to be Voluntary;
that all other circumstances and respects laid aside, every sin is simply and
absolutely by so much greater or lesser, by how much it is more or less
voluntary. For whereas there are in the reasonable soul three prime faculties,
from whence all humane Actions flow; the Understanding, the Will, and the
sensual Appetite or Affections: all of these concur indeed to every Action
properly Humane; yet so, as the Will carries the greatest sway, and is
therefore the justest measure of the Moral goodness, or badnesse thereof. In
any of the three corrupt Nature; and the very truth is, there is in every sin
(every complete sin) a fault in every of the three. And therefore all sins, by
reason of the blindness of the Understanding, may be called Ignorances; and by
reason of the impotency of the Affections, Infirmities; and by reason of the
perverseness of the will, Rebellions. But for the most part it falls out so,
that although all the three be faulty, yet the obliquity of the sinful Action
springs most immediately and chiefly from the special default of some one or
other of the three. If the main defect be in the Understanding, a sin of
Ignorance. If the main defect be in the Affections, some passion blinding or
corrupting the Judgment: the sin arising from such defect we call a sin of
Infirmity. If the main defect be in the with perverse resolution bent upon any
evil: the sin arising from such wilfulness we call a Rebellion, or a sin of
Presumption. And certainly these sins of Presumption are the Gravius quidem
infirmitate, quam ignorantia; sed multo gravius studio, quam infirmitate
peccatur.

De poenit. d. 3. ex Gregor.


greatest of the three; because the wilfullest: and those of Ignorance the
least; because there is in them the least disorder of the will, which does its
office in some measure, in following the guidance of the understanding: the
greater fault being rather in the understanding, for misguiding it. And of sins
of Ignorance, compared one with another, that is ever the least, wherein the
defect is greater in the understanding, and in the will less.

Principle do issue sundry material conclusions: and namely, amongst many
other, most pertinently to our purpose these two. The one; that all Error and
Ignorance does not always and wholly excuse from sin. The other; that yet some
kind of Ignorance and Error does excuse from sin, sometimes wholly, but very
often at least in part. The whole truth of both these conclusions, we may see
in this one action of Abimelech, in taking Sarah into his house. In him there
was a twofold Error; and thence also a twofold Ignorance. The one was an Error
in universali, (Ignorantia Iuris, as they call it;) concerning the nature of
Fornication: heinous sin, he took to be either none at all, or a very small
one. The other was an error in particulari, (Ignorantia facti,) concerning the
personal condition and relation of Sarah to Abraham: whose sister he thought
her to be, and not wife, though she were both.

That former Ignorance ( Ignorantia juris) in Abimelech, was in some degree
voluntary. For Abimelech had in him the common Principles of the Law of nature;
by the light whereof, if he had been careful to have improved it, but even so
far as right reason might have led a prudent and dispassionate natural man,
simple Fornication such incongruity with those Principles, as might have
sufficiently convinced him of the unlawfulness thereof. It is presumed, that
all Ignorance of that, which a man is bound to know, and may know if he be not
wanting to himself, is so far forth wilful. Now Abimelech was bound to know,
that all carnal knowledge of man and woman out of the state of Wedlock was
simply unlawful; and so much, if he had not been wanting to himself in the use
of his Naturals, he might have known: and therefore it was a kind of wilful
ignorance in him in some degree, that he did not know wholly excused from sin,
in taking Sarah, notwithstanding both that, and his other ignorance: for
although he did not know her to be Abraham's wife, yet he knew well enough she
was not his own wife; and being not so to him, whatsoever she was to Abraham it
skilled not, he should certainly not have taken her. To plead Ignorance, that
he knew not Fornication to be a sin, would little help him in Actions; not
merely according to the present knowledge they actually have: but according to
the knowledge which they ought and might to have had, those means considered,
which he had afforded them of knowledge. Those means, even where they are
scantest, being ever sufficient, at the least thus far, Romans 1.20.
(...), as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. to leave the transgressor without
excuse, and to make void all pretensions of Ignorance.

That Error then did not wholly excuse Abimelech from sin; because Ignorance
was partly wilful: yet we may not deny, but even that error did lessen and
extenuate the sinfulness of the Action something, and so excuse him in part: a
tanto, though not a toto. Because it appears by many evidences, that his
ignorance therein was not grossly affected and wilful: and look how much measure
you abate in the wilfulness, so much weight you take off from the sin. The
light of Nature, though to a man that could have made the best of it, it had
been sufficient to have discovered the vicious deformity, and consequently the
moral unlawfulness of Fornication; yet was it nothing so clear in this equity,
and commutative Justice. Besides common Opinion, and the Custom of the times,
and Consent (though corrupt consent) of most nations, in making but a light
matter of it; might easily carry him with the stream, and make him adventure to
do as most did, without any scruple, or so much as suspicion of such foul
wickedness, in a course so universally allowed and practiced. These respects
make his wilfulness less, his ignorance more pardonable, and his sin more
excusable. And I make no question, the premises considered, but that Abraham's
sin in denying Sarah to be Verse. 12.
the equivocating trick he had to help it) was by many degrees greater, than
was Abimelechs in taking her: as being done more against knowledge, and
therefore more wilfully. Abimelechs sin in taking her, though with some degrees
of wilfulness, being yet a sin rather of Ignorance: whereas Abraham's sin in
denying her, was a sin of Infirmity at the least, if not much rather a sin of
Presumption.

Now although this former Error (Ignorantia Iuris,) could not wholly excuse
Abimelech from sin in what he had done, but in part only; for he sinned
therein, by giving way to unchaste the seventh Commandment: yet that other
Error of his ( Ignorantia facti, in mistaking a married woman for a single)
does wholly excuse his fact from the sins of injustice, in coveting and taking
another man's Wife, against the eighth and the tenth Commandments. He had not
injurious intent against Abraham, in that kind and degree: and therefore
though he took his wife from him indeed, yet not knowing any such matter by
her, especially having withal made ordinary and requisite enquiry thereafter,
it must be granted he did it unwittingly, and therefore unwilfully: and
therefore also unsinfully, as to that species of sin. St. Augustine says
truly, Peccatum ita est voluntarium, ut si non sit voluntarium, non est
peccatum: without some consent of the will, no complete actual sin is
committed. Such ignorance therefore, as preventeth a toto, and cutteth off all
consent of the will, must excuse, and that a toto, the Actions that proceed
therefrom from being sins. It is clear from the words of my Text, that
Abimelechs heart was sincere in this action of taking Sarah, from any injury
intended to Abraham therein; although de facto he took his wife from him:
because he did it ignorantly.

By what has been spoken we may see in part, what kind of Ignorance it is,
that will excuse us from sin, either in whole, or in part; and what will not.
Let us now raise some profitable Inferences from this observation. First, our
Romish Catholics What, say they, were they not all downright Papists?
believed, as we believe? worshipped, as we worship? You will not say, they all
lived and dyed in Idolatry, and so are damned. And if they were saved in their
faith, why may not the same faith save us? and why will not you also be of that
religion that brought them to Heaven?] A motive more plausible, than strong:
the Vanity whereof our present Observation duly considered and rightly applied
fully discovers. We have much reason to conceive good hope of the salvation
of many of our Forefathers: who led away with the common superstitions general
truths, which by the mercy of God were preserved amid the foulest
overspreadings of Popery, agreeable to the Word of God, (though clogged with an
addition of many superstitions and Antichristian inventions withal,) be brought
to true Faith in the Son of God; unfeigned Repentance from dead works; and a
sincere desire and endeavor of new and holy Obedience. This was the Religion,
that brought them to Heaven; even Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience. This is
the true, and the Old, and Catholic Religion: and this is our Religion, in
which we hope to find salvation; Catholics come to Heaven, it is this
Religion must carry you thither. If together with this true Religion, of Faith,
Repentance, and Obedience, they embraced also your additions, as their blind
guides then led them; prayed to our Lady, kneeled to an Image, crept to a
Cross, flocked to a Mass, as you now do: these were their spots and their
blemishes; these were their 1 Cor. 3.12.
hay and their stubble; these were their Errors and their Ignorances. And I
doubt not, but as S. Paul for his blasphemies and persecutions, so they
obtained mercy for these sins, because they did them ignorantly in misbelief.
And upon the same ground, we have cause also to hope charitably of many
thousand poor souls in Italy, Spain, and other parts of the Christian World at
this day: that by the same blessed means they may obtain mercy and salvation in
the end, although in the mean time through ignorance they defile themselves
with much foul Idolatry, and many gross Superstitions.

But the Ignorance that excuses from sin, is Ignorantia facti, according to
that has been already declared: whereas theirs was Ignorantia juris, which
excuses not. And besides, as they lived in the practice of that worship which
we call Idolatry, so they dyed in the same without repentance: and so their
case is not the same with Saint Paul's, who saw those his sins, and sorrowed for
them, and forsook them: But how can Idolaters, living and dying so without
repentance, be saved? It is answered, that ignorance in point of fact, so
conditioned as has been showed, does so excuse a toto; that an Action
proceeding thence, though material inconformity unto the Law of God, is yet not
formally a sin. But I do not so excuse the Idolatry of our Forefathers, as if
it were not in it self a sin, and that (without repentance) damnable. But yet
their Ignorance being such as it was: nourished by Education, Custom,
Tradition, the Tyranny of their leaders, the Fashion of the times, not without
some show also of Piety and Devotion; and themselves withal, having such
slender means of better knowledge: though it cannot wholly excuse them from sin
without repentance damnable, yet it much lesseneth and qualifieth the
sinfulness of their Idolatry; arguing that their continuance therein
prejudices, than from a wilful contempt of Gods holy Word and Will. And as for
their Repentance, it is as certain, that as many of them as are saved, did
repent of their Idolatries, as it is certain no Idolater, nor other sinner can
be saved without Repentance. But then, there is a double difference to be
observed, between Repentance for Ignorances, and for known sins. The one is,
that known sins must be confessed, and repented of, and pardon asked for them
in particular, every one singly by it self, (I mean for the kinds, though not
ever for the individuals,) every kind by it self, at least where God allows
time and leisure to the to call himself to a punctual examination of his life
past, and does not by sudden death, or by some disease that takes away the use
of reason deprive him of opportunity to do that: Whereas for Ignorances, it is
enough to wrap them up all together in a general and implicit confession, and
to crave pardon for them by the lump, as David does in the 19. Psalm, [ Psalm.
19.12.
Who can understand all his Errors? Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret sins.]
The other difference is, that known sins are not truly repented of, but where
they are Prove. 28.13.
forsaken; and it is but an hypocritical semblance of penance without the truth
of the thing, where is no care, either endeavor of reformation. But ignorances
may be faithfully repented of, and yet still continued in. The reason; because
they may be repented of in the general and in the lump, without special
knowledge that they are sins: but without such special knowledge they cannot be
reformed. Some of our forefathers live in Popish Idolatry, but even dye in an
Idolatrous act, breathing out their last with their lips at a Crucifix, and an
Ave-Mary in their thoughts: and yet have truly repented, (though but in the
general, and in the crowd of their unknown sins,) even of those very sins; and
have at the same instant true Faith in Jesus Christ, and other Graces
accompanying salvation.

But why then may not I, will some Popeling say, continue as I am, and yet come
to heaven, as well as they continued what they were, and yet went to heaven? If
I be an Idolater, it is out of my Error and Ignorance: and if that general
Prayer unto God at the last, to forgive me all my Ignorances, will serve the
turn, I may run the same course I do without danger or fear: God will be
merciful to me for what I do ignorantly. Not to preclude all possibility of
mercy from thee, or from any sinner: Consider yet, there is a great difference
between their state and thine, between thine ignorance and theirs. They had but
a very small enjoyance of the light of Gods Word, Matthew. 5.15.
hid from them under two bushels for sureness: under the bushel of a tyrannous
Clergy, that if any man should be able to understand the books, he might not
have them; unknown tongue, that if any man should chance to get the books, he
might not understand them. Whereas to thee, the light is holden forth, and set
on a Candlestick; the books open; the language plain, legible, and familiar.
They had eyes, but saw not: because the light was kept from, and the land was
dark about them, as the Exodus 18.21, 23.
darkness of Egypt. But thou live as in a Goshen, where the light
encompasseth thee in on all sides; where there are Joh. 5.35.
burning and shining lamps in every corner of the land. Yet is thy blindeness
greater, (for who so blind, as he that will not see?) and more inexcusable:
because thou Mat. 13 15.
shuttest thine the light, lest thou should see and be converted, and God
should heal thee. Briefly, they wanted the light, thou shunnest it: they lived
in darkness; thou delightest in it: their ignorance was simple; thine affected
and wilful. And therefore although we doubt not, but that the times of their
ignorance God Act. 17.30.
winked at; yet thou have no warrant to presume, that God will also in these
times wink at thee, who Luke 7.30.
rejectest the counsel of God against 2 These. 2.10, 11
love and affection to the truth, art justly given over to strong delusions, to
believe fables, and to put thy confidence in things that are lies. So much for
that matter.

Secondly, here is a needful admonition for us all, not to flatter our selves
for our ignorance of those things, that concern us in our general or particular
Callings; as if for that ignorance our reckoning should be easier at the day of
judgment. Ignorance indeed excuses sometimes, sometimes lesseneth a fault,
but yet not all ignorance, all faults; not wilful and affected ignorance any
fault. the offense Ignorantia direct and per se voluntaria auget voluntarium,
and per consequens peccatum. Aq^in. 1.2. qu. 76.4.
much more grievous, and the offender much more inexcusable. A heedless
servant, that Luke 12.48.
neither knows, nor does his Masters will, deserves some stripes. A stubborn
servant that knows it, and yet transgresses it, deserves more stripes. But
worse than them both is that ungracious servant, who fearing his Master will
appoint him something he had rather let alone, keeps himself out of the way
beforehand, and mich^th in a corner out of sight, of purpose that he might not
know his Masters will; that so he may after stand upon it when he is chidden,
and say, He knew it not: more stripes. Would the Spirit of God, think you, in
the Scripture so often call upon us to Prove. 2.3, 4.7.23.23.
get the knowledge of Gods will, and to increase therein; or would he commence
his Hos. 4.1.
suit against a land, and enter his action against the people thereof, for want
of such knowledge, if ignorance were better or safer? O it is a fearful thing
for a man to See Prove. 1.24, etc.
shun instruction, and to say he desires not the knowledge of God. Psalm. 36.3.
N^^uerunt intelligere, ut been agerent. When men are once come to that pass,
that they will not understand nor seek after God; when they John 3 20.
hate the light, because they take pleasure in the Ephesians. 5.11.
works of darkness; Impia men's odit etiam ipsum intellectum: and homo aliquando
nimium mente perversa timet intelligere ne cogatur quod intellexerit facere.
Aug. de ver. Apost. ser. 13.
are afraid to know too much, lest their hearts should condemn them for not
doing thereafter; when like the Psalm. 58.4, 5.
deaf Adder they stop their ears against the voice of the charmer, for fear
they should be charmed by the power of that voice out of their crooked and
Serpentine courses; when they are so Ex intention voluntaris ad peccandum
prevenit, quod aliquis vult subire ignorantiae damnum, propter libertatem
peccandi. Aqu. 1.2, 76, 4.
resolved to take freedom to sin, that they choose to be still Ignorant, rather
than hazard the foregoing of any part of that freedom: what do they, but even
run on blindfold into hell? and through inner, poast along unto (...). Mat.
25.30.
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth? Bernard. de 12.
grad. humil.
Frustra sibi de ignorantia blandiuntur, says S. Bernard, Saint Paul so
speaks of such men, as if their case were desperate; [ 1 Cor. 14 38.
If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant:] as who say; if he will needs be
wilful, at his peril be it. But as many as desire to walk in the fear of God
with upright and sincere hearts, let them thirst after the knowledge God and
his will, as the Psalm 41.2.
Heart after the rivers of waters; let them Prove. 2.3, 4.
cry after knowledge, and lift up their voices for understanding; let them seek
it as silver, and dig for it as for hid treasures; let their feet tread often
in Gods Courts, and even wear the thresholds of his house; let them delight in
his holy Ordinances, and rejoice in the light of his Word; depending upon the
ministry thereof with unsatisfied ears, and unwearted attention, and feeding
thereon with uncloyed appetites: that so they may see, and hear, and learn, and
understand, and believe, and obey, and increase in wisdom, and in grace, and
in favor with God and all good

But then in the third place consider, that if all ignorance will not excuse an
offender, (though some do:) how can thou hope to find any color of excuse
or extenuation, that sinnest wilfully with knowledge, and against the light of
thine own conscience? The least sin thus committed, is in some degree a
Presumptuous sin, and carries with it a contempt of God: and in that regard is
Quo quisque melius sapit, ^ deterius delinquit. Greg. in pastorali.
greater, than any sin of Ignorance. Jam. 4.17.
To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is a sin, says
Saint James: Sin beyond all plea of excuse. Saint Paul though he were a 1 Timothy
1.13.
Persecutor Blasphemer of the Lord, and injurious to the Brethren; yet he
obtained Mercy, because he did all that ignorantly. His bare ignorance was not
enough to justify him: but he stood need of Gods mercy, or else he had
perished in those sins for all his ignorance. But yet who can tell, whether
ever he should have found that mercy, if he had done the same things and not in
ignorance? Ignorance then, though it do not deserve pardon, yet it often
finds it: because it is not joined with open contempt of him, that is able to
pardon. But he that sins against knowledge, does Ponere obicem, (if you will
allow the phrase, and it may be allowed in sense:) he does not only provoke the
Justice of God by his sin (as every other sinner does,) but he does also damb
up the Mercy of God by his contempt, and does his part to shut himself out for
ever from all possibility of pardon; unless the boundless overflowing mercy of
God come in upon him with a strong tide, and with an unresisted current break
it self a passage through. Do this then my beloved Brethren. Labor to get
knowledge, labor to increase your knowledge, labor to abound in knowledge:
but beware you rest not in your knowledge. Rather 2 Pet. 1.5, 7.
give all diligence, to add to your knowledge Temperance, and Patience, and
Godliness, and brotherly kindeness, and Charity, and other good graces. Without
these, unprofitable; nay, damnable. Eccles. 1.18.
Qui apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem; is true in this sense also. He that
increases knowledge, unless his care of obedience rise in some good proportion
with it, does but lay more rods in steep for his own back, and increase the
number of his stripes, and add to the weight and measure of his own most just
condemnation. Know this, that although Integrity of heart may stand with some
ignorances, as Abimelech here pleads it, and God allows it: yet that man's
heart is devoid of all singleness and sincerity, who allows himself in any
course he knows to be sinful, or takes this liberty to himself, to continue
and persist in any known ungodliness. And thus much for our second Observation.

I add but a Third: and that taken from the very thing which Abimelech here
pleads, viz. the integrity of his heart; considered together with his present
personal estate and condition. I dare not say, he was a Castaway: for what
knows any man, how Abimelech doubtless was an unbeleever, a stranger to the
covenant of God made with Abraham, and so in the state of a carnal and mere
natural man. And yet both he pleads, and God approves, the innocence and
integrity of his heart in this business, [ Yea, I know that thou did this
in the integrity of thine heart.] Note hence, That in an unbeleever and natural
man, and therefore also in a wicked person and a castaway, (for as to the
present state, the unregenerate and the Reprobate, are truth and singleness,
and integrity of heart in some particular Actions.

We use to teach, and that truly, according to the plain evidence of Scripture,
and the judgment of the ancient Fathers, against the contrary tenet of the
later Church of Rome; that all the works of unbeleevers and natural men, are
not only stained with sin, (for so are the best works of the faithful too;) but
also are really and truly sins: both in their own nature, because they spring
from a corrupt fountain, for Joh. 3.6.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and it is impossible that a Mat.
7.18.
corrupt tree should bring forth good fruit; and Gods estimation, because he
beholds them as out of Christ, Mat. 3.17.
in and through whom alone he is well pleased. St. Augustines judgment
concerning such men's works is well known, who pronounces of the best of them,
that they are but splendida peccata, glorious sins: and the best of them are
indeed no better. We may not say therefore, that there was in Abimelechs heart,
as nor in the heart of any man, a legal integrity; as if his person, or any of
his actions were innocent, and free from sin, in that perfection which the Law
requires. Neither yet can we say, there was in his heart, as nor in the heart
of any unbeleever, an Evangelical integrity; as if his person were accepted,
and for the persons sake all or any of actions approved with God, accepting
them as perfect, through the supply of the abundant perfections of Christ then
to come. That first and legal integrity, supposes the righteousness of
works, which no man has; this latter and Evangelical integrity, Faith, which
no unbeliever has: no man's heart being, either legally perfect, that is in
Adam; or Evangelically perfect, that is out of Christ. But there is ^ third
kind of integrity of heart, inferior to both these, which God here
acknowledges in Abimelech; and of which only we affirm, that it may be found
in an unbeliever, and a Reprobate: and that is, a Natural or Moral integrity;
when the heart of a mere natural man is careful to follow the direction and
guidance of right reason, according to that light (of Nature, or Revelation)
which is in him, without hollownesse, halting, and hypocrisy; Rectus usus
Naturalium we Papists and some other Sectaries, by sowring it with the leaven
of their Pelagianism, rendered it suspicious. The Philosophers and learned among
the Heathen, by that which they call a good conscience, understand no other
thing, then this very Integrity whereof we now speak. Not that an Unbeliever
can have a good conscience, taken in strict propriety of truth, and in a
spiritual sense. For the whole man being corrupted through the fall of Adam;
the conscience also is wrapped in the common pollution: so that Tit. 1.15.
to them that are defiled and unbeleeving nothing is pure, but even as speaks
S. Paul, Tit. 1. and being so defiled, can never be made good, till Heb. 10.22.
their hearts be sprinkled from that pollution, Heb. 9.14.
by the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without
spot to God, and till the Conscience be purged by the same blood from dead
works to serve the living God, as speaks the same Apostle, Heb. 9. and 10.

But yet a good Conscience in that sense as they meant it, a Conscience morally
good, many of them had; who never had Faith in Christ, nor so much as the least
inckling of the Doctrine of Salvation. Romans 2.14.
Not having the Law, they were a Law unto themselves; doing by nature many of
the things contained in the Law: and choosing rather to undergo the greatest
miseries, as shame, torment, exile, yea death it self, or any thing that could
befall them, than wilfully to transgress those rules, and notions, and
dictates of piety and equity, which the God of Nature had imprinted in their
Consciences. Could heathen men and unbeleevers have taken so much comfort in
the testimony of an excusing Conscience, as it appears many of them did; if
such a Conscience were not in the kind, (that is Morally) Good? Or how else
could Paul have made that protestat^on he did in the Council, [ Act. 23.1.
Men and Brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this
day:] At least, if he meant to include, (as most of the learned conceive he
did) the whole time of his life, as well before his conversion, as after?
Balaam was but a cursed Hypocrite, and therefore it was but a copy of his
countenance, and no better, (for his heart even then hankered after 2 Pet. 2.15.
the wages of unrighteousness,) Balaks liberal offer, with this answer. Number.
22.18.
If Balak would give me his house full of gold and silver, I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. But I assure my self, many
thousands of unbeleevers in the world, free from his hypocrisy would not for
ten times as much as he there spoke of, have gone beyond the Rules of the Law
of Nature written in their hearts, to have done either less or more. Abimelech
seems to be so affected; at least, in this particular action and passage with
Abraham: wherein God thus approves his integrity, Yea, I know that thou
did this in the integrity of thy

The Reason of which moral integrity in men unregenerate and merely natural, is
that Imperium Rationis, that power of natural Conscience and Reason, which it
has, and exercises over the whole man: doing the office of a Lawgiver, and
having the strength of a law; [ Romans 2.14.
They are a law unto themselves,] says the Apostle, Romans 2. As a Law, it
prescribes, what is to be done: as a Law, it commands, that what is
prescribed be done: as a Law, it proposes rewards and punishments, accordingly
as what it prescribes and commands is done or not done. Abimelechs own
Reason, by the informed him, that to take another man's wife from him was
injurious; and enjoyneth him therefore, as he will avoid the horrors and
upbraidings of a condemning heart* by no means to do it. Resolved accordingly
to do, and to obey the law of Reason written in his heart, before he durst take
Sarah into his house, he makes inquiry first, whether she were a single woman
or a wife: and therefore, although (upon misinformation) he took another man's
wife, unwitting that she was so, he pleads here, and that justly, the
integrity of his heart. And from obedience to the same Law especially, spring
those many rare examples of Justice, Temperance, and other moral virtues, which
we read of in Heathen men, not without admiration: which were so many strong
evidences also of this moral integrity of their hearts.

A point that would bear much enlargement, if we intended to amplify in by
Instances; and did not rather desire to draw it briefly into use, by
Inferences. A just condemnation, it may be first, to many of us, who call our
selves Christians, and Believers, and have many blessed means of direction and
instruction for the due ordering of our hearts and lives which those Heathens
wanted: yet the detestation of vicious and gross enormities, and in the
conscionable practice of many offices of virtue. Among them what strictness of
Justice? which we either slack or pervert. What zeal of the common good? which
we put off each man to other, as an unconcerning private injuries? which we
pursue with implacable revenge. What contempt of honors, and riches? which we
so pant after, so adore. What temperance and frugality in their provisions?
wherein no excess satisfies us. What free beneficence to the poor, and to
pious uses? whereto we contribute penuriously and with grudging. What
conscience of oaths and promises? which we so slight. What reverence of their
Priests? whom we count as the scum of the people. What loathing of swinish
drunkenness? wherein some of us glory. What detestation of usury, as a monster
in nature? whereof some of ours a trade. Particularities are infinite, but what
should I say more? Certainly, unless our righteousnesses exceed theirs, we
shall never come to heaven: but how shall we escape the nethermost hell, if our
unrighteousnesses exceed theirs? Romans 2.27.
Shall not Uncircumcision which is by nature, if it keep the law, judge thee,
who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the law? said S. Paul to
the Jew: make application to thy self, thou that art Christian.

Secondly, if even in unbeleevers, and Hypocrites, and Cast-awaies there may be
in particular Actions, integrity and singleness uncertain Rule for us to judge
of the true state of our own or other men's hearts, by what they are in some few
particular actions. Men are indeed that, not which they show themselves in some
passages, but what they are in the more general and constant tenor of their
lives. If we should compare Abimelech and David together, by their different
behavior in the same kind of temptation, in two particulars of the sacred
History, and look no farther: we could not but give sentence upon them quite
contrary to right and truth. We should see Abimelech on the one side, though
allured with Sarahs beauty; injurious thought to her husband, or adulterous
intent in himself. We should behold 2 Samuel 11.2, etc.
David on the other side, enflamed with lust after Bathsheba, whom he knew to
be another man's Wife: plotting first, how to compass his filthy desires with
the Wife, and then after how to conceal it from the Husband, by many wicked and
politic fetches; and, when none of those would take, at last to have him
murdered, being one of his principal 2 Samuel 23.39.
Worthies, in a most base and unworthy fashion, with the loss of the lives of
a number of innocent persons more; besides the betraying of Gods cause, the
dis-heartning of his people, and the of his and their enemies. When we should
see and consider all this on both sides, and lay the one against the other:
what could we think but that Abimelech were the Saint, and David the Infidel;
Abimelech the man after Gods own heart, and David a stranger from the Covenant
of God? Yet was David all this while, within that Covenant: and (for any thing
we know, or is likely.) Abimelech not. Particular actions then, are not good
unbeleever awed sometimes by the law of natural Conscience, may manifest much
simplicity and integrity of heart; and the true Child of God, swayed sometimes
with Romans 7.23.
the law of sinful concupiscence, may bewray much foul Hypocrisy, and
infidelity. But look into the more constant course of both their lives: and
then may you find the Hypocrite and the unbeleever wholly distinguished from
the godly, by the want of those right marks of sincerity that are in the godly:
no zeal of Gods glory; no sense of original corruption; no bemoaning of his
privy hypocrisy and secret Atheism; no suspicion of tenderness of Conscience
in smaller duties; no faithful dependence upon the providence or promises of
God for outward things; no self-denial, or poverty of spirit; no thirst after
the salvation of his brethren, and the like: none of these I say, to be found
in any constant manner in the general course of his life; although there may be
some sudden light flashes of some of them now and then in some particular
Actions. Measure no man's heart then, especially not thine own, by those rarer
discoveries of moral integrity in particular actions: but by the powerful
manifestations of habitual grace, in the more constant of life and practice.

We may learn hence thirdly, not to flatter our selves too much upon every
integrity of heart; or to think our selves discharged from sin in the sight of
God, upon every acquital of our own Consciences: when as all this may befall an
Hypocrite, an Unbeleever, a Reprobate. When men accuse us of hypocrisy or
unfaithfulness, or Psalm. 35.11.
lay to our charge things we never did: it is, I confess, a very comfortable
and a blessed thing, if we can find protection against their accusations in
our own hearts, and be able to plead the integrity thereof in bar against
their calumniations. Our integrity, Moral, and though but only in those actions
wherein they charge us wrongfully,) and the testimony of our own consciences,
may be of very serviceable use to us thus far, to make us regardlesse of the
accusations of unjust men: that one testimony within shall relieve us more,
than a thousand false witnesses without can injure us. 1 Cor. 4.3.
With me it is a very small thing, says Saint Paul, that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment: as if he should have said, I know my self better
than you do; and therefore so long as I know nothing by my self of those
things, wherein you censure me, I little reckon what either you, or others
shall think or say by me. We may by his example make use of this; the inward
testimony of our hearts being sufficient to justify us against the accusations
of men: but we may not rest upon this; as if the acquital of our hearts were
sufficient to justify us in the sight of God. S. Paul knew it, who durst not
rest 1 Cor. 4.3, 4.
Yea, I judge not mine own self; for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
hereby justified: but he that judges me, is the Lord. Our hearts are close,
and false; and nothing so Jer. 17.9, 10
deceitful as they: and who can know them perfectly, but he that made them, and
can search into them? Other men can know very little of them: our selves
something more: but God alone all. If therefore when other men condemn us, we
find our selves agrieved: we may remove our cause into an Higher Court; appeal
from them to our own Consciences, and be relieved there. But the Highest Court
of all; there lies yet an appeal further and higher than it, even to the
Iudgement-seat, or rather to the Mercy-seat of God: who both can find just
matter in us, to condemn us, even in those things wherein our own hearts have
acquitted us; and yet can withal find a gracious means to justify us, even
from those things wherein our own hearts condemn us. Whether therefore our
hearts condemn us, or condemn us not: 1 John 3.20.
God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. To conclude all this
point, and therewithal the first general part of my Text; Let no Excusations of
our own confidence of any integrity in our selves, make us presume we shall be
able to stand just in the sight of God, if he should enter into Judgment with
us: but let us rather make suit unto him, that since we cannot Psalm. 19.19.
understand all our own errors, he would be pleased to cleanse us from our
secret sins. And on the other side, let no accusations of our own Consciences,
or guiltiness of our manifold frailties and secret hypocrisies, make us despair
of obtaining his favor and righteousness: if denying our selves, and
renouncing all integrity in our selves, as of our selves, we cast our selves
wholly at the footstool mercy, and seek his favor in the face of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ the righteous.

Of the former branch of Gods reply to Abimelech, in those former words of the
Text, [ Yea I know that thou did this in the integrity of thy heart]
hitherto. I now proceed to the latter branch thereof, in those remaining words
[ For I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee
not to touch her.] (...). The word signifies properly to hold in, or to keep
back; Vatablus in Schol. hic.
Retinui, or Iunius hic.
Cohibui, or as the Latin has it, Vulgar. hic.
Custodivi te: implying Abimelechs forwardness to that sin; certainly he had
been gone, if God held him back. The Greek renders it, Septuag. hic.
(...). I spared thee: and so the Latin Parcere, is sometimes used for
impedire, or prohibere, to hinder, or not to suffer; as in that of Virg. Eclog.
3.
Virgil, Parcite oves nimium procedere. Or taking parcere in the most usual
signification, for sparing; it may very well stand with the purpose of the
place; for indeed God spares us no less, indeed he spares us much more, when
he makes us forbear sin, than when having sinned he forbeareth to punish; and
as much cause have we to acknowledge his mercy, and to rejoice in it, when he
holds our hands that we sin not, as when he holds his own hands that he
strike not. For I also withheld thee from sinning against me. How? Did not
Abimelech sin in taking Sarah, or was not that as Psalm. 51.4.
every other sin is, a sin against God? Certainly, if Abimelech had not sinned
in so doing, and that against God; God would not have so plagued him as he did,
for that deed. The meaning then is; not, that God withheld him wholly from
sinning at all therein; but that God withheld him from sinning against foul
kind, and in that high degree, as to defile himself by actual filthiness with
Sarah, which but for Gods restraint he had done: [ Therefore suffered I thee
not] Septuag. hic.
(...). Vulg. hic.
Non dimisi te, that is, I did not let thee go: I did not leave thee to thy
self: or most agreeably to the letter of the Text in the (...).
Hebrew, Non dedi, or non tradidi; I did not deliver, or give. That may be, non
dedi potestatem, I did not give thee H. A. hic.
leave or power, and so giving is sometimes used for suffering, as Psalm. 16.
Psalm. 16.10.
Non dabis sanctum tuum, Thou will not suffer, etc. and Genesis 31.73. Exodus 3.19.
and 12 23. Number. 22.13. Jud. 1.24. and 15.1. Ester. 9.14.
elsewhere. Or non dedi te tibi, I gave thee not to thy self. A man cannot be
put enemy, than to be left in manu consilii sui, delivered into his own hands,
and given over to the lust of his own heart. Or as it is here translated, I
suffered thee not. We should not draw in God as a party, when we commit any
sin, as if he joined with us in it, or lent us his helping hand for it: we do
it so alone, without his help, that we never do it, but when he lets us
alone, and leaves us destitute of his help. For the kind, and manner, and
measure, and circumstances, and events, and other the appurtenances of sin; God
orders them by his Almighty power and providence so, as to become serviceable
to his most wise, just, most holy purposes: but as for the very formality it
self of the sin, God is (to make the most of it,) but a sufferer; [Therefore
suffered I thee not, To touch her.] Signifying that God had so far restrained
Abimelech from the accomplishment of his wicked and unclean purposes, that
Sarah was preserved free by his good providence, not only from actual adultery,
but from all unchaste and wanton dalliance also with Abimelech.

It was Gods great mercy to all the three parties, that he did not suffer this
evil to be done: for by this means he graciously preserved Abimelech from the
sin, Abraham from the wrong, and Sarah from both. And it is to be acknowledged
the great mercy of God, when at any time he does, (and he does ever and anon
more or less,) by his gracious and powerful restraint withold any man, from
running into those extremities of sin and mischief, Satan, and the manifold
temptations that are in the world through lust. The Points then that arise from
this part of my Text, are these. 1. Men do not always commit those evils, their
own desires, or outward temptations prompt them unto. 2. That they do it not,
it is from Gods restraint. 3. That God restrains them, it is of his own
gracious goodness and mercy. The common subject matter of the whole three
points, being one, viz. Gods restraint of man's sin; we will therefore wrap them
up all three together, and one entire Observation, as the total of all three.
God in his mercy oftentimes restrains men from committing those evils, which,
if that restraint were not, they would otherwise have committed.

This Restraint, whether we consider the Measure, or the Means which God uses
therein; is of great variety. For the Measure; God sometimes restrains men a
Toto, from the whole sin, whereunto they are tempted; as he withheld Joseph
from consenting to the persuasions of his Mistress: sometimes only a Tanto, and
that more or less, as in his infinite wisdom he sees expedient; suffering them
perhaps but only to desire the evil, perhaps to resolve upon it, perhaps to
prepare for it, perhaps to begin to act it, perhaps to proceed far in it, and
yet keeping them back from falling into the extremity of the sin, or
accomplishing their whole desire in the full and final consummation thereof; as
here he dealt with Abimelech. Abimelech sinned against the eighth Commandment,
in taking Sarah injuriously from Abraham, say he had been but her brother; and
he sinned against the seventh Commandment in a foul degree, in harboring such
wanton and unchaste thoughts concerning Sarah, and making such way as he did,
(by taking her the satisfying of his lust therein: but yet God withheld him
from plunging himself into the extremity of those sins, not suffering him to
fall into the act of uncleanness. And as for the Means whereby God withholds
men from sinning; they are also of wonderful variety. Sometimes he takes them
off, by diverting the course of the corruption, and turning the affections
another way. Sometimes he awaketh natural Conscience; which is a very tender
and tickle thing, when it is once stirred, and will boggle now and then at a
very small matter in comparison, over it will do at some other times. Sometimes
he affrighteth outward Evils; as shame, infamy, charge, envy, loss of a friend,
danger of humane laws, and sundry other such like discouragements. Sometimes
he cools their resolutions, by presenting unto their thoughts the terrors of
the Law, the strictness of the last Account, and the endless unsufferable
torments of Hellfire. Sometimes, when all things are ripe for execution, he
denies them opportunity, or casts impediment in the way, that quasheth all.
Sometimes he Qu^sdam praes^^^n^ Deus multa peccare posse, ^^agellat eos
infirmitate corporis, ne peccent, ut eis utilius sit frangi languoribus ad
salutem, quam remanere incolumes ad d^mnationem, Hug. 2. de Anim.
disableth them, and weakeneth the arm of flesh wherein they trusted, so as
they want power to their will; as here he dealt with Abimelech. And sundry
other ways he has, more than we are able to search into, whereby he lays a
restraint upon men, and keeps them back from many sins and mischiefs, at
least from the extremity of many sins and mischiefs, whereunto otherwise Nature
and Temptation would carry them with a strong current. Not to speak yet of that
sweet, and of all other the most blessed and powerful restraint, which is
wrought in us by the Spirit of Sanctification, renewing the soul, corruption
that is in the Flesh unto the Obedience of the Spirit: at which I shall have
fitter occasion to touch anon.

In the mean time, that there is something or other, that restrains men from
doing some evils, unto which they have not only a natural proneness, but
perhaps withal an actual desire and purpose; might be shown by a world of
instances: but because every man's daily experience can abundantly furnish him
with some, we will therefore content our selves with the fewer. See Genesis 31.23,
etc.
Laban meant no good to Jacob, when taking his Brethren with him, he pursued
after him seven days journey in an hostile manner; and power to his will, to
have done Jacob a mischief, Jacob being but imbellis turba, no more but
himself, his wives and his little ones, with his flocks and herds, and a few
servants to attend them, unable to defend themselves, much more unmeet to
resist a prepared enemy: yet for all his power, and purpose, and preparation,
Laban when he had overtaken Jacob, durst have nothing at all to do with him,
and he had but very little to say to him neither: The worst was but this, [
Thus and thus have you dealt with me. And Genesis 31.29.
It is in the power of mine hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father
spoke unto me yesternight, saying; Jacob either good or bad:] See the story in
Genesis 31. The same Jacob had a Brother, as unkind as that Uncle, nay much more
despightfully bent against him than he; for he had vowed his destruction, (
Genesis 27.41.
The days of mourning for my Father are at hand, and then I will slay my
Brother Jacob;) and although the Ibid. v. 44, 45.
Mother well hoped, that some few days time and absence would appease the fury
of Esau, and all should be forgotten; yet Genesis 31.38.
twenty years after the old grudge remained, and upon Jacobs approach Genesis 32.6.
Esau goes forth to meet him with 400. men, armed (as it should seem) for his
destruction: Ibid. v. 7, 8.
Jacob into a terrible fear, and much distressed he was good man, and glad to
use the best wit he had, by dividing his Companies, to provide for the safety
at least of some part of his charge. And yet behold at the encounter, no use at
all of the 400. men, unless to be spectatours and witnesses of the joyful Genesis
33.4, etc.
embraces, complements that passed between the two brothers, in the liberal
offers and modest refusals each of others courtesies; in the 32. and 33. of
Genesis. A good Probatum of that Observation of Solomon, Prove. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. Balaam the Conjurer, when the King Balac had cast the hook before
him, baited with ample Number. 22.7.17.
rewards in hand, and great promotions in reversion, if he would come over to
him and curse Israel; had both Covetousness and Ambition enough in him to make
him bite: so that he was not only 2 Pet. 2.15.
willing, but even desirous, to satisfy the King; for he loved the wages of
unrighteousness with his heart, and therefore Number. 23, 13, 14, 17, 28.
trial (till he saw it was all in vain,) if by any means he could wring a
permission from God to do it. But when his Number. 24.5, etc.
eyes were opened to behold Israel, and his mouth open that he must now
pronounce something upon Israel: though his eyes were full of Envy, and his
heart of Cursing, yet God put a parable of Blessing into his mouth, and he was
not able to utter a syllable of any thing other than good concerning Israel, in
22. and 24. of Numbers.

In all which and sundry other instances, wherein when there intended
beforehand so much evil to be done, and there was withal in the parties such
a forward desire, and such solemn preparation to have it done; and yet when all
came to all, so little or nothing was done, of what was intended, but rather
the contrary: it cannot first be imagined, that such a stop should be made, but
by the powerful restraint of some superior, and overruling hand; neither may
we doubt in the second place, that every such restraint, by what second and
subordinate means soever it be furthered, is yet the proper work of God, as
proceeding from and guided by his Almighty and irresistible providence. As for
that which happened Balaam, that it was Gods doing, the evidence is clear; we
have it from the mouth of two or three witnesses. The Wisard himself confesses
it, Number. 22.13.
The Lord will not suffer me to go with you, Number. 22. The King that set him on
work, upbraideth him with it; Number. 2^.11.
I thought indeed to promote thee to great honor: but lo the Lord has kept
thee back from honor: Number. 24. And Moses would have Israel take knowledge of
it; Deuteronomy. 23.5.
The Lord thy God would not harken unto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned the
curse into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loved thee, Deuteronomy. 23. It was
God then that turned Balaams curse into a blessing, and it was the same God,
Labans revengeful thoughts into a friendly Expostulation; and it was the same
God, that turned Esaus inveterate malice into a kind brotherly congratulation.
He that has set Job 38.8, 11.
bounds to the Sea, which, though the waves thereof rage horribly, they cannot
pass, (Hitherto shall thou go, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves;) and
did command the waters of the Exodus 15.8.
Red Sea to stay their course, and stand up as on heaps; and the Psalm. 114.3.
River Jordan, to run quite against the current up the Channel; he has Prove.
21.1.
in his hands, and at his command the hearts of all the sons of men, yea though
they be the greatest Kings and Monarchs in the world, as the Rivers of waters;
and can wind and turn them at his pleasure, inclining them which way soever he
will. Psalm. 76.10.
The fierceness of man shall turn to thy praise, (says David in Ps. 76.10.)
and the fierceness of them shall thou retain: the latter clause of the verse
is very significant in the Original, and comes home to our purpose; as if we
should translate it, (...) Residuum irarum cinge^. Vatablus.
Thou shall gird the remainder of their or of their fierceness. The meaning is
this. Suppose a man's heart be never so full fraught with envy, hatred, malice,
wrath, and revenge, let him be as fierce and furious as is possible; God may
indeed suffer him, and he will suffer him to exercise so much of his
corruption, and proceed so far in his fierceness, as he sees expedient and
useful for the forwarding of other his secret and just and holy appointments,
and so order the sinful fierceness of man by his wonderful providence, as to
make it serviceable to his ends, and to turn it to his glory: but look
whatsoever wrath and fierceness there is in the heart of a man, over and above
so much as will serve for those his remainder whatsoever it be he will gird; he
will so bind, and hamper, and restrain him, that he shall not be able to go an
inch beyond his ^e^der, though he would fret his heart out. The fierceness of
man shall turn to thy praise, so much of it as he does execute: and the
remainder of their fierceness thou shall refrain, that they execute it not. Be
he never so great a Prince; or have he never so great a spirit: all is one; he
must come under. No difference with God in this, betwixt him that sits on
the Throne, and her that grindeth at the Mill: Psalm. 76.12.
He shall refrain the spirit of Princes, and is wonderful in the last verse. of
that Psalm.

Now of the truth of all that has been hitherto spoken in both these branches
of the Observation, (viz. that first there is a restraint of evil; and then
secondly, that this restraint is from God;) I know not any thing can give us
better assurance, taking them both together, than to consider the generality
and strength of our Natural first, in regard of the Persons; overspreading the
whole lump of our nature: there is not a child of Adam free from the common
infection; Psalm. 14.2.
They are all corrupt, General secondly, in regard of the subject, overrunning
the whole man, soul and body, with all the parts and powers of either, so as
Esaias 1.6.
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head there is no whole part.
John 3.6.
Whatsoever is born of the flesh; and Tit. 1.15.
To them that are defiled and unbeleeving nothing is pure, but even their mind
and Conscience is defiled; and Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of the thoughts of their hearts are only evil
continually. General thirdly, in regard of the object: averse from all Romans
7.18.
In me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing;) and prone to all kind of
evil, ( Psalm. 36.4.
He has set himself in no good way, neither does he abhor any thing that is
evil.) Add to this generality, the strength also of our corruption; how
vigorous, and stirring, and active it is, and how it carries us headlongly
with full speed into all manner of evil, Jer. 8.6.
As the horse rusheth; so as we have no hold of our selves, neither power to
stay our selves, till we have run as far as we can, and without the mercy of
God plunged our selves into the bottom of the bottomless pit. Lay all this
together, and there can be no other sufficient reason given, than this
restraint whereof we now speak, why any one man should at any one time refrain
from any one sin being tempted thereunto; whereinto any other man at any other
time has fallen, being alike tempted. Every man would kill his brother, as
Genesis 4.8.
Cain did Abel; and every man defile his sister, as 2 Samuel 13.11
Amnon did Tham^r; and every man oppress his inferior, 1 Kin. 21.16.
Ahab did Naboth; and every man supplant his betters, as 2 Samuel 16.3.
Z^bah did M^ph^bosheth; and every man betray his Master, as Mat. 26.15.
Judas did Christ: every man being as deep in the loins of Adam, as either
Cain, or Judas, or any of the rest. Their nature was not more corrupt than
ours, neither ours less corrupt than theirs: and therefore every one of us
should have done those things, as well as any one of them, if there had not
been Nullum peccatum est quod unquam fecerit homo, quod non possit facere alter
homo, si Creator desit a quo fact^^ est homo. Augustine. soliloqu. cap. 15.
something without and above nature to withhold us, and keep us back therefrom,
when we were tempted, which was not in that measure afforded them, when they
were tempted. And from whom can we think restraint to come, but from that God,
who is the Author and the Lord of nature, and has the power and command and
rule of nature; by whose grace and goodness we are whatsoever we are: and to
whose powerful assistance we owe it, if we do any good, (for it is he that
sets us on;) and to his powerful restraint, if we eschew any evil, (for it
is he that keeps us off) Therefore I also withheld thee from sinning against
me.

And as to the third point in the Observation, it is not much less evident
than the two former; namely, that this Restraint, as it is from God, so it is
from the Mercy of God. Hence it is that Divines Grace: distinguishing between a
twofold Grace; a special renewing Grace, and a Common restraining Grace. The
special and renewing Grace is indeed so incomparably more excellent, that in
comparison thereof the other is not worthy to be called by the name of Grace,
if we would speak properly and exactly: but yet the word [ Grace] may not
unfitly be so extended, as to reach to every act of Gods providence,
restrains men from doing those evils which otherwise they would do; and that
in a threefold respect: God, of themselves, of others. First, in respect of
God, every restraint from sin may be called Grace; in as much as it proceeds
ex mero motu, from the mere good will and pleasure of God, without any cause,
motive, or inducement in the man that is so restrained. For take a man in the
state of corrupt nature, and leave him to himself; and think, how it is
possible for him to forbear any sin, whereunto he is tempted. There is no power
in nature, to work a restraint: nay there is not so much as any pronenesse in
nature, to desire a restraint: much less then is there any worth in Nature, to
deserve a restraint. Issuing therefore, not at all from the Powers of Nature,
but from the free pleasure of God, as a beam of his merciful providence, this
Restraint may well be called Grace. And so it may be secondly, in respect of
the Persons themselves: favor to them, more than they have deserved, that by
this means their sins (what in number, what in weight) are so much lesser, than
otherwise they would have been; whereby also their account shall be so much the
easier, and stripes so many the fewer: Chrysostom in Genesis hom. 25. and alibi
saepe.
Saint Chrysostom often observes it, as an effect of the mercy of God upon
them, when he cutteth off great offenders betimes with some speedy destruction:
and he does it out of this very consideration, that they are thereby prevented
from committing many sins, which if God should have lent them a longer time,
they would have committed. If his observation be sound; it may then well pass
for a double Mercy of God to a sinner, if he both respite his destruction, and
withal restrain him from sin: for by the one, he gives him so much longer
time for repentance, which is one Mercy; and by the other, he preventeth
another Mercy. Thirdly, it may be called Grace, in respect of other men.
restraining men from doing evil, God intends, as principally his own glory,
so withal the good of mankind, especially of his Church, in the preservation
of humane society: which could not subsist an hour, if every man should be left
to the wildenesse of his own nature, to do what mischief, the Devil and his
own heart would put him upon, without restraint. So that the restraining of
men's corrupt purposes and affections, proceeds from that Tit. 3.4.
(...) (as the Apostle somewhere calls love of GOD to mankind, whereby he
wills their preservation: and might therefore in that respect bear the name
of Grace, though there should be no good at all intended thereby to the person
so restrained. Just as those (...), those spiritual gifts, which God has
distributed in a wonderful variety for the the receiver, are yet styled graces
in the Scriptures: because the distribution of them proceeds from the
gracious love and favor of God to his Church, whose benefit he intends
therein. God here restrained Abimelech; as elsewhere he did Laban, and Esau,
and Balaam, and others: not so much for their own sakes, though perhaps
sometimes that also; as for their sakes, whom they should have injured by their
sins, if they had acted them. As here Abimelech for his chosen Abraham's sake;
and Laban and Esau for his servant Jacobs sake; and Balaam for his people
Isreal's Psalm. 105. and that with special reference (as I conceive it) to this
very story of Abraham, Psalm. 105 14.
He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for their sakes;
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: He reproved even
Kings, by restraining their power, as here Abimelech; but it was for their
sakes still, that so Sarah his anointed might not be touched, nor his Prophet
Abraham sustain any harm.

We see now the Observation proved in all the points of it. 1. Men do not
always commit those evils, they would, and might do. 2. That they do not, it
is from Gods restraint, who withholds restraint is an act of his merciful
providence, and may therefore bear the name of Grace: in respect of God, who
freely gives it; of them, whose sins and stripes are the fewer for it; of
others, who are preserved from harms the better by it. The Inferences we are
to raise from the premises for our Christian practice and comfort, are of two
sorts: for so much as they may arise from the consideration of Gods Restraining
Grace, either as it may lie upon other men, or as it may lie upon our selves.

First, from the consideration of Gods restraint upon others; preservation:
even to the power and goodness of their God, in restraining the fury of his
and their enemies. We live among Ezekiel. 2.6.
Scorpions, and Mat. 10.16.
as sheep in the midst of Wolves; and they that Psalm. 69.4.
hate us without a cause, and are mad against us, are more in number than the
hairs of our heads: And yet as many and as malicious as they are, by the Mercy
of God still we are, and we live, and we prosper in some measure, in despite of
them all. Is it any thanks to them? None at all. The Genesis 3.15.
seed of the Serpent bears a natural and an immortal hatred against God, and
all good horns to their curstness, and power answerable to their wills, we
should not breath a minute. Is it any thanks to our selves? Nor that neither:
we have neither number to match them, nor policy to defeat them, nor strength
to resist them; weak, silly, Luke 12.32.
little flock, as we are. But to whom then is it thanks? As if a little flock
of sheep escape, when a multitude of ravening Wolves, watch to devour them, it
cannot be ascribed either in whole the sheep in whom there is no help, or to
the Wolf in whom there is no mercy; but it must be imputed all and wholly to
the good care of the shepherd, in safe guarding his sheep, and keeping off the
Wolf: so for our safety and preservation in the midst, and in the spite of so
many Enemies, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us; O Lord, not unto us, whose greatest strength is but weakness;
much less unto them, whose tenderest Prove. 12.10.
mercies are cruel; but unto thy Name be the glory, O thou Psa. 80.1.
Shepherd of Israel, who out of thine abundant love to us, who are the Psalm.
95.7.
flock of thy Pasture, and the sheep of thy hands, have made thy power
glorious, in curbing restraining their malice against us. Psalm. 107.8.15. etc.
Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men. Wonders we may well call them;
indeed they are Miracles: if things strange, and above, and against the
ordinary course of Nature may be called Miracles. When we read the stories in
the Scriptures, of Dan. 6.23.
Daniel cast into the den among the Lions, and not touched; of the Dan. 3.27.
three children walking in the midst of the fiery furnace, and not scorched; of
a Acts 28.5.
viper fastening upon Paul's hand, and no harm following: we are stricken with
some amazement; at the consideration miraculous escapes. Yet such Miracles as
these, and such escapes, God works daily in our preservation: notwithstanding
we live encompassed with so many firebrarnds of hell, such herds of ravening
Wolves, and Lions, and Tigers, and such numerous Mat. 3.7.
generations of vipers: I mean wicked and ungodly men, the spawn of the old
Serpent, who have it by kind from their father, to thirst after the
destruction of the Saints and servants of God; and to whom it is as natural so
to do, as for the fire to burn, or a viper to bite, or a Lion to devour. Oh
that men would therefore this his goodness, and daily declare these his great
wonders, which he daily does for the children of men.

Secondly, since this restraint of wicked men is so only from God, as that
nothing either they, or we, or any Creature in the world can do, can withold
them from doing us mischief, unless God lay his restraint upon them: it should
teach us so much wisdom, as to take heed how we trust them. It is best and
safest for us, as in all other things, so in this, to keep the golden mean,
that we be neither too timorous, nor too credulous. If wicked men then threaten
and plot against thee, yet fear them not: God can restrain them if he think
good, and then assure thy self they shall not harm thee. If on the other side
they colloague, and make show of much kindness to thee, yet trust them not:
God may suffer them to take their own way, and not restrain them, and then
assure thy self they will not spare thee. Thou may think perhaps good nature
will hold him in; or thou have had trial of him heretofore, and found him
faithful as heart could wish; or thou have some such tie upon him by kindred,
neighborhood, acquaintance, covenant, oath, benefits, or other natural or
civil obligation, as will keep him off, at least from falling foul upon thee
all at once. Deceive not thy self; these are but slender assurances for thee to
abide upon. Good nature! alas where is it? since Adam fell, there was never any
such thing in rerum natura: if there be any good thing in any man, it is all
from Grace; nature is all naught, even that which Romans 8.7.
(...), is stark naught. We may talk of this and that, of good natured men, and
I know not what! But the very truth is, set grace aside, (I mean all grace,
both renewing and restraining grace,) there is no more good nature in any man
than there was in Cain and in Judas. That thing, which we use to call good
nature, is indeed but a subordinate means or instrument, whereby God
restrains some men more than others from their birth, and special
constitution, from sundry outrageous exorbitancies, and so is a branch of this
restraining Grace whereof we now speak. And as for thy past Experience, fetters
God laid upon him then, nor how he was pleased with those fetters. God might
full sore against his will, not only restrain him from doing thee hurt, but
also constrain him 3 Reg. 17.4.
to do thee good: as sometimes he commanded the Ravens to feed Eliah; a bird so
(...). Arist. 6. hist. Anim. 6. - Pellunt nidis pullos sicut and corvi. Plin.
10. Not. hist. 12.
unnatural to her young ones, that they might famish for her, if God did not
otherwise provide for them; and therefore it is noted in the Scripture as a
special argument of Gods providence, that he feeds the Psalm. 147.9. Job
38.41. Luke 12.24.
young Ravens that call upon him. But as nothing that is constrained is
durable, but every thing when it is constrained Usque recurrit. Horat. 1.
Epist. 10.
return to his own kind, and primitive disposition, as these Ravens which now
fed Eliah, would have been as ready another time to have pecked out his eyes:
so a Natural man is a natural man still, howsoever ouer-ruled for the present:
and if God, as he has hitherto by his restraint withheld him, shall but
another while withhold his restraint from him; he will soon discover the inbred
hatred of his heart against good things and men, and make thee at the last
beshrew thy folly in trusting him, when he has done thee a mischief unawares.
And therefore if he have done thee seven courtesies, the eighth; yet trust him
not; for there are Prove. 26.25.
seven abominations in his heart. And as for whatsoever other hanck thou may
think thou have over him, be it never so strong: unless God manacle him with
his powerful restraint, he can as easily unfetter himself from them all, as
Judge. 16*9.12.
Sampson from the green withs and coards wherewith the Philistines bound him.
All those forementioned relations came in but upon the bye, and since: whereas
the Genesis 3.15.
hatred of the wicked against goodness is of an ancienter date, and has his
root in (corrupt) nature: and is therefore of such force, that it makes void
all obligations, whether civil, domestical, or other, that have grown by virtue
of any succeeding contract. It is a ruled case, Mat. 10.36.
Inimici domestici, A man's enemies may be they of his own house. Let not any
man then, that has either Religion or Honesty, have any thing to do with that
man; at least let him not trust him more than needs he must, that is an Enemy
either to Religion or Honesty. So far as common Humanity, and the necessities
of our lawful Occasions and Callings do require, we may have to do the good
providence of God for the success of our affairs even in their hands, not
doubting but that God will both restrain them from doing us harm, and dispose
them to do us good, so far as he shall see expedient for us: but then, this is
not to trust them, but to trust God with them. But for us to put our selves
needlessly into their hands, and to hazard our safety upon their faithfulness by
way of trust; there is neither wisdom in it, nor warrant for it. Although God
may do it, yet we have no reason to presume that he will restrain them for our
sakes, when we might have prevented it our preserve us from receiving mischief
from them, unless God do restrain them. Therefore trust them not.

Thirdly, if at any time we see wickedness set aloft, bad men grow to be great,
or great men show themselves bad, sinning with an high hand, and an arm
stretched out, and God seems to strengthen their hand by adding to their
greatness, and increasing their power; if we see the Hab. 1.13.
wicked devouring the man that is more righteous than he, and God hold his
tongue the whilst; if we see the ungodly course it up and down at pleasure
which way soever the untamed Colt in a spacious field, God (as it were) laying
the rains in the neck, and letting them run; in a word, when we see the whole
world out of frame and order: we may yet frame our selves to a godly patience,
and sustain our hearts amid all these evils with this comfort and
consideration; that still God keeps the rains in his own hands, and when he
sees his time, and so far as he sees it good, he both can and will, check,
and control, and restrain them at his pleasure; as the cunning Rider sometimes
gives a fiery horse head, and lets him fling and run as if he were mad; he
the stop, when he list. The great Psalm. 104.26.
Leviathans, that take their pastime in the Sea, and with a little stirring of
themselves can make Job 41.31, 32.
the deep to boil like a pot, and cause a path to shine after them as they go;
he can Ibid. verse. 5.
play with them as children do with a bird: he suffers them to swallow his
hook, and to play upon the line, and to roll and tumble them in the waters; but
anon he strikes the hook through their noses, and fetches them up, and lays
them upon the shore, there to beat themselves without help or remedy, exposed
to nothing but shame and contempt. What then if God suffer those that hate him
to prosper for the time, and in their prosperity to Lord it over his heritage!
What if Princes should Psalm. 119.23.
sit and speak against us Ib. verse 161.
without a cause, as it was sometimes David's case! Let us not free at the
injuries, nor envy at the greatness of any: let us rather betake us to David's
Ibid. ver. 23.
occupied in the statutes, and to meditate in the holy Word of God. In that
holy Word we are taught, that the hearts even of Kings, how much more then of
inferior persons, are in his rule and governance, and that he does dispose and
turn them, as seems best to his godly wisdom; that he can Psalm. 76.12.
refrain the spirit of Princes, Psalm. 1^9.8.
bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in links of Iron; and though they Psalm. 2.6.
rage furiously at it, and lay their heads together, in consultation how to
break his bands, and cast away his cords from the^, yet they imagine but a vain
thing; whilst they strive against him on earth, he laugheth them to scorn in
heaven, and maugre all opposition establish the Kingdom of his Christ, and
protect his people. Say then the great ones of the world exercise their power
over us, and lay what restraints they can upon us: our comfort is, they have
not greater power over us, than Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in
ipsos imperium est Iovis. Hor 3. Carm. O^. 1.
God has over them; nor can they so much restrain the meanest of us, but God
can restrain the greatest of them much more. Say our enemies curse us with
Bell, Book, and Candle: our comfort is, God is able to return the curse upon
their own heads, and in despite of them too, Deuteronomy. 23.5.
turn it into a blessing upon us. Say they make warlike preparations against us
to invade us: our comfort is, God can Psalm. 48.7.
break the Ships of Tarshish, and scatter the most Psalm. 69.4.
invincible Armadoes. Say they that hate us be more in number than the hairs of
our head: our comfort is, the very Mat. 10 30.
hairs of our head are numbered with him, and without his sufferance not the
least Luke 21.18.
hair of our heads shall perish. Say (to imagine the worst) that our Enemies
should prevail against us, and Psalm. 106.41.
they that hate us should be Lords over us for the time: our comfort is, ^e
that loves us, is Lord over them, and can bring them under us again, when he
sees time. In all our fears, in all our dangers, in all our distresses; our
comfort is, that God can do all this for us: our care should be by our holy
obedience to protection, and not to make him a stranger from us, yea an enemy
unto us, by our sins and impenitency; that so we may have yet more comfort, in
a cheerful confidence, that God will do all this for us. The Assyrian, whose
Esaias 10.7.
ambition it was to be the Catholic King, and universal Monarch of the world,
stiling himself the Great King, ( Esaias 36.4.
thus says the Great King, the King of Assyria;) when he had sent Esaias 27.28,
29.
messengers Israel, and an Army to besiege and destroy Jerusalem: yet for all
his rage he could do them no harm, the Lord Esaias 10.12
brought down the stout heart of the King of Assyria, Esaias 37.33.
put a hook in his nose, and a bridle in his lips, and made him return back, by
the way by which he came, without taking the City, or so much as casting a
bank, or shooting an arrow against it. Nay, he that is indeed Job 41.34.
the great King over all the children of pride, and has better title to the
style of most Catholic King than any that ever yet bare it, whose Territories
are large as the Earth, and spacious as the Air, I mean the Devil, the Ephesians.
2.2.
Prince of this world; he fettered with the chain of Gods power and providence,
that he is not able with all his might and malice, no not though he raise his
whole forces, and muster up all the powers of darkness and Hell into one band,
to do us any harm in our souls, in our bodies, in our children, in our friends,
in our goods, no not so much as our very Mat. 8.31, 32.
Pigs, or any small thing that we have, without the special leave and
sufferance of our good God. He must have his Dedimus potestatem from him, or he
can do nothing.

Fourthly, since this restraint is an act of Gods mercy, whom we resemble in
nothing more Luke 6.36.
than in showing mercy: let every one of us in imitation of our Heavenly
Father, and in compassion to the souls of our brethren, and for our own good
and the good of humane society, endeavor our selves faithfully the best we can
to restrain, and withhold, and keep back others from sinning. The Magistrate,
the Minister, the Householder, every other man in his place and calling, should
do their best by rewards, punishments, rebukes, encouragements, admonitions,
persuasions, good example, and other like means to suppress vice, and restrain
disorders, in those that may any way come within their charge. Our first desire
should be, and for that we should bend our utmost endeavors, that if it be
possible, their hearts might be seasoned with grace and the true fear of God:
but as in other things, where we cannot attain to the full of our first aims,
Cicero.
Pulchrum est (as he says) in secundis tertiisve consistere; so here, we may
take some contentment in it, as some fruit of our labors, in our Callings, if
we can but wean them from gross disorders, and reduce them from extremely
debaucht courses to some good measure of Civility. It ought not to be, it is
not our desire, to make men Hypocrites; and a mere Civil man is no better: yet
to us, that cannot judge outward behavior, it is less grief, when men are
Hypocrites, than when they are Profane. Our first aim is, to make you good: yet
some rejoicing it is to us, if we can but make you less evil. Our aim is, to
make you of Natural, holy and Spiritual men; but we are glad, if of dissolute,
we can but make you Moral men: if in stead of planting Grace, we can but root
out Vice: if in stead of the power of Godliness in the reformation of the
inner-man, we can but bring you to some tolerable stayedness in the conformity
of the outward-man. If we can do but this, though we are to strive for that,
our labor is not altogether in vain in the Lord. For hereby, first, men's sins
are both less and fewer: and that secondly, abateth somewhat both of the number
weight of their stripes, and makes their punishment the easier: and thirdly,
there is less scandal done to Religion; which hypocrisy, profaneness:
Fourthly, the Kingdom of diminished, though not directly in the strength, for
he loses never a Subject by it; yet somewhat in the glory thereof, because he
has not so full and absolute command of some of his subjects, as before he
had, or seemed to have. Fifthly, much of the hurt that might come by evil
example, is hereby prevented. Sixthly, the people of God are preserved from
many injuries and contumelies which they would receive from evil men, if their
barbarous manners were not thus civilized; as a fierce Mastiffe does least
hurt, when he is chained and muzled. Seventhly and lastly, repress vicious
affections in others; it may please God these sorry beginnings may be the In
ipsis improbis dum formidato supplicio f^aenatur facultas, invocato Deo sanatur
voluntas. August. Tom. 2.
forerunners of more blessed and more solid graces. My meaning is not, that
these Moral restraints of our wild corruption, can either actually or but
virtually prepare, dispose, or qualify any man for the grace of Conversion and
Renovation; or have in them Virtutem seminalem, any natural power which by
ordinary help may be cherished and improved so far, as an Egg may be hatched
into a Bird, and a kirnel sprowt and grow into a tree; (far be it from us to
Pelagian conceits:) but this I say, that God, being a God of order, does not
ordinarily work but in order and by degrees, bringing men from the one extreme
to the other by middle courses; and therefore seldom brings a man from the
wretchedness of forlorn nature to the blessed estate of saving grace, but where
first by his restraining grace in some good measure he does correct nature, and
moralize it. Do you then that are Magistrates, do we that are Ministers, let
all Fathers, Masters, and others whatsoever, by wholesome severity (if fairer
courses will not reclaim them) deter audacious persons from offending, break
those that are under our charge of their wills and wilfulness, restrain them
from lewd and licentious practices and company, Levit. 19.17.
not suffer sin upon them for want of reproving them in due and seasonable
sort, Jude, ver. 23.
snatch them out of the fire, and bring them as far as we can out of the snare
of the Devil to Godward; and leave the rest to him. Possibly, when we have
faithfully done our part, to the utmost of our power; he will set in
graciously, and begin perfect conversion. If by our good care, they may be made
to forbear swearing, and cursing, and blaspheming; they may in time by his good
grace be brought to Eccles. 9.2.
fear an Oath: If we restrain them from gross prophanations upon his holy day
in the mean time; they may come at length to think his Sabbath Esaias 21.13.
a delight: If we keep them from swilling, and gaming, and revelling, and
rioting, and roaring, the while; God may frame them ere long to a sober and
sanctified use of the Creatures: and so it may be said of other sins and
duties. I could willingly enlarge all these points of Inferences, but that
there are yet behind Uses, to be made of this restraining Grace of God,
considered as it may lie upon our selves; and therefore I now pass on to them.

First, there is a root of Pride in us all, whereby we are apt to think better
of our selves, than there is cause: and every infirmity in our brother, (which
should rather be an item to us of our frailty) serves as fuel to nourish this
vanity, and to swell us up with a Pharisaical conceit, that forsooth we are
Luke 18.11.
not like other men. Now, if at any time, when we see any of our brethren fall
into some sin, from which by the good hand of God upon us we have preserved, we
then feel this swelling begin to rise in us, as sometimes it will do: the point
already delivered may stand us in good stead, to prick the bladder of our
pride, and to let out some of that windy vanity; by considering, that this our
forbearance of evil, wherein we seem to excel our brother, is not from
nature, but from grace; not from our selves, but from God. And here a little
let me close with thee, whosoever thou art, that please thy self with odious
comparisons, and stand so much upon terms of betternesse; thou art neither
Extortioner, nor adulterer, drunkard, nor swearer, thief, slanderer, nor
murderer; as such and such proud Pharisee, which perhaps they are not. To let
thee see thou art a Pharisee, do but give me a direct answer, without shifting
or mincing, to that Question of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Quis te discrevit? Who has made thee to differ from another? Was it God, or
thy self, or both together? If thou say it was God; thou art a dissembler,
and thy boasting has already confuted thee: for what have thou to do to glory
in that which is not thine? Ibid.
If thou have received it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received
If thou say it was from thy self; what Pharisee could have assumed more? All
the shift thou have, is to say it was God indeed that made the difference, but
he saw something in thee for which he made thee to differ: thou acknowledgest
his restraint in part, but thine own good nature did something. If this be all,
very Pharisee still, without all escape. That Pharisee never denied God a part,
no nor the chiefest part neither, he began his vaunting prayer with an
acknowledgement of Gods work, ( Luke 18.11.
I thank thee, O God, that I am not like other men.) It was not the denial of
all unto God, but the assuming of any thing unto himself, that made him a right
Pharisee. Go thy way then, and if thou will do God and thy self right; deny thy
self altogether, and Gratiae tuae depu^o, and quaecunque non feci mala. August.
2, Confess. 7.
give God the whole glory of it, if thou have been preserved from any evil.
And from thy brothers fall, besides compassioning forlorn Nature in him, make a
quite contrary use unto thy self; even to humble Gal. 6.1.
Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. [Am I any better than he? of
better mould than he? or better tempered than he? Am not I a child of the same
Adam, a vessel of the same clay, a chip of the same block, with him? why then
should I be Romans 11.20.
high-minded, when I see him fallen before me? why should I not rather fear,
lest my foot slip, as well as his has done? I have much cause, with all
thanfulnesse to bless God, for his good providence over me, in not suffering
me to fall into this sin hitherto: and with all humility to implore the
continuance of his gracious assistance for the to avoid this, or any other
evil.]

Secondly, since all restraints from sin, by what second means so ever they are
conveyed unto us, or forwarded, are from the merciful providence of God:
whenever we observe that God has vouchsafed us, or does offer us, any means
of such his gracious restraint; it is our duty joyfully to embrace those means,
and carefully to cherish them, and with all due thankfulness to bless the
name of God for them. Oh how often have we plotted, and projected, and contrived
a course for the expediting of our perhaps ambitious, perhaps covetous, perhaps
malicious, perhaps voluptuous designs: and by the providence of God some
unexpected intervening accident has marred the curious frame of all our
projects, that they have come to nothing; as a Spiders web spun with much art
and industry is suddenly disfigured, and swept away with the light touch of a
besome. How often have we been resolved to sin, and prepare^ to sin, and even at
the pits brink ready to cast our selves into hell: when he has plucked us
away, as he plucked Genesis 19.16.
Lot out of Sodom, by affrightments of natural Conscience, by apprehensions of
dangers, by taking away the opportunities, by ministering impediments, by
shortning our power, by sundry other means! Have we now blessed the Name of God
for affording us these gracious means of prevention and restraint? Nay have we
not rather been enraged thereat, and taken it with much impatience, that we
should be so crossed in the pursuit of our vain and sinful desires and
purposes? As wayward Children cry and take pet, when the Nurse snatcheth a
knife from them, wherewith they might perhaps fingers, perhaps haggle their
throats; or puts them back from the wels mouth when they are ready, with
catching at babies in the water, to type over: and as that merry mad man in the
Poet, was in good earnest angry with his friends for procuring him to be cured
of his madness, wherein he so much pleased himself, as if they could not have
done him a greater displeasure, Horat. 2. Epist. 1.
-- Pol me occidistis, amici, -- Non servastis --: such is our folly. We are
offended with those that reprove us; testy at those that hinder us; impatient
under those crosses that disable us: yea we fret and turn again at the powerful
application of the holy of God, when it endeavors to reform us, or restrain
us from those evils wherein we delight. Let us henceforth mend this fault;
cheerfully submit our selves to the discipline of the Almighty; and learn of
Holy David with what affections to entertain the gracious means he vouchsafes
us of restraint or prevention: as appears by his speeches unto Abigail, when
she by her wisdom had pacified his wrath against Nabal, whose destruction he
had a little before vowed in his heat, 1 Samuel 25.32, etc.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to He blessed God, as the Cause, and her, as the Instrument; and her
discreet behavior and advice, as the Means; of staying his hand from doing
that evil, he had vowed with his mouth, and was in his heart purposed to have
done.

Thirdly, since we owe our standing to the hand of God, who holds us up,
without whose restraint we should fall at every turn, and into every
temptation: we cannot but see what need we have to seek to him daily and hourly
to withhold us from falling into those sins, whereunto either our corrupt
nature would lead us, or draw us. We may see it by the fearful falls of David
and Peter, men nothing inferior to the best of us, how weak a thing man is to
resist temptation, if God withdraw his support, and leave him but a little to
himself. Which made David pray to God that he would Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back his servant from presumptuous sins. He well knew though he were the
faithful servant of God, that yet he had no stay of himself; but unless God
kept him back, he must on, and he must in, and he must in deep, even as far as
to presumptuous sins. No man, though he be never so good, has any assurance,
as upon his own strength, though it be never so great, that he shall sin,
though it be never so foul. When a Heathen man prayed unto Jupiter, to save him
from his Enemies; one that overheard him would needs mend it with a more
needful prayer, that Jupiter would save him from his Friends: he thought they
might do him more hurt, because he trusted them; but as for Enemies he could
look to himself well enough, for receiving harm from them. We that are
Christians, bad need pray unto the God of Heaven, that he would not give us up
into the hands of our professed enemies; and to pray unto God, that he would
not deliver us over into the hands of our false-hearted Friends: but there is
another prayer yet more needful, and to be pressed with greater importunity
than either of both, that God would save us from our selves, and not give us up
into our own hands; for then we are utterly cast away. There is a wayward
old man that lurketh in every of our bosoms, and we make but too much of him:
than whom, we spightful enemy, nor a more false friend. Alas we do not think,
what a man is given over to, that is given over to himself: he is given over to
Romans 1.16.
vile affections; he is given over to a Ibid. ver. 28.
reprobate sense; he is given over to Ephesians. 4.19.
commit all manner of wickedness with greediness. It is the last and
fearfullest of all other judgments, and is not usually brought upon men, but
where they have obstinately refused to hear the voice of God, in whatsoever
other tone he had spoken unto them; then to leave them to themselves, and to
their own counsels: [ Psalm. 81.11* 12.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me: so I gave them
up unto ] As we conceive the state of the Patient to be desperate, when the
Physician gives him over, and lets him eat, and drink, and have, and do,
what, and when, and as much as he will without prescribing him any diet, or
keeping back any thing from him he has a mind unto. Let us therefore pray
faithfully and fervently unto God, as Christ himself has taught us, that he
would not by leaving us unto our selves Mat. 6.13.
lead us into temptation, but by his gracious and powerful support deliver us
from all those evils, from which we have no power at all to deliver our selves.

Lastly, since this Restraint whereof we have spoken, may be but a common
Grace, and can give us no sound nor solid comfort if it be but a bare
restraint, and no more: though we ought to be thankful for it, because we have
not deserved it; yet we should not rest, nor think our selves safe enough, till
we have a well grounded assurance, that we are possessed of an higher and a
better grace, even the grace of sanctification. For that will hold out against
temptations, where this may fail. We may deceive our selves then, (and
thousands in the world do so deceive themselves;) if upon our abstaining from
sins, from which God withholds us, we the state of Grace, and to have the
power of godliness, and the spirit of sanctification. For, between this
restraining Grace, whereof we have now spoken, and that renewing Grace whereof
we now speak; there are sundry wide differences. They differ first, in their
fountain. Renewing grace springs from the special love of God toward those
that are his his in Christ: restraining grace is a fruit of that general mercy
of God, whereof it is said in the Psalm, that Psalm. 145.
his mercy is over all They differ secondly, in their extent: both of Person,
Subject, Object, and Time. For the Person; restraining Grace is common to good
and bad: Renewing Grace proper and peculiar to the Elect. For the Subject;
Restraining Grace may bind one part or faculty of a man, as the hand or
tongue, and leave another free, as the heart or ear: Renewing Grace works
upon all in some measure, sanctifies the whole man, 1 These. 6.23.
Body, and soul, and spirit, with all the parts and faculties of each. For the
Object; Restraining Grace may withhold a man from one sin, and give him
another: Renewing Grace carries an equal and just respect to all Gods
Commandments. For the Time; Restraining Grace may tie us now, and by and by
unloose us: Renewing Grace holds out unto the end, more or less, and never
leaves us wholly Thirdly, they differ in their Ends. Restraining Grace is so
intended chiefly for the good of humane society, (especially of the Church of
God, and of the members thereof;) as that indifferently it may, or may not do
good to the Receiver; but Renewing Grace is especially intended for the
Salvation of the Receiver, though Ex consequenti it do good also unto others.
They differ fourthly, and lastly, in their Effects. Renewing Grace mortifieth
the corruption, and subdueth it, and diminishes it; as water quenches fire,
by abating the heat: but Restraining Grace only inhibiteth the exercise of the
corruption, for the time, without any real diminution of it either in substance
or quality; as the Dan. 3.25.
fire wherein the three Children walked, had as much heat in it at that very
instant, as it had before and after, although by the greater power of God, the
natural power of it was then suspended from working upon them. The Lions that
spared Daniel were Lions still, and had their ravenous disposition still;
albeit God Dan. 6.22.
stopped for that time, that they should not hurt him: but that there was no
change made in their natural disposition appears by their entertainment of
their next guests, whom they devoured with all greediness, Ibid. verse. 24.
breaking their bones before they came to the ground. By these two instances
and examples, we may in some measure conceive of the nature and power of the
restraining grace of God in wicked men. It bridleth the corruption that is in
them for the time, that it cannot break out; and manacleth them in such sort,
that they do not show forth the ungodly disposition of their heart: but there
is no real change wrought in unsanctified, and their natural corruption
undiminished. Whereas the renewing and sanctifying Grace of God, by a real
change of a Lion makes a Lamb; alters the natural disposition of the soul,
by draining out some of the corruption; begets a new heart, a new spirit,
new habits, new qualities, new dispositions, new thoughts, new desires; makes
a Ephesians. 4.24.
new man in every part and faculty completely New. Content not thy self then
with a bare forbearance of sin, so long as thy heart is not changed, nor thy
will changed, nor thy affections changed: but strive to become a new man, to be
Romans 2.2.
transformed by the renewing of thy mind, to hate sin, to love God, to wrestle
against thy secret corruptions, to take delight in holy duties, to subdue thine
understanding, and will, and affections, to the obedience of Faith and
Godliness. So shall thou not only be restrained from sinning against God, as
Abimelech here was; but also enabled, as faithful Abraham was, to please God:
and consequently assured with all the faithful children of Abraham, to be 1
Pet. 1.5.
preserved by the almighty power of God through faith unto salvation. Which
Grace, and Faith, and salvation, the same Almighty God, the God of Power, and
of Peace, bestow upon us all here assembled, 1 Cor. 1.2.
With all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord,
both theirs and ours: even for the same our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, his most
dear Son, and our blessed Savior and Redeemer, to which blessed Father, and
blessed Son, with the blessed Spirit, most holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity,
be the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, from this time forth and for ever.
Amen.

AD POPULUM. Paul's Cross, London, 6. May, 1632.
1 PET. 2.16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God.


THere is not any thing in the world more generally desired than Liberty; nor
scarce any thing more generally abused. Insomuch as even that blessed liberty
which the eternal Son of purchased for His Spouse the Church, and endowed her
therewithal, has in no age been free from abuses: whilst some have sinfully
neglected their Christian liberty, to their own prejudice; and othersome have
as sinfully stood upon it, to the prejudice of their brethren. So hardly,
through pride and ignorance, and other corruptions that abound in us, do we hit
upon the golden mean, either in this, or almost in any thing else: but easily
swarve into the vicious extremes on both hands, declining sometimes into the
defect, the excess. The Apostles therefore, especially Saint Peter, and Saint
Paul, the two chiefest planters of the Churches, endeavored early to instruct
believers in the true doctrine, and to direct them in the right use of their
Christian liberty, so often in their several Epistles, as fit occasion was
offered two cases, which being very common, are therefore of the greater
consequence, viz. the case of Scandal, and the case of Obedience.

And we may further observe concerning these two Apostles, that S. Paul usually
touches upon this argument of liberty, as it is to be exercised in the case of
Scandal; but S. Peter oftener, as in the Case of Obedience. Whereof, on S.
Peter's part, I conceive the reason to be this: That being Gal. 2.7.
the Apostle of the Circumcision, and so having to deal most with the Jews, who
Seditiosissima gen^. Jos. Scalig. not. in Luc. 22.52.
could not brook subjection, but were of all Nations under heaven the most
impatient of a forain yoke; he was therefore the more careful to deliver the
doctrine of Christian liberty to them in such a manner, as might frame them
withal to yield such reverence and obedience to their Governors, as became
them to do. And therefore S. Peter beats much upon the point of Obedience.

But he no where presses it more fully than in this Chapter: Wherein after the
general exhortations of subduing the lusts that are in their own bosoms, verse.
11. and of ordering their conversation so as might be for their credit and
honesty in the sight of ver. 12. when he descends to more particular duties,
he begins first with, and insisteth most upon this duty of subjection and
obedience to authority, in the greatest remaining part of the Chapter. The
first Precept he gives in this kind, is set down with sundry amplifications
and reasons thereunto belonging, in the next verses before the Text (Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake:) And then he does by
way of Prolepsis, take away an objection, which he foresaw would readily be
made against that and the following Exhortations, from the pretext of Christian
liberty: in the words of the Text As free and not using your liberty for a
cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.)

Conceive the words as spoken in answer to what those new converts might have
objected. We have been taught, that the Son of God has made us free, and then
we are John 8.36.
free indeed: and so not bound to subject our selves to any Masters or
Governors upon earth, no not to Kings; but much rather bound not to do it, that
so we may preserve that freedom which Christ has purchased for us, and reserve
our selves the more entirely for Gods service, by refusing to be the servants
of men.

Objection the Apostle clearly takes off in the Text, with much holy wisdom,
and truth. He tells them, that being indeed set at liberty by Christ, they
are not therefore any more to enthral themselves to any living soul or other
creature; not to submit to any ordinance of man as slaves, that is, as if the
ordinance it self did by any proper, direct and immediate virtue, bind the
conscience. But yet all this notwithstanding, they might and ought to submit 1
Cor. 7.22.
the Lords freemen, and in a free manner; that is, by a voluntary and
uninforced both subjection to their power, and obedience to their lawful
commands. They must therefore take heed they use not their liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, nor under so fair a title palliate an evil
licentiousness, making that a cloak for their irreverent and undutiful carriage
toward their Superiors. For albeit they be not the servants of men, but of
God; and therefore owe no obedience to men as upon immediate tie of conscience,
and for their own sake, but to God only: yet for his sake, and out of the
conscience of that obedience which they owe Exo. 20.12.
honoring father and mother, and of being Romans 13.1.
subject to the higher powers, they ought to give unto them such honor and
obedience, as of right belongs unto them according to the eminency of their
high places. ( As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.)

From which words thus paraphrased, I gather three observations: all concerning
our Christian liberty, in that branch of it especially which respects humane
ordinances, and the use of the creatures, and of all indifferent things. Either
1. in the existence As free,) or 2. in the exercise of it, ( And not using your
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,) or 3. in the end of it, ( but) The first
observation this; We must so submit our selves to superior authority, as that
we do not Christian liberty: (As free.) The second this; We must so maintain
our liberty, as that we do not under that color either commit any sin, or omit
any requisite office either of charity or duty: (and not using your liberty for
a cloak of maliciousness.) The third this; In the whole exercise both of the
liberty we have in Christ, and of the respects we owe unto Gods servants: (but
as the servants of God.) The sum of the whole three points in brief this; We
must be careful without either infringing or abusing our liberty, at all times,
and in all things to serve God.

Now then to the several points in that order as I have proposed them, and as
they lie in the Text: ((...). As free.) Which words have manifest reference to
the exhortation deli^vered three verses before the text; as declaring the
manner how the duty there exhorted unto ought to be performed: yet so as the
exhortations also contained in the verses next after the text. Submit your
selves to public governors both supreme and subordinate; be subject to your
own particular masters; honor all men with those proper respects that belong
to them in their several stations: But look you do as slaves, but as free: do
it without impeachment of the liberty you have in Christ. Of which liberty, it
would be a profitable labor (but that I should then be forced to omit sundry
other things which I deem needful to be spoken, and more nearly pertinent to
the points proposed) to discover at large the nature, and parts, and causes,
and effects, and adjuncts; that we might the better understand the amplitude of
that dower which Christ has settled upon his Church, and thence learn to be the
more careful to preserve it. But I may not have time so to do; it shall
therefore suffice us to know, that as the other liberty, whether of glory or
grace; whether from the guilt of sin in our justification, or from the dominion
of sin in our sanctification, with the several appendices and appurtenances to
any of them: so this branch of it also which respects the use of indifferent
things; First is purchased for us by the blood of Joh. 8.36. and Gal. 5.1.
Christ, and is therefore usually called by the name of Christian Secondly, is
revealed unto us outwardly in the preaching of the Gospel of God and of Christ,
which is therefore Jam. 1.25. and 2.12.
the law of liberty. And thirdly, is conveyed unto us inwardly and
effectually by the operation of the Spirit of Psalm. 51.12.
free spirit (O stablish where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 2
Cor. 3.17.

Now this liberty, so dearly purchased, so clearly revealed, so firmly
conveyed; it is our duty to maintain with our utmost strength in all the parts
and branches of it, and (as the Apostle exhorts) to Gal. 5.1.
stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to
suffer our selves either by the devises of other men, or by our own sloth and
wilful default to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. And namely in
this particular serviceable offices we do to any of our brethren, especially to
those that are in authority, we must perform our duty therein with all
cheerfulness of spirit, and for Conscience sake, but still with freedom of
spirit, and with liberty of Conscience; as being servants to God alone, and not
to men. We find therefore in the Scriptures a peremptory charge both ways;
that we neither usurp mastership, nor undergo servitude. A charge given by our
Savior Christ to his Disciples in the former behalf, that they should Mat. 23
8.10.
not be called Rabbi, neither Masters, Matthew. 23. and a charge given by the
Apostle Paul to all believers in the 1 Cor. 7.23.
not be servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.

God forbid any man of us, possessed with an Anabaptistical spirit, or rather
frenzy, should understand either of those passages, or any other of like sound,
as if Christ or his Apostle had had any purpose therein to slacken those sinews
and ligaments, and to dissolve those joints and contignations, which tie into
one body, and claspe into one structure, those many little members and parts,
whereof humane societies consist: that is to say, to Non venit Christus
conditiones mutare. Hieron. in Ep. 6.
forbid all those mutual relations of superiority and subjection which are in
the world, and so to turn all into a vast Chaos of Anarchy and Confusion. For
such a meaning is contrarious to the express determination of Mat. 21.21.
Christ, and to the constant doctrine of Romans 13.1. etc. Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22.
S. Paul in other places: and we ought so to interpret the Scriptures, as that
one place may consist with another, without clashing or contradiction. The true
and plain meaning is this; that we must not acknowledge any our supreme Master,
nor yield our selves to be wholly and absolutely ruled by the will of any, nor
enthral our Judgments and Consciences to the sentences or laws of any man, or
Angel, but only Christ our Lord and Master in Heaven.

And this interpretation is very consonant to the Analogy of Scripture in
sundry places. In Ephesians. 6. (to omit other places) there are two distinctions
employed, the one in the 5. the other in the 7. verses, both of right good use
for the reconciling of sundry texts that seem to contradict one another, and
for the clearing of sundry difficulties in the present argument. Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants (says S. Paul there) be obedient to them that are your Masters
according to the flesh. Which limitation affords us the distinction of --
secundum carnem: quia est and Dominus secundum spiritum. Ille est verus Dominus
-- Augustine. in Psalm. 12^.
according to the flesh only, and of Masters after the spirit also. Intimating
that we may have other Masters of our flesh, to whom we may (and must) give due
reverence, so far as concerns the flesh; that is, so far as appertains to
the outward man, and all outward things. But of our spirits, and souls, and
consciences; as we can have no fathers, so we may have no Masters upon earth,
but only our Master and our Father which is in heaven. And therefore (in Mat.
23.) Christ forbids the calling of any man upon earth Mat. 13.9.
Father, as well as he does the calling of any man Master. And both the
prohibitions are to be understood alike, and as has been now declared.

Again (says S. Paul there) Ephesians. 6.7.
with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men; which opposition
imports a second distinction, and that is of Masters, into supreme, and
subordinate: those are subordinate Masters, to whom we do service in ordine ad
alium, and as under another. Those are supreme Masters, in whom our obedience
rests in the final resolution of it, without looking farther or higher. Men
may be our Masters, and we their servants, the first way; with subordination to
God, and -- distingu^bant Dominum aeternum a temporali: tamen subditi erant,
propter dominum aeternum, etiam domino temporali. Augustine. in Psalm. 124.
for his sake: And we must do them service, and that with good but with
reservation ever of our bounden service to him, as our only supreme sovereign
and absolute Master. But the later way, it is high sacrilege in any man to
challenge, and it is high Treason against the sacred Majesty of God and of
Christ for us to yield to any other but them, the mastership, that is, the
sovereign and absolute mastership over us.

Mastership or servitude, as if they intended to discharge us from those mutual
obligations, wherein either in nature or civility we stand tied one to another,
in the state Oeconomical, Political, or Ecclesiastical; as anon it shall
further appear: but only to beget in us a just care, amidst all the offices of
love and duty which we perform to men, to preserve inviolate that liberty which
we have in Christ; and so to do them service, as to maintain withal our own
freedom (...), as free.

A thing whereof it behooves us to have a special care, and that First, in
regard of the trust reposed in us in this behalf. Every Religiosus homo
sanctusque diligenter and circumspecte solet tueri fidei commissa. Senec. de
tranquil. cap. 11.
honest man takes himself bound to discharge with faithfulness the trust
reposed in him, and to preserve what is committed unto him by way of trust,
(though it be another man's) Nisi ad suum modum curam in deposito praestat,
fraud non caret. l. 32. ff. de deposito.
no less, if not rather much more carefully, than he would do if it were his
own; that so he may be able to give a good account of his trust. Now these two,
the Christian Faith, and the Christian Liberty, are of all other the choicest
jewels, whereof the Lord Jesus Christ has made his Church the depositary.
Every man therefore in the Church Jude, verse. 3.
earnestly to contend, as for the maintenance of the faith, (as S. Jude
speaks) so also for the maintenance of the liberty, which was once delivered
to the Saints: even eo nomine, and for that very reason, because they were both
delivered unto them under such a trust. 1 Timothy 6.20. and 2 Timothy 1.14.
O Timothee, depositum custodi: S. Paul more than once calls upon Timothy to
keep that which was committed to his trust. He means it in respect of the
Christian Faith: which he was bound to keep entire as it was delivered him, at
his peril, and as he would answer it another day. And the like obligation lies
upon us, in respect of this other rich depositum, this Christian liberty: for
which we shall be (...). Pittaci dictum apud Stob. Sermon. 1.
answerable to Christ, from whom we received it, how we have both kept it, and
used it. And if by our default, and for want either of care or courage in us (
dolo vel lata culpa, as the Lawyers say) we lose or imbeazel it (as she said in
the Canticles, Cant. 1.^.
They made me the keeper of the Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not
kept:) No doubt it will lie heavy upon us, when we come to give in our
accounts. Rather we should put on a resolution (like that of Exodus 10.26.
Moses, who would not yield to leave so much as an hoof behind him) not to
part with a jot of that liberty wherewith Christ has entrusted us, the
servants of men.

Especially since we cannot so do, Secondly, without manifest wrong to Christ;
nor thirdly, without great dishonor to God. Not without wrong to Christ: S.
Paul therefore disputes it as upon a ground of right, 1 Cor. 7. Ye are bought
with a price, (says he) 1 Cor. 7.23.
be ye not the servants of men: and in the next chapter before that, 1 Cor.
6.19, 20.
ye are not your own, for you are bought with a price. servants: yet if you
were your own, there should be no injury done thereby to any third person; but
unto whosoever should complain as if he were wronged, you might return this
reasonable answer, ( Mat. 20.13.15.
Friend I do thee no wrong, is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine
own?) But, says he, this is not your case: you are not your own, but Christ's.
He has bought you with his most precious blood; he has paid a valuable
(rather an invaluable price) for you: and having bought you and paid for you,
his; and you cannot dispose your selves in any other service without apparent
wrong to him.

Neither only do we injure Christ, by making our selves the servants of men;
but we dishonor God also: which is a third reason. For to whom we make our
selves servants, him we make our Lord and God. The covetous worldling
therefore, by Mat. 6.24.
serving Mammon, makes Mammon his God: which made S. Paul two several times to
set the brand of Idolatry upon covetousness ( Ephesians. 5.15.
the covetous man which is an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3.5.
covetousness which is Idolatry, Col. 3.) And the voluptuous Epicure is
therefore Phil. 3.19.
belly his God, Phil. 3. because he Romans 16.18.
serves his own belly, as the the phrase is, Romans 16. Neither can I imagine
upon what other ground the Devil should be called 2 Cor. 4.4.
the God of this world, than this, that 1 John 5.19.
(...), the men of this evil world by doing him service do so make a God of
him. For service is a principal part of that honor that belongs to God
alone, and whereof in his jealousy he will not endure that any part should be
given away from him to another: Mat. 4.10.
Ipsi soli servies, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. We cannot serve any other, but to his great dishonor.

Yea and our own too; which may stand for a fourth reason. Ye see your calling
brethren, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. He would have men take notice of
their Christian calling, (it is a holy and a high calling:) that so they might
Ephesians. 4.1.
walk worthy of it, and carry themselves in every respect answerably thereunto.
Now by our calling we are freemen: for Gal. 5.13.
brethren you have been called unto liberty, Gal. 5. or (which is all one) to
the service of God. And being so, we infinitely abase our selves, and disparage
our calling; when of freemen we become slaves; and make our selves of Gods,
men^s servants: incomparably more to our own dishonor, than free of a rich
company, and has born office in it, should for base respects bind himself
apprentice again with a master of poor condition in some pelting trade. It is
V. Paul ff. de capit. deminut.
deminutio capitis (as the Civilians call it,) for a man to descend from a
higher to a lower condition: of the three degrees whereof that is esteemed the
greatest, (maxima deminutio capitis) which is with loss of liberty. Leo the
Emperor therefore by special and severe constitution (as you may see it in Leo
Novell. constit. 59.
the Novels) forbad all freemen within the Empire the sale of their liberties;
calling it facinus in those that were so presumptuous as to buy them, and no
less than folly, yea madness ( dementia and vesania) in those that were so base
as to sell them: not without some indignation at the former laws, for suffering
such an indignity to be so long practiced without either chastisement or
restraint. And if he justly censured them as men of -- qui tam ignavi and
abjecti animi est -- Ibid.
abject minds, that would for any consideration in the world willingly forgo
their civil and Roman what flatness of spirit possesses us, if we wilfully
betray our Christian and spiritual liberty?

Whereby, besides the dishonor, we do also (which is the fifth reason, and
whereunto I will add no more) with our own hands pull upon our own heads a
great deal of unnecessary cumber. For whereas we might draw an Mat. 11.30.
easy yoke, carry a light burden, observe 1 John 5 3.
commandments that are not grievous, and so live at much hearts ease, in the
service of God and of Christ: by putting our selves into the service of men, we
thrust our necks into a (...). Plat. apud. St^b. Ser. 46.
hard yoke of bondage, such as neither we nor any of our fathers were heavy and
importable burdens; and subject our selves to ordinances, which are both
grievous and unprofitable, and such are so far from preserving those that use
them from perishing, that themselves Col. 22.22.
perish in the using.

Now against this liberty, (which if we will answer the trust reposed in us,
and neither wrong Christ, nor d^shonour God, nor yet d^base and encomber our
selves, where we should not,) we must with our utmost power maintain: The
offenders are of two sorts: to wit, such as either injuriously encroach upon
the liberty of others; or else betray away their own. The most notorious of the
former sort are the Bishops of Rome; whose usurpations upon the consciences of
men, show them to be the true successors of the Scribes and Pharisees, in Mat.
23.4.
laying heavy burdens upon men's shoulders which they ought not, and in Mark 7.9.
rejecting the Word of God to establish their own traditions; rather than the
successors of S. Peter, who forbids 1 Pet. 5.3.
d^minatum in Cleris, in the last chapter of this Epistle at verse 3. To teach
their own judgments to be infallible; To make their definitions an universal
and unerring rule of faith; To style their decrees and constitutions Oracles;
To assume to all power in heaven and earth; To require subjection both to their
laws and persons, as of necessity unto salvation; To suffer themselves to be
called by their parasites Gloss. in extravag. Ioh. 22. c. Cum in^ er.
Dominus Deus noster Papa, and S^apleton de princip. fid. in praefat.
Optimum, maximum, and supremum in terris numen; all which and much more is
done and taught and professed by the Popes, and in their behalf: if all this
will not reach to S. Paul's 2 These. 2.4.
exaltari supra omne quod voca^ur Deus: yet certainly, and no Peter's 1 Pet. 5 3.
dominari in Cleris, even to the exercising of such a Lordship over the Lords
heritage, the Christian Church, as will become none but the Lord himself, whose
heritage the Church is.

Besides these, that do it thus by open Assault, I would there were not others
also, that did by secret underminings go about to deprive us of that liberty
which we have in Christ Jesus, even then when they most pretend the maintenance
of it. They inveigh against the Church Governors, as if they Lorded it over
Gods heritage; and against the Church orders and constitutions, as if they were
contrary to Christian liberty. Wherein, besides that they do manifest Church in
both particulars: they consider not, that those very accusations, which they
thus irreverently dart at the face of their Mother, (to whom they owe better
respect,) but miss it, do recoil part upon themselves, and cannot be avoided.
For whereas these constitutions of the Church are made for order, decency, and
uniformity sake, and to serve unto edification; and not with any intention at
all to lay a tie upon the consciences of men, or to work their judgments to an
opinion, as if there were some necessity, or inherent holiness in the things
required thereby; neither Governors, neither ought they to press them any
farther: (which is sufficient to acquit both the Governors from that Lording,
and the Constitutions from that trenching upon Christian liberty, wherewith
they are charged:) Alas that our brethren who thus accuse them, should suffer
themselves to be so far blinded with prejudices and partial affections, as not
see, that themselves in the mean time, do really exercise a spiritual Lordship
over their disciples, who depend in a manner wholly upon their judgments, by
imposing upon their consciences sundry Magisterial conclusions, for which they
have no sound warrant from the written Word of God. the impeachment of their
Christian liberty, and leading them into error: they do withal exasperate
against them the minds of those that being in authority look to be obeyed; and
engage them in such sufferings, as they can have no just cause of rejoicing in.

For, beloved, this we must know, that as it is injustice to condemn the
innocent, as well as it is injustice to clear the guilty, and both these are
equal Prove. 17.15.
abominable to the Lord: so it is superstition to forbid that as sinful, which
is in truth indifferent, and therefore lawful; as well as it is superstition to
enjoin that as necessary, which indifferent, and therefore arbitrary. Does that
heavy woe in Esaias 5. appertain (think ye) to them only, that out of
profaneness Esaias 5.20.
call evil good: and nothing at all concern them, that out of preciseness call
good evil? Does not he decline out of the way, that turns aside on the right
hand, as well as he that turns the left? They that positively make that to be
sin, which the Law of God never made so to be: how can they be excused from
symbolizing with the Pharisees and the Papists, in making the narrow ways of
God yet narrower than they are, in Mat. 15.9.
teaching for doctrines men's precepts, and so 1 Cor. 7.35.
casting a snare upon the consciences of their brethren? If our Church should
press things as far, and upon such grounds, the one way, as some forward
spirits do the other way; if as they say (it is a sin to kneel at the
Communion, and therefore we charge you upon your consciences not to do it;) so
the Church should say (it is a sin not to kneel, and therefore require you upon
your consciences to do it,) and so in all other lawful (yet arbitrary)
ceremonies: possibly then the Church could no more be able to acquit her self
from encroaching upon Christian liberty, than they are that accuse her for it.
Which since they have done, and she has not: she is therefore free, and
themselves only guilty.

It is our duty, for the better securing of our selves, as well against those
open impugners, as against these secret underminers, to look heedfully to our
trenches and fortifications, and to Gal. 5.1.
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, lest by some
device Gal. 2.^.
give place by subjection, no not for an hour; lest we be ensnared by our own
default, ere we be aware. For indeed we cannot be ensnared in this kind, but
merely by our own default; and therefore S. Paul often admonishes us, to take
heed that none Ephesians. 5.6; Col. 2.4.8.18; 2 These. 2 3.
deceive, spoil or beguile us: as if it were in our power, if we would but use
requisite care thereunto, to prevent it; and as if it were our fault most, if
we did not prevent it. And so in truth it is. For we oftentimes betray away our
own liberty, when we might maintain it; and so become servants unto men, when
we free.

Which fault we shall be the better able to avoid, when we shall know the true
causes, whence it springs: which are evermore one of these two, an unsound
head, or an unsound heart. Sometimes we esteem too highly of others, so far as
either to envassal our judgments to their opinions, or to enthrall our
consciences to their precepts; and that is our weakness: there the fault is in
the head. Sometimes we apply our selves to the wills of others, with an eye to
our own benefit or satisfaction in some other carnal or worldly respect; and
that is our fleshlinesse: there the the heart. This latter is the worst, and
therefore in the first place to be avoided. The most and worser sort,
unconscionable men, do often transgress this way. When for fear of a frown or
worse displeasure, or to curry favor with those they may have use of, or in
hope either of raising themselves to some advancement, or of raising to
themselves some advantage, or for some other like respects, they become
officious instruments to others for the services, as are evidently (even to
their own apprehensions) sinful and wicked. So 1 Samuel 22.18.
Doeg did King Saul service in shedding the blood of fourscore and five
innocent Priests: and 2 Samuel 13.28.
Absalons servants murdered their masters brother upon his bare command: and
Mar. 15.15.
Pilate partly to gratify the Jews, but especially for fear of Job. 19.12.
Cesars displeasure, gave sentence of death upon Jesus, who in his own
conscience he thought had not deserved it. In such cases as these are, when we
are commanded by our superiors, or required by our friends, or any other way
solicited to do that which we know the service) by a flat and peremptory
denial, though it be to the greatest power upon earth. As the three young men
did to the great Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.18.
Be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the
golden image which thou have set up. And the ancient Christians to the heathen
Emperors, Da veniam Imperator: tu carcerem, ille gehennam. And the Apostles to
the whole council of the Jews, Acts 4.19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you, more than unto God,
judge ye. Acts 4. He Gal. 1.10.
please men, he is the servant of men, and cannot be the servant of God.

But honest and conscionable men, who do not easily and often fail this way,
Romans 16.18.
(...) (as the word is Romans 16.) men that are not evil, are yet apt sometimes
to be so far carried away with an high estimation of some men, as to subject
themselves wholly to their judgments, or wills; without ever questioning the
truth of any thing they teach, or the lawfulness of any thing they enjoin. it
is a dangerous thing Jude verse. 16.
(...), as S. Jude speaks, to have men's persons in admiration; though they be
of never so great learning, wisdom, or piety: because the best and wisest Act.
14.15; and Iam. 5 17.
(...), subject to the like infirmities as we are both of sin and error, and
such as may both Humana authoritas plerumque fallit. Aug 2. de ordin. 9.
deceive others, and be themselves deceived. That honor which Pythagoras his
Scholars gave to their Master, in resting upon his bare authority ((...)) as a
sufficient proof, yea as -- (...). Aelian. 4. var. 17.
a divine Oracle, many judicious even among the heathen altogether Neq, vero
proba^es* leo id, quod de Pythagoricis accepimus --

Cic. 1. de not. deorum.


misliked, as too servile, and prejudicial to that libertas Philosophica, that
freedom of judgment which was behooveful for the study of Philosophy. How much
more then must it needs be prejudicial in libertas Evangelica, that freedom we
have in Christ, to give such honor to any other man, but the man Christ Jesus
only, or to to any other writings than to those which are in truth 1 Pet. 4.11.
the Oracles of God, the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament.

Fathers; more to the Canons and decrees of general and provincial Councels;
and not a little to the judgment of learned, sober, and godly Divines of later
and present times, both in our own and other reformed Churches. But we may not
Horat. 1. Ep. 1. V^ isti qui in verba jurant, nec quid dicatur aestimant, sed a
quo. Sen. Epist. 12.
jurare in verba, build our faith upon them as upon a sure foundation, nor pin
our belief upon their sleeves; so as to receive for an undoubted truth
whatsoever they hold, and to reject as a gross error whatsover they disallow,
without farther examination. Saint John bids us 1 John 4.11.
try the spirits, before we believe Ioh. 4. And the Act. 17.11.
Beroeans are remembered with praise for so doing, Act. 17. We blame it in the
Schoolmen, that some adhere pertinaciously to the opinions of Thomas, and
others as pertinaciously to the opinions of Scotus, in every point wherein they
differ; insomuch as it were grande piaculum, a heinous thing and not to be
suffered, if a Dominican should dissent from Thomas, or a Franciscan from
Sco^us, though but in one single controverted conclusion. And we blame it
j^stly: for S. Paul blamed the l^ke sidings and partakings in the Church of
Corinth (whilst one professed himself to be of Paul, another of Apollo,
another of Cephas,) 1 Cor. 3.4.
carnality unbeseeming Christians. And is it not also blameworthy in us, and a
fruit of the same carnality, if any of us shall affect to be accounted rigid
Lutherans, or perfect Calvinists: or give up our judgments to be wholly guided
by the writings of Luther or Calvin, or of any other mortal man whatsoever?
Worthy instruments they were both of them of Gods glory, and such as did
excellent service to the Church in their times, whereof we yet find the
benefit; and we are unthankful, if we do not bless God for it: and therefore
it is an unsavory thing for any man ^o gird at their names, whose memories
ought to be precious. men? had they received the spirit in the fullness of it,
and not by measure? knew they otherw^se than in part, or prophesied otherwise
than in part? might they not in many things, did they not in some things,
mistake and err? Howsoever the Apostles interrogatories are unanswerable:
what, says he, 1 Cor. 1.13.
was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? even so,
was either Luther or Calvin crucified for you? or were ye baptized into the
name either of Luther or Calvin, or any other man? that any one of you should
say, I am of Luther; or any other, I am of Calvin; and I of him, and I of him?
what Calvin or Luther, nay 1 Cor. 3.5.
what is Paul or Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed? that is to say,
instruments, but not Lords of your belief.

To sum up, and to conclude this first point then. To do God and our selves
right, it is necessary we should with our utmost strength maintain the doctrine
and power of that liberty wherewith Christ has endowed his Church, without
either usurping the over others, or subjecting our selves to their servitude:
so, as to surrender either our judgments or consciences, to be wholly disposed
according to the opinions or wills of men, though of never so excellent piety
or parts. But yet lest while we shun one extreme, we fall into another, as (the
Lord be merciful unto us) we are very apt to do; lest while we seek to preserve
our liberty that we do not lose it, we stretch it too far, and so abuse it: the
Apostle therefore in the next clause of the Text puts in a caveat for that
also, ( not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.) Whence arises
our second observation. We must so maintain our liberty, that we abuse it not:
as we shall, if under the pretense of Christian liberty we either adventure the
doing of some unlawful thing, or omit the performance of any requisite duty.
(As free and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness.)

The Apostles intention in the whole clause will the better appear, when we
know what is meant by Cloak, and what by Maliciousness. The Greek word (...),
which is no where else found in the whole new Testament but in this verse only;
signifies properly any covering: as the covering of Exodus 16.14. and 36.16.
badgers skins, that was spread over the Tabernacle, is in the Septuagints
translation cloak, (though it do not properly so signify;) in respect of that
notion wherein the word in our English tongue is commonly and proverbially
used: to note some fair and colorable pretense, wherewith we disguise and
conceal from the conusance of others the dishonesty and faultiness of our
intentions in some things practiced by us. Our Savior Christ says of the
obstinate Jews, that had heard his doctrine and seen his miracles, that John
15.22.
they had no cloak for their sin, Ioh. 15. he means they had no color of
plea, nothing to pretend by way of excuse. And Saint Paul professes in the
whole course of his ministry not to have used at any time 1 These. 2.5.
a cloak of 1 Thessalonians. 2. that is, he did not under color of preaching the
Gospel endeavor to make a prey of them, or a gain unto himself. In both which
places, the Greek word is (...), which signifies a fair show, pretense, or
color; which we use to call a cloak.

It is a corruption very common among us; whatsoever we are within, yet we
desire Gal. 6.12.
(...), to make a fair show outwardly, and to make bright Mat. 23.25.
the outside of the platter, how sluttish soever the inside be. We are loath
to forbear those sins, which we are ashamed to profess: and therefore we
blanch them, color them, and cloak them; that we may both do the thing we
desire, and yet miss the shame we deserve. A fault of an ancient original, and
of long continuance: ever since Genesis 3.7.
Adam first patcht together a cloak of fig leaves, to cover the shame of his
nakedness. Since which time, (unless it shame as well as grace, Esaias 3.9.
proclaim their sins as Sodom, and hide them not, but rather glory in them;)
what man ever wanted some handsome cloak or other to cast over Nullum vitium
est sine patrocinio. Sen. ep. 116.
the foulest and ugliest transgressions? 1 Samuel 15.15.
Saul spares Agag, and the fatter cattle, flat contrary to the Lords express
command: and the offering of sacrifice must be the cloak. 3 Kin. 21.13.
Iezabel by most unjust and cruel oppression murthereth Naboth to have his
Vineyard: and the due punishment of blasphemy must be the cloak. The covetous
Mat. 23.14.
Pharisees devour widows houses, and devotion must be the cloak. So Monkery is
used for a cloak of idleness and Epicurism; The seal of confession for a cloak
of packing treasons, and diving into the secrets of all Princes and Estates:
Purgatory, Dirges, Indulgences, and Jubilees, for a cloak of much rapine and
avarice. Seneca said truly of most men, that they studied more Sen. Ep. 116.
excusare vitia, quam excutere, rather solicitous how to cloak their faults
than desirous to forsake them: and S. Bernards complaint is much like it, both
for truth and elegancy, that men did not set themselves so much Bernard.
colere virtutes, to exercise true virtue and the power of godliness, as
colorare vitia, to mask foul under the vizard of virtue and godliness. Alas,
that our own daily experience did not too abundantly justify the complaint in
the various passages of common life; not needful, being so evident, and being
so many, not possible, to be now mentioned. We have a clear instance in the
text, and it should grieve us to see it so common in the world: that the
blessed liberty we have in Christ should become (...) a cloak, and that of
maliciousness.

You see what the Cloak is: see now what is Maliciousness. (...) is the word;
which is properly rendered by malice or maliciousness. malitia whence these are
borrowed; so likewise (...) in Greek, is many times used to signify one
special kind of sin, which is directly opposite to brotherly love and charity:
and the word is usually so taken, wheresoever it is either set in opposition to
such charity, or else ranked with other special sins of the same kind, such as
are Romans 1.29; Col. 3.8; Tit. 3.3.
anger, envy, hatred, and the like. And if we should so understand it here,
the sense were good: for it is a very common thing in the world to offend
against brotherly charity, under the color of Christian liberty; and
doubtless our Apostle here intends maliciousness in this place is to be
taken in a larger comprehension, for all manner of evil, and of naughtiness,
according to the adequate signification of the Greek and Latin adjectives,
(...) and malus, from whence the substantive used in the Text is derived. Of
which maliciousness so largely taken, that special maliousnesse before spoken
of, is but a branch. The Apostles full purpose the text, is to restrain all
that abuse of Christian liberty, whereby it is made a cloak for the palliating
of any wicked or sinful practice in any kind whatsoever. And so understood, S.
Peter's admonition here is paralleled with S. Paul's elsewhere; Brethren (says
he) you have been called unto liberty: only use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5.15. To use liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
and to use liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; is the very same thing: and
it is a very great sin.

For the proof whereof I shall need to use no other arguments, the Text will
afford. First every act of maliciousness is a sin: and secondly to cloak it
with a fair pretense, makes it a greater sin: but then thirdly to use
Christian liberty for the cloak, gives a farther addition to it, and makes it
a greater sin. First it is a sin to do any act of maliciousness. (...) and
(...) conjugata, and do mutually infer each other. It is a superfluous thing,
and such as we might well enough be without: Jam. 1.21.
(...) superfluity of maliciousness, Iam. 1. Nor so only, hurtful thing and of
a noxious and malignant quality, as leaven sowring the whole lump of our
services to God; 1 Cor. 5.8.
(...), the leaven of maliciousness, 1 Cor. 5. It is a thing to Acts 8.22.
(...), repent of this thy wickedness maliciousness, says S. Peter to Simon
Magus, Act 8. It is a thing to be cast away from us, and abominated as a filthy
garment or polluted cloth: 1 Pet. 2.1.
(...), laying aside or casting away all maliciousness, says the same Apostle
again in the first verse of this Chapter.

It is evil then to do any act of maliciousness: but much worse when we have
so done, to cloak it with a fair pretense. For besides that all things
howsoever cloaked and covered from the eyes Heb. 4.13.
naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do; this cloaking of
our sins is but a farther evidence of our hypocrisy in his sight: who as he is
a God of pure eyes, and therefore cannot but hate all sin; so is he a God that
loves a pure heart, and therefore of all sins hates hypocrisy. They that by
injustice and oppression devour widows houses, shall certainly receive
damnation for that, but if withal they do it under the color of devotion and
of long prayers, Mat. 23.13.
(...) they shall receive the greater damnation for that also.

But if men will needs be hypocrites, and must have a cloak for maliciousness:
they might yet at least bethink themselves of somewhat else of lighter price to
make a cloak of; and not to use to so base a purpose so rich a stuff, as is
this blessed liberty which the Son of God has purchased with his most precious
blood As in nature corruption optimi pessima: so in morality, by how much the
right use of it, by so much is it worse in the abuse. As the quickest spirited
Wine has the sowrest lees; and the best wit misgoverned is the most
pernicious; and an Angel when he falls becomes a Devil. So to use this
liberty which is a spiritual thing, for an occasion to the flesh, to take this
liberty which (if I may so speak) is the very livery cloak of the servant of
God, and to make it a cloak of maliciousness for the service of sin: must needs
be presumption in an high degree, and an unsufferable abuse.

Now we see how great a sin it is thus to abuse our liberty, it will be needful
in the next place to inquire more particularly, abuse consists, that so we
may be the better able to avoid it. We are therefore to know that Christian
liberty may be used or rather abused for a cloak of maliciousness, these four
ways following. First, we may make it a cloak of maliciousness, if we hold our
selves by virtue thereof discharged from our obedience, either to the whole
moral Law of God, or to any part of it. Where to omit those that out of the
wretched Noli ergo liberate (...) ad libere peccandum. August. in Ioh. tract.
41.
profaneness of their own hearts, pervert this branch of Evangelical doctrine,
as they do all the rest, to their own destruction. As a Spider turns Jude
ver. 4.
turn the grace of God into wantonness, and the liberty they have in Christ
into a profane licentiousness. Great offenders this way are the Libertines and
Antinomists, who quite cancel the whole Law of God, under the pretense of
Christian Liberty, as if they that were in Christ were no longer tied to yield
obedience to the Moral Law: which is a pestilent error, and of very dangerous
consequence; Whereas our blessed Savior himself has not only professed that
he came not to destroy the Law, but expressly forbidden any man to think so of
him. ( Mat. 5.17. V. Augustine. li. 17, 18. etc. contra Faustum Manichaeum fuse;
and in quaest. V. and N* T. quaest. 69.
Think not that I came to) And Saint Paul rejects the consequence with an
absit, as both unreasonable and impious, if any man should conclude, that by
preaching the righteousness of faith, the Law were abolished, ( Romans 3. ult.
Do me then make void the Law through faith? God forbid: yea (says he, rather)
we establish the Law, Romans 3.

But they interpret those words of Christ in this sense, He came not destroy
the law, but to fulfill it: that is, he came not to destroy it without
fulfilling it first, but by fulfilling it in his own person, he has destroyed
it unto the person of every believer: and therefore Romans 10 4. Finis
perficiens, non interficiens. August. 2. cont. adversar. legis 7.
the end of the law to every one that believes, Romans 10. Whence it is that the
faithful are said to be Romans 7.6.
freed from the law, delivered from the law, Romans 7.4. Gal. 2.19.
dead to the law, and to be Romans 6.14. Gal. 5.18.
no longer under the law, and other like speeches there are many every where in
the New Testament. I acknowledge both, their Expositions to be just, and all
these allegations true: yet not sufficient to evict their conclusion. Not to
wade far into a controversy, one distinction, which well heeded and rightly
applied, will clear the whole point concerning the abrogation and obligation of
the Moral Law under the New Testament, and cut off many needless curiosities,
which lead men into error. The Law then may be considered either as a Rule, or
as a Covenant. Christ has freed all believers from the rigor and curse of the
law, considered as a Covenant: but he has not freed them from obedience to the
law, considered as a Rule. And all those Scriptures that speak of the Law as if
as a Covenant; those again that speak of the Law as if it were still in force,
take it considered as a Rule. The Law as a Covenant, is rigorous; and under
that rigor we now are not, if we be in Christ: but the Law as a Rule, is
equal; and under that equity we still are, though we be in Christ.

The Law as a Rule only shows us, what is good and evil, what we are to do
and not to do. ( Mic. ^.8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of
thee;) without any condition annexed either of reward if we observe it, or of
punishment as a Covenant exacteth punctual and personal performance of every
thing that is contained therein, with a condition annexed of Gods acceptance,
and of blessing if we perform it to the full; but of his wrath and curse upon
us, if we fail in any thing. Now by reason of transgression we having all
broken that Covenant, the Law has his work upon us, and involveth us all in
Gal. 3.10.
the curse: so as by Ibid. verse. 11.
the Covenant of the Law no flesh living can be justified. Then comes in
Christ: who subjecting himself for our sakes to the Covenant of the Law, first
fulfilleth it in his own person, but in our behalf as disanulleth it, and in
stead thereof establishes Heb. 8.6.
a better Covenant for us, even the Covenant of Grace. So that now as many as
believe, are free from the Covenant of the Law, and from the Curse of the Law;
and set under a Covenant of Grace, and under promises of Grace. There is a
translation then of the Covenant: but what is all this to the Rule? That still
is where it was: even as the nature of good and evil is still the same it was.
And the Law considered as a Rule, can no more be abolished or changed, than can
the nature of good and evil be abolished or changed. It is our singular comfort
then, and the happiest Christian liberty, that we are freed by Christ and
through faith in him from the Covenant and Curse of the Law: but we must know
that it is our duty, notwithstanding the liberty that we have in Christ, to
frame our lives and conversations according to the Rule of the Law. Which if we
shall neglect under the pretense Christian Liberty; we must answer for both:
both for neglecting our duty, and for abusing our liberty. And so much for the
first way.

The second way, whereby our liberty may be used for a cloak of maliciousness;
is, when we stretch it in the use of things that are indeed indifferent beyond
the just bounds of sobriety. Many men that would seem to make conscience of
their way, will perhaps ask the opinion of some Divine, or other learned man,
whether such or such a thing be lawful or no; and if they be once persuaded
that it is lawful, they then think they have free liberty to use it manner and
measure they please: never considering what Because we are free, we may not run
wild. Hall. 15. Contempl. 3.
caution and moderation is required even in lawful things to use them lawfully.
Saint Gregory's rule is a good one, Gregor.
Semper ab illicitis, quandoque and a licitis: things unlawful we must never
do; nor ever lawful things, but with due respect to our calling and other
concurrent Quaedam quae licent, tempore and loco mutato non licent. Sen.
controver. 25.
circumstances. Wine and music, and gorgeous apparel, and delicate fare, are
such things as God in his goodness has created and given to the children of
men for their comfort; and they may use them lawfully, and take comfort in them
as their portion: but he that shall use any of them intemperately, or
unseasonably, or vainly, or wastfully, abuses both them and himself. And
therefore we shall often find both the things themselves condemned, and those
that used them blamed in the Scriptures. The men of Israel for Amos 6.4.6.
stretching themselves upon their couches, and eating the lambs out of the
flock, and chaunting to the sound of the Vial, and drinking Wine in bowls, Amos
6. And the women for their Esa. 3.18.23.
bracelets, and earrings, and wimples, and crisping pins, and their other
bravery in Esaias 3. And the rich man for Luke 16.19.
faring deliciously and wearing fine linen in the Parable, Luke 16. Yea our
Savior himself pronounces a woe against Luke 6.25.
them that laugh, Luke 6. And yet none of all these things are or were in
themselves unlawful: it was the excess only, or other disorder in the use of
them that made them obnoxious to reproof. Though some in their heat have said
so, yet who can reasonably say, that horse-matches, or playing at cards or
dice, are in themselves and wholly unlawful? And yet on the other side, what
sober wise man, because the things are lawful, would therefore approve of that
vain and sinful expense which is oftentimes bestowed by men of mean estates in
the dieting of Horses, and wagering upon them? or of that excessive abuse of
gaming, wherein thousands of our time, and consume away their whole substance,
both which ought to be far more precious unto them? I might instance in many
other things in like manner. In all which, we may easily err either in point
of judgment, or practice, or both; if we do not wisely sever the use from the
abuse. Many times because the abuses are common and great, we peevishly condemn
in others the very use of some lawful things. And many times lawful use of the
things, we impudently justify our selves in the very abuses also. That is
foolish preciseness in us; and this profane partiality: by that we infringe
our brethrens liberty; by this pollute our own. The best and safest way for us
in all indifferent things is this: to be indulgent to others, but strict to our
selves; in allowing them their liberty with the most, but taking our own
liberty ever with the least.

But is not this to preach one thing, and do another? ought not our Doctrine
and our Practice to go together? It is most true, they ought so to do: Neither
does any thing I have said make to doctrinally deliver to be absolutely
necessary, we may not in our own practice omit: and what we may doctrinally
condemn as simply unlawful, we are bound in our own practice to forbear. But
things of a middle and indifferent nature, we may not ( doctrinally) either
impose them as necessary, neither forbid as unlawful; but leave a liberty in
them both for other men and our selves to use them or not to use them, as
particular circumstances and occasions and other reasons of convenience shall
lead us. And in these things both we must allow others a liberty, which for
some particular reasons it may not be so fit for us to take; and we strictness
for some particular reasons, which we dare not to impose upon others. It was a
foul fault and blameworthy in the Scribes and Pharisees to tie Mat. 2^.4.
heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, which they would not touch with one
of their fingers: but if they should (without superstition, and upon reasonable
inducements) have laid such burdens upon themselves, and not imposed them upon
others; for any thing I know, they had been blameless. There are many things
which in my conscience are not absolutely and in Thesi necessary to be done;
which yet in Hypothesi for some personal respects I think so fit for omit them;
still reserving to others their liberty to do as as they should see cause.
There are again many things which in my conscience are not absolutely and in
Thesi unlawful to be done; which yet in Hypothesi, and for the like personal
respects, I think so unfit for me to do, that I should resolve to undergo some
inconvenience rather than do them: yet still reserving to others the like
liberty as before, to do as they should see cause. It belongs to every sober
Christian advisedly to consider not only what in it self may lawfully be done
or left undone; but also what godly wisdom and discretion is fittest for him to
do, or not to do upon all occasions, as the exigence of present circumstances
shall require. He that without such due consideration will do all he may do at
all times, under color of Christian liberty, he shall undoubtedly sometimes
use his liberty for a And that is the second way, by using it excessively.

It may be done a third way, and that is by using it uncharitably, which is the
case whereon I told you Saint Paul beats so often. When we use our liberty
so, as to 1 Cor. 8.9.
stumble the weak consciences of our brethren thereby, and will not remit in
any thing the extremity of that right and power, we have in things of
indifferent nature, Romans 15.2.
to please our neighbor for his good unto ed^fication, at least so far as we
may do it without greater inconvenience; we Romans 14.15.
walk not charitably: and if not charitably, then not Christianly. Indeed the
case may stand so, that we cannot condescend to his infirmity prejudice either
to our selves, or to the interest of some third person. As for instance; when
the Magistrate has positively already determined our liberty in the use of it
the one way; we may not in such case redeem the offense of a private brother
with our disobedience to superior authority in using our liberty the other
way: and many other like cases there may be. But this I say, that where without
great inconvenience we may do it; it is not enough for us to Romans 15.1.
please our selves, and to satisfy our own consciences, that we do but what we
lawfully may: but Gal. 6.2.
bear one another burdens, and to forbear for one another sakes what otherwise
we might do, and so to fulfill the Law of Christ. S. Paul who has forbidden us
in one place to make our selves 1 Cor. 7 23.
the servants of any man (1 Cor. 7.) has yet bi^dden us in another place Gal.
5.13.
by love to serve one another (Gal. 5.13.) And his practice therein consents
with his doctrine (as it should do in every teacher of truth,) for though he
were h free from all, and knew it, and would not 1 Cor 6.12.
be brought under the power of any, yet in love he became 1 Cor. 9.19, 22.
servant to all, that by all means he might win some. It was an excellent
saying of Luther, Luther in Galat. 5.
Omnia libera We should know, and be fully persuaded with the persuasion of
faith, that all things are lawful: and yet withal we should purpose and be
fully resolved for charity sake to forbear the use of many things, if we find
them inexpedient. He that will have his own way in every thing he has a
liberty unto, whosoever shall take offense at it; makes his liberty but a
cloak of maliciousness, by using it uncharitably.

The fourth and last way, whereby we may use our liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, is, by using it undutifully, pretending it disobedience to
lawful authority. The Anabaptists that deny all subjection to Magistrates in
indifferent things, do it upon this ground, that they imagine Christian liberty
to be violated when by humane laws it is determined either the one way or the
other. And I cannot but wonder, that many of our brethren in our own Church,
who in the question of Ceremonies must argue from their ground, (or else they
talk of Christian liberty to no purpose) conclusion: which to my apprehension
seems by the rules of good discourse to issue most naturally and necessarily
from it. It were a happy thing for the peace both of this Church and of their
own consciences, if they would in calm blood review their own dictates in this
kind; and see whether their own principle (which the cause they are engaged in
makes them dote upon) can be reasonably defended; and yet the Anabaptists
inference thence, (which the evidence of truth makes them to abhor) be fairly
avoided. Yet somewhat they have to say for the proof of that their ground:
which if it be ^ound, it we should subscribe to it; if it be not, it is as good
reason they should retract it. Let us hear therefore what it is, and put it to
trial.

First, say they, Ecclesiastical Constitutions (for there is the quarrel)
determine us precisely ad unum in the use of indifferent things, which God and
Christ have left free ad utrumlibet. Secondly, by necessity upon the thing they
enjoin, they take upon them as if they could alter the nature of things, and
make that to become necessary which is indifferent, which is not in the power
Thirdly, these Constitutions the freedom of the conscience: for ^f the
conscience be bound, how is she free? Nor so only, but fourthly, the things so
enjoined are by consequence imposed upon us as of absolute necessity unto
salvation: forasmuch as it is necessary unto salvation for every man to do that
which he is bound in conscience to do; by which device kneeling at the
Communion, standing at the Gospel, bowing at the name of Jesus, and the like,
necessity unto salvation. Fifthly, say they, these Constitutions cannot be
defended but by such arguments as the Papists use for the establishing of that
their rotten Tenet, that humane as well as divine. Then all which premises,
what can be imagined more contra^ious to true Christian liberty?

In which Objections (before I come to their particular answer) I cannot but
observe the unjust (I would we might not say unconscionable) partiality of the
Objecters. First, in laying the accusation the Ecclesiastical laws only:
whereas their arguments (if they had any strength in them) would as well
conclude against the Political laws in the civil State, and against domestical
in private Families, as against the Laws Ecclesiastical: yet must these only be
guilty, and they innocent, which is not equal. Let them either damn them all,
or quit them all: or else let them show wherein they are unlike, which they
have not yet done, neither Secondly, when they condemn the things enjoined as
simply and utterly unlawful upon quite other grounds; and yet keep a stir about
Christian liberty: for which argument there can be no place without supposal of
indifferency, (for Christ has left us no liberty to unlawful things,) how can
they answer this their manifest partiality? Thirdly, if they were put to speak
upon their power were in their own hands, and Church affairs left to their
ordering, they would not forbid those things they now dislike, every way as
strictly and with as much imposition of necessity, as the Church presently
enjoyneth them; I doubt not but they would say Yea: and what equity is there in
this condemn that in others, which they would allow in themselves? Fourthly, in
some things they are content to submit to the Ecclesiastical Constitutions
notwithstanding their Christian which liberty they stiffely pretend for their
refusal of other some: whereas the case seems to be every way equal in both;
all being enjoined by the same authority, and for the same end, and in the same
manner. If their liberty be impeached by these; why not as much by those? or if
obedience to those may consist with Christian liberty; why not as well
obedience to these? In allowing some, rejecting others, where there is the same
reason of all: are

And now I come to answer their arguments, or rather flourishes, for they are
in truth no better. That first allegation, that the determining of any thing in
unam partem takes away a man's liberty to it, is not true. For the liberty of a
Christian to any thing indifferent consists in this; that his judgment is
thoroughly persuaded of the indifferency of it: and therefore it is the
determination of the judgment, in the opinion of the thing, not in the use of
it, that takes away Christian liberty. Otherwise not only Laws Political and
Ecclesiastical: but also all Vows, Promises, Covenants, and what not, that
pitcheth upon any certain resolution de futuro, should be prejudicial to
Christian Liberty: because they do all determine something in unam partem,
which before was free and indifferent in utramque partem. For example: if my
friend invite me to sup with him, I may by no means promise him to come;
because the liberty I had before to go or not to go, is now determined by
making such a promise: neither may a young man bind himself an Apprentice, with
any certain Master, or to any certain trade, because the liberty he had before
of placing himself indifferently with that Master, or with another, and in that
trade, or in determined by such a contract. And so it might be instanced in a
thousand other things. For indeed to what purpose has God left indifferent
things determinable both ways by Christian liberty, if they may never be
actually determined either way, without impeachment of that liberty? It is a
very vain power, that may not be brought into act; but God made no power in
vain. Our Brethren I hope will wave this first argument, Christian liberty, a
very Chimera, a non ens, a mere notional liberty, whereof there can be no use.

That which was alleged secondly, that they that make such Laws take upon them
to alter the nature of things, by making indifferent things to become
necessary, being said gratis without either truth or proof, is sufficiently
answered by the bare denial. For they that make Laws concerning indifferent
things, have no intention at all to meddle with the nature of them; they leave
in medio as they found it: but only for some reasons of convenience to order
the use of them; the indifferency of their nature still being where it was.
Nay, so far is our Church from having any intention of taking away the
indifferency of those things which for order and comeliness she enjoyneth; that
she has by her public declaration protested the contrary: wherewith they
ought to be satisfieed. Especially since her sincerity in that declaration
(that none may cavil, as if it were protestatio contraria facto,) appears by
these two most clear evidences among many other; in that she different rites
used in other Churches, and also mutable: neither of which she could do, if she
conceived the nature of the things themselves to be changed, or their
indifferency to be removed by her Constitutions.

Neither is that true, which was thirdly alleged, that where men are bound in
conscience to obey, there the conscience is not left free; or else there would
be a contradiction. For there is no contradiction, where the affirmative and
negative are not ad idem, as it is in this case. For Obedience is one thing,
and the Thing commanded another; The Thing is commanded by the Law of man, and
in regard thereof the conscience is free: but Obedience to men is commanded by
the Law of God, and in regard thereof the conscience is bound. So that we are
obedience in indifferent things lawfully commanded; the conscience still
remaining no less free in respect of the things themselves so commanded, then
it was before. And you may know it by this; In Laws properly humane (such as
are those that are made concerning indifferent things) the Magistrate does not
nor can say; This you are bound in conscienee to do, and therefore I command
you to do it: as he might say, if the bond of obedience did spring from the
nature of the things commanded. But now when the Magistrate begins at the
other end, as he must do, the bond of obedience arises from that power in the
Magistrate, and duty in the subject, which is of divine Ordinance. You may
observe therefore that in humane Laws not merely such (that is, such as are
necessary, or merely unlawful;) the Magistrate may there derive the bond of
obedience from the nature of the things themselves. As for example, if he
should make a Law to inhibite Sacrilege, or Adultery; he might then well say,
you are bound in conscience to abstain from these things, and therefore I
command you so to abstain: which he could not so well say in the Laws made to
inhibit the eating of flesh, or the transportation of grain. And the reason of
the difference is evident: because those former Laws are rather Divine than
humane (the substance of them being divine, and but the sanction only humane)
immediate virtue, and in respect of the things themselves therein commanded:
which the later being merely humane (both for substance and sanction) do not.

The consideration of which difference and the reason of it, will abundantly
discover the vanity of the fourth allegation also: wherein it was objected that
the things enjoined by the Ecclesiastical Laws are imposed upon men as of
necessity to salvation: Which is most untrue. Remember once again, that
obedience is one thing; and the things commanded another. Obedience to lawful
authority is a duty commanded by God himself and in his Heb. 12.14.
holiness without which no man shall see God: but the things themselves
commanded by lawful authority, are neither in truth necessary to salvation, nor
do they that are in authority impose them as such. Only they are the object
(and that but by accident neither and contingently, not necessarily) about
which that obedience is conversant, and wherein it is to be exercised. An
example or two will make it plain. We know every man is bound in conscience to
employ himself in the works of his particular calling with faithfulness and
diligence; and that faithfulness and diligence is a branch of that holiness
and righteousness which wine, or making of shoes, were necessary to
salvation, because these are the proper employment of the Vintners, and
Shoomakers calling, which they in conscience are bound to follow, nor may
without sin neglect them? Again, if a Master command his servant to go to the
market, to sell his corn, and to buy in provision for his house, or to wear a
livery of such or such a color and fashion: in this case who can reasonably
deny but that the servant is bound in conscience to do the very things his
master bids go, to s^ll, to buy, to wear? and yet is there any man so
forsaken of common sense, as thence to conclude, that going to market, selling
of corn, buying of meat, wearing a blue coat, are necessary to salvation? or
that the Master imposes those things upon the servant as of necessity unto
salvation? The obligation of the servants conscience to do the things commanded
arises from the force of that divine Law which binds servants to masters in
lawful things. The master in the things he so commands, has no particular
actual respect to the conscience of his servant, (which perhaps all that while
never came within his thoughts,) but merely respects his own occasions and
conveniences. In this example as in a glass let the Objectors behold the
lineaments and feature of their own argument. Because kneeling, standing,
bowing, are commanded by the Church, and the people are bound in conscience to
obey the Laws of the Church; therefore the Church imposes upon the people
kneeling, standing, and bowing, as necessary to salvation.

If that which they object were indeed true, and that the Church did impose
these rites, and ceremonies upon the people, as of necessity to salvation, and
require to have them so accepted: doubtless the imposition were so prejudicial
to Christian liberty, as that every faithful man were bound in conscience for
the maintenance of that liberty, to disobey her authority therein, and to
confess against the imposition. But our Church has been so far from any
intention of doing that her self, that by her foresaid public declaration she
has manifested her utter dislike of it in others. What should I say more?
Horat. 1. Sat. 3.
Denique te ipsum concute. It would the Patriarchs of that party that thus
deeply (but untruly) charge her; to look unto their own cloaks, dive into their
own bosoms, and survey their own positions and practice: if happily they may be
able to clear themselves of trenching upon Christian liberty, and ensnaring the
consciences of their brethren, and imposing upon their Proselytes their own
traditions of kneel not, stand not, bow not, (like those mentioned Col. 2. of
Col. 2.21.
touch not, taste not, handle not) requiring to have them accepted of the
people even as of necessity unto salvation. If upon due examination they can
acquit themselves in this matter, their accounts will be the

As for consent with the Papists in their doctrine concerning the power that
men's laws have over the conscience, which is the last objection: it ought not
to move us. We are not ashamed to consent with them, or any others, in any
truth. But in this point we differ from them, so far as they differ from the
truth: which difference I conceive to be, neither so great as some men, nor yet
little as other some men would make it. They teach that Humane laws,
especially the Ecclesiastical, bind the consciences of men, not only in
respect of the obedience, but also in respect of the things themselves
commanded, and that by their own direct immediate and proper virtue. In which
doctrine of theirs, 3. things are to be First, that they give a pre-eminence to
the Ecclesiastical laws above the Secular in this power of binding. We may
objectors; how men will run into extremities beyond all reason, when they give
themselves to be led by corrupt respects. As he said of himself and his
fellow-Philosophers, Horat. 1. Ep. 17.
Scurror ego ipse mihi, populo tu: so it is here. They of Rome carried with a
wretched desire to exalt the Papacy, and indeed the whole Clergy as much as
they may, and to avile the secular powers as much as they dare; they therefore
ascribe this power over the conscience to the Ecclesiastical laws especially,
but do not show themselves all out so zealous for the secular. Ours platform of
discipline into the Church, and for that purpose to present the established
government unto the eyes and the hearts of the people in as deformed a shape as
they can; quarrel the Ecclesiastical laws especially for tyrannizing over the
consciscience, but do not show themselves so much agrieved at the secular.
Whereas the very truth is, whatsoever advantages the secular powers may have
above the Ecclesiastical, or the Ecclesiastical above the secular in other
respects; yet as to the power of binding the all humane laws in general are of
like reason, and stand upon equal terms. It is to be misliked secondly in the
Romish the things themselves also, and not only tie it to the obedience;
whereby they assume unto themselves ( interpretative) the power of altering the
nature of the things by removing of their indifferency, and inducing a
necessity: for so long as they remain indifferent, it is certain they cannot
bind. And thirdly and principally it is to be misliked in them, that they
would have this binding power to flow the Laws themselves immediately per se;
which is in effect to equal them with the divine Law: for what can that do
more? whereas humane laws in things not repugnant to the Law of God, do bind
the conscience indeed to obedience, but it is by consequent, and by virtue of a
former Divine Law, commanding us in all lawful things to obey the superior
powers.

But whether mediately or immediately, may some say, whether directly or by
consequent, whether by its own or by a borrowed virtue; what is it material to
be argued, so long as the same effect will follow, and that as entirely to all
intents and purposes, the one a debt be alike recoverable; it skilleth not much
whether it be due upon the original bond, or upon an assignment. If they may be
sure to be obeyed, the higher powers are satisfied: Let Scholars wrangle about
words and distinctions; so they have the thing, it is all they look after. This
Objection is in part true, and for that reason the differences in this
controversy are not altogether of so great consequence as they the governors,
whence the obligation of conscience springs, so long as they are conscionably
obeyed, as was truly alleged: Yet unto inferiors who are bound in conscience
to yield obedience, it is not all one; but it much concerns them to
understand whence that obligation arises, in respect of this very point
whereof we now speak of Christian liberty, and for two weighty and important
considerations.

For first: if the obligation spring as they would have it from the
Constitution it self, by the proper and immediate virtue thereof; then the
conscience of the subject is tied to obey the Constitution in the rigor of it:
whatsoever occasions may occur, and whatsoever other inconveniences may follow
thereupon: so as he sins mortally, who at any time in any case (though of
never so great necessity) does otherwise than the very letter of the
Constitution requires, (yea though it be extra casum scandali and contemptus.)
Which were an heavy case, and might prove to be of very pernicious
consequence; and is indeed Christian liberty, by enthralling the conscience
where it ought to be free. But if on the other side, which is the truth, the
Constitution of the Magistrate bind the conscience of the subject, not
immediately and by its own virtue, but by consequent only and by virtue of that
law of God which commands all men to obey their superiors in lawful things:
then is there a liberty left to the subject, in cases extraordinary and of some
pressing necessity not otherwise well to be avoided, to do otherwise sometimes
than the Constitution requires. And he may so do with a free conscience. So
long as he is sure of two things: First, that he be driven thereunto by a true
and real, and not by a pretended necessity only; and secondly, that in the
manner of doing he use such godly discretion, as neither to show the least
contempt of the law in himself, nor to give ill example to others to despise
government or governors. And this first difference is material.

And so is the second also, if not much more; which is this. If the Magistrates
Constitution did bind the conscience virtute propria, and immediately; then
should the conscience of the subject be bound to obey the constitution of the
Magistrate ex intuitu upon the bare knowledge and by the bare warrant thereof,
without farther enquiry: and consequently should be bound to obey as well in
unlawful things, as lawful. Which consequence (though they that teach otherwise
will not admit) yet in truth they cannot avoid: for the proper and immediate
being supposed, the effect must needs follow. Neither do I yet see what
sufficient reason they that think otherwise can show, why the conscience of the
subject should be bound to obey the Laws of the Magistrate in lawful things,
and not as well in unlawful things. The true reason of it is well known to be
this, even because God has commanded us to obey in lawful things, but not in
unlawful. But for them to assign this reason, were evidently to overthrow their
own Tenent: because it evidently deriveth the bond of conscience from a higher
power than that of the Magistrate, even the Commandment of God. And so Paul in
Romans 13. men must Romans 13.1, 6.
be subject to the higher powers: why? because the powers are commanded of God;
And that for conscience sake too: why? because the magistrates are the
ministers of God. Neither may they be resisted: and why? because to resist them
is to resist the ordinance of God. That is S. Paul's doctrine. And S. Peter
accords with him. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves (says he) to every ordinance of man. What for the man's
sake? or for the ordinance sake? No: but propter Dominum, for the Lords sake,
verse. 13. And all this may very well stand with Christian liberty: for the
conscience Cum Christo juben^e servis homini, non illi servis sed ei qui
jussti. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
subject to none but God.

By these answers to their Objections, you may see what little reason some men
have to make so much noise as they do about Christian liberty. Whereupon if I
have insisted far beyond both your expectations and my own first purpose: I
have now no other thing whereby to excuse it, but the earnestness of my
desire, if it be possible, to contain within some reasonable bounds of sobriety
and duty, those of my brethren, who think they can never run far enough from
superstition, unless they run themselves quite out of their allegiance. There
are sundry other things, which I am forced Christian Obedience, and of
Christian Liberty. For the winding of our selves out of which perplexities,
when they may concern us, I know not how to commend both to my own practice and
yours, a shorter and fuller rule of direction, than to follow the clew of this
Text: Wherein the Apostle has set just bounds both to our obedience and
liberty. Bounds to our obedience; that we obey so far as we may without
prejudice to our Christian liberty; in all our acts of obedience to our
superiors still keeping our consciences free, by subjecting them to none but
God. Submit your selves, etc. but yet as free and as the servants of God, and
of none besides. Bound^ to our Liberty; that (the freedom of our judgments
and consciences ever reserved,) we must yet in the use of indifferent things
moderate our liberty, by ordering our selves according unto Christian sobriety,
by condescending sometimes to our brethren in Christian charity, and by
submitting our selves to the lawful commands of our governors in Christian
duty. In any of which respects if we shall fail, and that under the pretension
of Christian liberty: we shall thereby, quite contrary to the express
direction of both the Apostles, but abuse the name of liberty, for an occasion
to the flesh, and for a cloak of maliciousness.

[ As free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.]

And so I pass from this second, to my third and last observation; wherein, if
I have been too long or too obscure in the former, The Observation was this. In
the whole exercise both of the liberty we have in Christ, and of those respects
we owe unto men, we must evermore remember our selves to be and accordingly
behave our selves as those that are Gods servants: in these last words, ( But
as the servants of God,) containing our condition and our carriage. By our
condition, we are (...), the servants of God: and our carriage must be (...),
as the servants of God. I shall fit my method to this division; and first show
you sundry reasons, for which we should desire to be in this Condition, to be
(...), the servants and then give some directions, how we may frame our
carriage answerably thereunto, to demean our selves (...), as the servants of
God.

For the first: We cannot imagine any consideration, that may be found in any
service in the world, to render it desirable; which is not to be found, and
that in a far more eminent degree, in this service of God. If Justice may
provoke us, or Necessity enforce us, or easiness hearten us, or Honor allure
us, or Profit draw us, to any service: behold here they all concur; the service
of God and of Christ is excellently all these. It is of all other the most
just, the necessary, the most easy, the most honorable, the most profitable
service. And what would you have more?

First it is the most just service; whether we look at the title of Right on
his part, or reasons of Equity on ours. As for him, he is our Lord and Master
pleno jure, he has right to our best services by a threefold title, like a
treble cord, which Satan and all the Creation. ( Esaias 44.21.
Remember O Jacob thou art my servant, I have formed thee, thou art my servant
O Israel, Esaias 44.) Princes and the great ones of the world expect from those
that are their Creatures raised them, but in truth are not so, for they never
made them;) yet they expect much service from them, that they should be forward
instruments to execute their pleasures, and to advance their intentions: how
much more may the Lord justly expect from us who are every way his creatures,
raised us out of the dust, nay he made us of nothing,) that we should be his
servants to do his will, and instruments to promote his glory? Besides this Ius
creationis; he has yet two Ius redemptionis, and Ius liberationis. He has
bought us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we are his by purchase: and
he has won us out of the hands of our enemies, and so we are his by conquest.
We read often in the Law of servants Exodus 12.44. and alibi.
bought with money, (...): and it is but reason, he that has paid a valuable
consideration for a man's service, should have it. Now God has bought us and
redeemed us, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
not And being bought with such a price we are 1 Cor. 6.19.
not our own, to serve the lusts of our own flesh; nor any man's else, that we
should be the servants of men; but his only that has bought us and paid for
us, to 1 Cor. 6.20.
glorify him both in our bodies and souls, for they are his; jure
redemptionis, by the right of Purchase and Redemption. Again, when we were
mancipia peccati and diaboli, service in the mean time, our wages in the end
should have been eternal God by sending his Son to live and dye for us, has
conquered sin and Satan, and freed us from that wretched thraldom, to this end,

That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies we might Luke 1.74, 75
serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
lives. ( Psalm. 116.16.
I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the Son of thine handmaid; thou have
broken my bonds in sunder, Psalm. 116.) That is jus liberationis, the right of
Conquest and deliverance. Having so many and so strong titles thereunto, An qui
fundum aufert. ejus a quo emptus est, and tradit et qui nihil in eo habet
juris, injustus est: and qui seipsum auf^rt dominuti Deo, a quo factus est, and
malignis servit spiritibus, justus est? Aug. 19. de Civit. 21.
with what Justice can we hold back our services from him? It is the first and
most proper jus suum cuique, to Romans 13.7.
render to all their dues, and to let every one have that which of right
appertains unto him. And if we may not deny Mat. 22.21.
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; it is but right we should also give
unto God the things that are Gods by so many and just titles.

Especially since there are reasons of Equity on our part in this behalf, as
well as there is title of right on his part. You know the rule of equity, what
it is; even to do to others, as we would be done to. See then first how we deal
with those that are under our command. We are rigid and importunate exactors of
service from them: we take on unreasonably, and lay on unmercifully, services
toward us. How should this our strictness in exacting services from those
that are under us, add to our care and Vis ut tibi serviat* cum quo factus es;
and non vis servire ei, a quo factus es? Aug. de 10. Chord. c. 10.
conscience in performing our bounden services to our Lord and Master that is
over us? But as it is with some unconscionable dealers in the world, that
neither have any pity debtors, nor any care to satisfy their creditors; and as
we use to say of our great ones (and that but too truly of too many of them)
that they will neither do right, nor take wrong: such is our disposition. We
are neither content to forgo any part of that service, which we take to be due
to us; nor willing Quod laudas in servo, non exhibes Domino: and eo
sceleratius, quia vis ut meliorem tu habeas servum quam te Deus. Aug. Ibid.
to perform any part of that service, which we know to be due to God. See
secondly, how we have dealt even with God himself. It is the masters part to
command, not to serve: yet have we against all reason and good order done our
endeavor to make him who is our Master become our slave. Himself complains
Esa. 43 23, 24
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, and wearied thee with
incense: but thou have made me to serve 43.) Now what can be imagined more
preposterous and unequal, then for a servant to make his master do him service,
and himself his master none? See thirdly, what Christ has done for us: though
he were the Eternal Son, of the Eternal God, no way inferior to the Father, no
way bound to us; yet out of his free love to us, and for our good, he took upon
him Phil. 2.7.
the form of a servant, and was among us, Luke 22.27.
as one that That love of his should in all equity and thankfulness, yet
further bind us to answer his so great love, by making our selves servants
unto him, who thus made himself a servant for us. Thus both in point of right
and equity, the service of God is a just service.

secondly, the most necessary service. Necessary first, because we are
servi-nati, of a servile condition, born to serve. We have not the liberty to
choose whether we will serve, or no: all the liberty we have is to choose our
master; (as Joshua said to the people, Jos. 24.15.
Choose you whom you will serve.) Since then there lies upon us a necessity
serving, it should be our wisdom to make a virtue of that necessity, by making
choice of a good master; with his resolution there, I and my house will serve
the Lord. It is necessary secondly, for our safety and security: lest if we
withdraw our service from him we perish justly in our rebellion: according to
that in the Prophet, Esaias 60.12.
The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish.) It is
necessary thirdly, Nihil illi jam liberi est: spospondit. Senec. Ep. 36.
by our own voluntary act: when we bound our selves by solemn vow and promise
in the face of the open congregation at our Baptism, to continue Christ's
faithful soldiers and servants unto our lives end. Now the word is gone out of
our Prove. 20.25.
enquire what we have to do. Thus the service of God is a necessary service.

It is thirdly, (which at the first hearing may seem a Paradox, yet will appear
upon farther consideration to be a most certain truth) of all other the most
easy service: in regard both of the of the employment; and of the help we have
toward the performance of it. He that serves many Masters, or even but one if
he be a fickle man, he never knows the end of his work: what he does now,
anon he must undo: and so Sisyphus-like he is ever doing, and yet has never
done. Matthew. 6.24.
No man can serve two masters: not serve them so, as to please both; scarce so,
as to please either. And that is every man's case, that is a slave to sin: Senec.
Tot Domini, quot vitia. Every lust calls for his attendance; yea and many
times contrary lusts Nos ^am graves Dominos, interdum alternis vicibus
impe^antes, interdum patimur. Senc. Ep. 37.
at once, (as when Ambition bids, let fly, and Covetousness cries as fast,
Hold:) whereby the poor man is En quid agis? Duplici in diversum scinderis
hamo* Hunccine, an hunc sequeris? Pers. Satyr. 5.
infinitely distracted, between a loathness to deny either, and the
impossibility of gratifying both. Saint Paul therefore speaking of the state of
the Saints before conversion, expresses it thus, Tit. 3. ( Tit. 3.3.
We our selves also, were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures;) and that diversity breeds distraction. But the
servant of God is at a good certainty; and knows beforehand both what his
work must be, and what his wages must be. As is the Master himself, so are his
Commandments, Heb. 13.8.
Yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever, without variableness Jam. 1 17.
shadow of turning. ( 1 John 2.7.
Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but the old commandment which
ye had from the beginning. 1 Ioh. 2.)

It is some ease to know certainly what we must do; but much more to be assured
of sufficient help for the doing of it. If we were left to our selves for the
doing of his will, so as the yoke lay all upon our necks, and the whole burden
upon our shoulders: our necks, though their sinews were of iron, would break
under the yoke; and our shoulders, though their plates had the strength of
brass, would crack under the burden. But our comfort is, that (as Austin
sometimes prayed, Augustine.
da Domine quod jubes and jube quod vis:) so he that sets us on work,
strengthens us to do the work, ( Phil. 4.13.
I can do all things through him that strengthens me, Phil. 4.) Nay rather
himself does Esaias. 26.12.
the work in us ( 1 Cor. 15.10.
Yet not I, but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 15.) The Son of God puts his
neck in the yoke with us, whereby it becomes his yoke as well as ours; and
that makes it so easy to us; and he puts the shoulder under the burden
with us, whereby it becomes his burden as well as ours; and that makes it so
light to us. ( Mat. 11.30.
Take my yoke upon you: for my yoke is easy, and my burden light. Auson. in
carm. ad Theodos.
Iuvat idem, What he commands us to do, he helps us to do: and thence it
is, that 1 John 5.3.
his Commandments are not grievous. Thus the service of God is an easy
service.

It is fourthly, the most honorable service. Caeteris paribus, he goes for
the better man, that serves the better Master. And if men of good rank and
birth think it an honor for them, and a thing worthy their ambition to be the
Kings servants, because he the best and greatest Master upon earth: how much
more then is it an honorable thing, and to be desired with our utmost
ambitions, to be the servants of God, who is Optimus Maximus, and that without
either flattery or limitation, the best and greatest Master, and in comparison
of whom the best and greatest Kings are but as worms and grasshoppers. Sirac.
23.28.
It is a great glory to follow the Lord, says the son of Sirac, Sirac. 23. And
the more truly any man serves him, the more still will it be for his own
honor. For 1 Samuel 2.50.
them that honor me I will honor, says God, 1 Samuel 2. and Christ, Ioh. 12.
John 12.26.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Thus the service an honorable
service.

It is lastly and fifthly, the most profitable service. We are indeed Luke
17.10.
unprofitable servants to him: but sure we have a very profitable service under
him. They that speak against the Lord with stout words, saying, Mal. 3.13, 14.
It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances? Mal. 3. or as it is in Job 21. Job 21.15.
What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have
if we pray unto him? speak without all truth and reason. For verily never man
truly served God, who gained not incredibly by it. These things among other the
servants of God may certainly reckon vails and benefits of his service, wherein
his Master will not fail him, if he fail not in his service: Protection,
Maintenance, Reward. Men that are in danger cast to put themselves the service
of such great personages as are able to give them protection. Now God, both can
and will protect his servants from all their enemies, and from all harms. (
Psalm. 143.12. ( I am thine, O save me. Psalm. 119.94.
Of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul,
for I am thy servant, Psalm. 143.) Again, God has all good things his servants
may be assured of a sufficiency of both, when other shall be left destitute in
want and distress, ( Esa. 65.13, 14.
Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; behold my servants shall
65.) And whereas the servant of sin, (besides that he has fruit nor comfort of
his service in the mean time,) when he comes to receive his wages at the end
of his term, finds nothing but shame or death; shame, if he leave the
service, and if he leave it not, death: ( Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof on the contrary, besides that
he reapeth much comfort and content in the very service he does in the mean
time, he receives a blessed reward also at the last, even eternal life. He
has Romans 6.21.
his fruit in holiness, (there is his comfort onward) and the end there is his
full and final reward. A reward far beyond the merit of his service. And so the
service of God is a profitable service.

And now I pray you what can any man allege or pretend for himself if he shall
hang back, and not with all speed and cheerfulness tender himself to so just,
so necessary, so easy, so honorable, so profitable a service? Me thinks I
hear every man answer, as the Israelites sometimes said to Joshua with one
common voice, Josh. 24.16.
God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve any other: Nay but we
will serve the Lord, for he is our God, Josh. 24. But Gal. 6.7.
mocked with hollow and empty protestations. We live in a wondrous complemental
age, wherein scarce any other word is so ready in every mouth, as your servant,
and at your service, when all is but mere form, without any purpose, or many
times but so much as single thought, of doing any serviceable office to those
men, to whom we profess so much service. However we are one toward another,
yet with the Lord there is no dallying: it behooves us there to be real. If we
profess our selves to be, or desired to be the servants of God; we must have a
care to demean our selves (...), in all respects as becomes the servants of
God. To which purpose when I shall have given you those few directions I spoke
of, I shall have done. Servants owe many duties to their earthly Masters in the
particulars; but three generals comprehend them all, Reverence, Obedience,
Faithfulness. Whereof the first respects the Masters person, the second his
pleasure, the third his business. And he that will be Gods servant in truth,
and not only in title, must perform all these to his heavenly Master.

Reverence is the first; which ever arises from a deliberate apprehension of
some worthiness in another more than in a man's self; and is ever accompanied
with a fear to offend, and a care to please, the person reverenced: and so it
has three branches. Whereof the first is Humility. It is not possible, that
that servant who (...). Menand.
thinks himself the wiser, or any way the better man of the two, should truly
reverence his Master in his heart. Saint Paul therefore would have servants to
1 Timothy 6.1.
count their own Masters worthy of all honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. he knew well they
could not else reverence them, as they ought. Plaut.
Non dec^t superbum esse hominem could he say in the Comedy; A man that
thinks goodly of himself, cannot make a good servant either to God or man.
Then are we meetly prepared for this service, and not before, when truly
apprehending our own vileness and unworthiness, both in our nature and by
reason of sin; and duly acknowledging the infinite greatness and goodness of
our Master, we unfainedly account our selves altogether unworthy to be called
his servants.

Another branch of the servants reverence is fear to offend his master. This
fear is a disposition well becoming a servant, and therefore God as our Master,
and by that name of Master challenges it, Mal. 1. ( Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear?
says the Lord of Hosts.) Fear and reverence are often joined together, and so
jointly required of the Lords servants. ( Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice to him with reverence, Psalm 2.) And the
Apostle would have us furnished with grace, Heb. 12.18.
whereby to serve God acceptably with reverence 12.

From which fear of offending, a care and desire of pleasing cannot be severed:
which is the third branch of the servants Reverence to his Master. Saint Paul
bids Titus, exhort servants to Tit. 2 9.
please their masters well in all things. So must Gods servant do; he must
study to Col. 1.10.
walk worthy of him unto all pleasing: not much regarding how others interpret
his doings, or what offense they take at him, so long as his Master accepts
his services, and takes his endeavors in good part. Who so is not thus
resolved to please his Master, although he should thereby the displeasure of
the whole world besides, is not worthy to be called the servant of such a
Master. ( Gal. 1.10.
If I yet sought to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.)
And all this belongs to Reverence.

Obedience is the next general duty ( Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants be obedient to your Masters, Ephesians. 6. Romans 6.16.
Know you not, whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are
to whom ye obey? Romans 6.) As if there could be no better proof of service than
obedience: And that is twofold: Active, and Passive. For Obedience consists
in the subjecting of a man's own will to subjection, if it be in something to be
done, makes an Active; if in something to be suffered, a Passive obedience.
Our Active Obedience to God, is the keeping his Commandments, and the doing of
his will: as the people said, Josh. 24. Josh. 24*24.
The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey. And this must be
done Psalm. 18.44.
in auditu auris, upon the bare signification of his pleasure without disputing
or debating the matter: as Mat. 8.9.
the Centurions servant, if his Master did but say, Do this, without any more
ado, did it. So Abraham the servant of the Lord, Heb. 11.8.
when he was called to go out into a place which he should receive for an
inheritance, obeyed and went out, though he knew not whither. Nor only so, but
in Genesis 22.
the greatest trial of Obedience that ever we read any man (any mere man) to
have been put unto, being commanded to sacrifice Heb. 11.17, 18.
his only Isaac shall thy seed be called: he never Romans 4.20.
stumbled (as not at the promise through unbelief, so neither) at the command
through disobedience, but speedily went about it, and had not failed to have
done all that was commanded him, had not the Lord himself, when he was come
even to the last act, inhibited him by his countermand. If mortal and wicked
men look to be obeyed by their servants upon the warrant of their bare command,
in evil and unrighteous acts; ( 2 Samuel 13.28.
When I say unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him) fear not: have not I
commanded says Absalon to his servants, 2 Samuel 13.) Ought not the express
command of God much more, to be a sufficient warrant for us to do as we are
bidden, none of whose commands can be other than holy and just?

That is our Active obedience. We must give proof of our Passive obedience
also, both in contenting our selves with his allowances, and in submitting our
selves to his corrections. He that is but a servant in the house, may not think
to command whatsoever the house affords at his own pleasure; (that is the
Masters prerogative alone:) but he must content content to allow him; and take
his portion of meat, drink, livery, lodging, and every other thing, at the
discretion and appointment of his Master. Neither may the servant of God look
to be his own carver in any thing; neither ought he to mutter against his
Master (with that Mat. 25.24.
ungracious servant in the Parable) complaining of his hardness, and austerity,
if his allowances in some things fall short of his desire: but 1 Timothy 6.8.
having food and raiment, be it never so little, never so course, ^he should be
content with it; nay though he should want either or both, he should be content
We should all learn of an old experienced servant of God Saint Paul, what grace
and long experience had taught him, Phil. 4.11.
In whatsoever state we are, to be therewith content.

We are to show our Obedience to our heavenly Master yet further, by submitting
to his wholesome discipline, when at any time he shall see cause to give us
correction. Our Apostle a little after the Text would have servants to be
subject even to their 1 Pet. 2.18.
froward Masters, and to take it patiently when they are buffetted
undeservedly, and without fault. How much Lev. ^6*21.23.
to accept the punishment of our iniquity (as we have the phrase, Levit. 26.)
and with patience to yield our backs to the whip; when God who has been so
gracious a Master to us, shall think fit to exercise some little severity
toward us, and to lay stripes upon us? Especially since he never strikes us:
First, but for our fault, (such is his justice,) nor Secondly, (such is his
mercy) but for our good. And all this belongs Obedience, which the servant of
God ought to manifest, both by doing and suffering according to the will of his
Master.

The third and last general duty is Fidelity, ( Mat. 24.45.
Who is a faithful and wise servant? Mat. 25.21.
Well done thou good and faithful servant.) As if both the wisdom and goodness
of a servant consisted in his faithfulness. Now the faithfulness of a servant
may be tried especially by these three things: By the heartinesse of his
service, by being tender of his Masters honor and profit, and by his
quickness and diligence in doing his business. A notable example whereof we
Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. in all the three particulars. For first, being many
miles distant from his Master, he was no less solicitous put in trust withal,
then he could have been, if he had been all that while in the eye of his
Master. Secondly, he framed himself in his speeches and actions, and in his
whole behavior to such a discreet carriage, as might best set forth the credit
and honor of his Master. Thirdly, he used all possible diligence and
expedition; losing not any time, either at first for the delivery of his
message, or at last for his return home after he had brought things to a good
conclusion. Such faithfulness would well the service of God in all the
aforesaid respects.

The first whereof is Heartinesse in his service. There are many servants in
the world, that will work hard, and bustle at it lustily for a fit, and so long
as their Masters eye is upon them; but when his back is turned, can be content
to go on fair and softly, and fellow-like. Such Ephesians. 6.5, 7. Col. 3.22, 23.
(...), the Apostle condemns, Col. 3. and elsewhere, admonishing servants
whatsoever they do to do it heartily, and to obey their Masters not with
eye-service, but in singleness of heart. Toward our heavenly Master, true it
is, if we had but this eye-service, it were enough; because we are never out
his eyes are in all the corners of the earth, Prove. 15.3.
beholding the evil and the good, Psalm. 11.4.
and his eyelids try the children of men; Psalm. 139.3.
he is about our beds, and about our paths, and spyeth out all our goings. And
therefore if we should but study to approve our selves and our actions before
his sight; it could not be but our services should be hearty, as well as handy;
because our hearts are no less in his sight, than our hands are. We cannot
content our Master, nor should we content our selves, with a bare and barren
profession in the service of God; neither with the addition of some outward
performances of the work done: But since our Master calls for the Prove. 23.26.
heart as well as the hand and tongue; and requires Psalm. 51.6.
truth in the inward parts no less, rather much more, than show in the
outward: let us but join that inward truth of the heart, unto the outward
profession and performance; and doubtless we shall be accepted. ( 1 Samuel 12.24.
Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart, 1 Samuel 12.

Secondly, we must show our faithfulness to our Master by our zeal in his
behalf. A faithful servant will not endure an evil word spoken of his Master
behind his back, but he will be ready upon every occasion to vindicate his
credit, and to magnify him unto the opinion of others: He will make much of
those that love his Master, and set the less by those that care not for him.
And as to his credit principally, so he has an eye also in the second place to
the profit of his Master. He will have a care to save his goods the best he
can; it (...). Euripiae. in Med. act 1.
will grieve his very heart to see any of them vainly wasted or imbeazeled by
his fellow servants; yea and it will be the service of God. If we have no heart
to stand up in our rank and place for the maintenance of Gods truth and
worship, when it is discountenanced or overborn either by might or multitudes:
If our blood will not appear a little, when cursed miscreants blast the honor
of God with their unhallowed breath by blaspheming oaths, fearful imprecations,
scurrile prophanations of Scripture, licentious and bitter sarcasms against the
holy Ordinances of God: If a profound drunkard, and rimer, and habituated
swearer, a complete roarer, every loose companion and professed scorner of all
goodness, that does but peep out with a head, be as welcome into our company,
and find as full and free entertainment with us, as he that carries the face,
and for any thing we know has the heart, of an honest and sober Christian,
without either profaneness or preciseness: If we grieve not for the
miscarriages of those poor souls that live near us, especially those that fall
any way under our charge: what faithfulness is there in us, or what zeal for
God, to answer the title we usurp, so often as we call our selves the servants
of God?

Thirdly, if we be his faithful servants, we should let it appear by our
diligence in doing his businesses. No man would willingly entertain an idle
servant, that is (...). ap. Stob. Ser 60.
good at bit, and nothing else; one of those the old riming verse describes (
Sudant quando vorant, frigescant quando laborant) such as can eat till they
sweat, and work till they freeze. ( Mat. 25 26.
O thou wicked and slothful servant,) says the Master in the parable, to him
that napkined up his talent, Mat. 25. they are rightly joined, wicked and
slothful, for it is impossible a slothful servant should be good. The Poets
therefore give unto Mercury, who is interpres divum, the messenger (as they
faign) Jupiter, and the other gods, wings both at his hands and feet: to
intimate thereby what great speed and diligence, was requisite to be used by
those that should be employed in the service of Princes, for the managing of
their weighty affairs of State. Surely no less diligence is needful in the
service of God, but rather much more: by how much both the Master is of greater
majesty, and the service of greater importance ( Romans 11.11.
Not slothful in business, fervent) says S. Paul. Let all those that trifle
away their precious time in unconcerning things, or poast off the repentance of
their sins, and the reformation of their lives, till another age; or any other
way slack their bounden service unto God either in the common duties of their
general, or in the proper works of their particular calling: tremble to think
what shall become of them, when all they shall be Jer. 48.10.
cursed, that have done the Lords work (in what kind soever) negligently.

We see now what we are to do; if we will approve our selves and our services
unto the Lord our heavenly Master. What remains but that we be willing to do
it: and for that end pray to Phil. 2.12.
work in us both the will and the deed, that he would be pleased of his great
goodness to give to every one of us courage to maintain our Christian liberty
inviolate as those that are free; wisdom to use it right, and not for a cloak
of maliciousness; and grace at all times, and in all places to behave our
selves as the servants of God; with such holy reverence of his Majesty,
obedience to his will, faithfulness in his employments, as may both procure to
us, and our services in the mean time gracious acceptance in his sight, and in
the end a glorious reward in his presence: even for Jesus Christ his sake, his
only Son and our

FINIS.
A Table of the places of Scripture, to which some light (more or less) is
given in the foregoing Fourteen Sermons.
Chap. Ver. Page Genesis III. 4 -- 5 131 -- 15 241.351. -- 16 241 -- 19 241 IV 2
242 VI 6 200 IX 25 221 XV 15 210 XVIII 20 137 -- 32 212 XIX 8 40 -- 9 212 -- 16
211 XX s VI 323 etc. XXIIII 12 etc. 400 XXXI 29 346 XXXII 6 etc. 346 XXXIII 4
etc. 346 Exodus II. 14 10 X 26 369 XI 5 -- 6 224 XIIII 4 179 XX 5 224.231.234.
XXIII s I -- III. 125 etc. Lev. 26. 21 399 -- 23 399 -- 26 etc. 335.301. Number.
22. 27 282 XXIII 19 200 XXV 5 156 Deuteronomy. 8. 3 300 -- 14 306 -- 17 306 18 316 XV
4 250 XVII 4 109 XXXII 15 310 Ios. 24. 15 394 24 398 Judge. 3. 9 -- 10 157 V 7
157 XIX 30 109 1 Samuel 2. 30 396 IV 18 155 XII 24 400 XV 15 377 2 Samuel 13. 28
399 XV 4 117 XXI 14 166 2 King. 2. 9 102 X 20 112 XXI 13 377 -- s XXIX 173 etc.
Those that have this note s prefixed are the Texts of the Sermons.
1 King. 3. 9 62 VI 25-26 228 VIII 27 226 X 10 209 -- 30 222 XXII 20 210 1 Chronicles. 26. 29-31 155 2 Chronicles. 19. 6 114 XXIIII 22 310 Nehem. 5. 15 140 Job 1. 2
100 -- 5 10 -- 20 224 IX 33 2 XIII 7 36 XXII 30 212 XXIX 9 100 -- s 14 -- 17.
etc. 97 etc. Psalm 2. 11 398 III 7 112 IV 6-7 301 XIIII 4 111 XVIII 44 398 XIX
12 335.343 -- 13 360 XXXIIII 11 106 XXXVI 3 336 -- 6 215 XXXVII 1 193 XXXIX 11
219 XLV 6 -- 7 102 L 22 213 LI 6 400 -- 12 367 LII 2 -- 4 131 LVII 4 111 LVIII
5 336 -- 6 112 LXXIII 2 -- 3 217 -- 17 217 LXXV 2 -- 4 114.170. LXXVI 10 348 --
12 348 LXXXI 12 361 LXXXII 6 105.114. CIII 1 -- 2 298 CV 14 351 CVI 6 235 -- s
XXX 149 etc. -- 31 156 CVII 8 352 CIX 14 235 -- 16 101 CXVI 12 299 -- 16 393
CXIX 6 183 -- 94 396 -- 141 4 CXLIII 12 396 CXLV 8 206 -- 16 244 CXLVII 1 312
-- 9 353 Prove. 1. 13 135 III 3 107 XII 13 162 XIV 21 6 XV 8 190 -- 17 301 XVI
12 170 XVII 16 261 XVIII 7 135 -- 9 244 -- 13 110 -- 17 136 XX 25 294 XXI 1 348
XXIIII 26 102 XXV 2 110 XXVI 13 162 -- 25 353 XXVIII 13 335 XXIX 7 137 -- 12
142 XXX 1 6 -- 33 130 XXXI 20 244 Eccles. 1. 4 222 -- 18 337 VIII 11 162 IX 1
179 X 4 270 -- 10 65 XI 4 160 XII 9 68 Esaias 1. 24 199 III 9 377 -- 15 111 --
18-23 381 V 20 372 VIII 20 158 XXVI 12 395 XXVIII 21 398 XXXVII 35 222 XXXIX 8
210 XLIII 23-24 394 XLIV 21 392 LII 11 205 LV 8-9 216 LVII 1 211 LX 12 394 LXV
13-14 395 Ierem. 3. 15 231 V 1 213 VIII 6 349 XVII 9 263 XVIII 7 -- 8 198.202.
-- 18 131 XXIII 29 186 XLVIII 10 402 Lam. 5. 7 231 Ezekiel. 22. 9 132 XXIX 20 191
XXXIII 13-14 198.202. Dan. 3. 16 88 -- 18 378 VI 3 -- 5 134 IX 5 235 Hos. 2. 8
310 IIII 1 336 XI 8 199 XIII 9 279 Amos 3. 6 228.279. VI 4 -- 6 381 Ion. 3. 9
203 Micah 6. 8 380 Zach. 5. 4 227 Mal. 1. 6 398 Matthew. 3. 7 226 IIII 10 370 V
15 65 -- 16 180.53. -- 17 379 -- 29-30. 143 -- 37 40 VI 2 etc. 190 -- 24 395
VII 12 133 IX 13 36 XI 19 180 -- 30 371.395. XII 31-32. 32 -- 36 31 XIII 5 -- 6
177.183. -- 20-21. 177 XVIII 7 293 -- 10 4.7. XIX 21-22. 182 XXIII 4 382 -- 8
367 -- 10 367 -- 13 378 -- 14 377 -- 23 102 -- 35-36. 235 XXIIII 45 400 -- 51
179 XXV 21 400 -- 26 401 -- 28 67 XXVI 11 250.309. XXVII 25 221 XXVIII 20 55
Mark 4. 16-17. 177 X 18 280 Luke 3. 14 135 VI 25 381 VIII 6 177 IX 50 86 X 28
208 XII 14 10 -- 48 336 XV 17 194 XVI 2 137 -- 9 245 -- 19 381 -- 25 194 XVII
13 315 XVIII 11 5.359. XIX 8 130.141. -- 41 210 -- 53 43 XXI 15 69* -- 26 153
XXIII 2 29 -- 11 4 John. 2. 10 58 III 36 82 IX 2 -- 3 219 X 12 31.112. XV 22
376 XVII 26 396 XIX 12 29 XX 22 56.271. Act. 4. 19 374 VIII 22 378 X 28 252 XI
45-46. 52 XIIII 1 -- 2 82 -- 15 374 -- 17 301 XV 9 202 -- 28-29 328 XVII 11 375
-- 28 213 XXIII 1 339 XXIIII 25 188 XXVI 9 84 Romans 1. 16 179 -- 19-20. 280 II 5
-- 6. 218 -- 14 339.340. -- 15 78 -- 22 42 III s VIII 26. etc. -- 31 379 IV 13
203 -- 20 399 VI 14 379 -- 16 398 -- 21-22. 396 -- 23 217 VII 4 379 -- 6 379 X
4 379 XI 35 316 XII 7 103 -- 11 402 XIII 1 116 -- 1 -- 6 391 -- 4
106.114.123.163. -- 6 106 XIIII 2 82 -- s III 1. etc. -- 4 10 -- 5 86 -- 6 297
-- 10 11 -- 13 12 -- 14 82.36. -- 15 383 -- 20-21. 36 -- 22 82 -- s XXIII 73.
etc. XV 1 -- 2 383 -- 14 158 XVI 18 374 1 Cor. 1. 13 375 -- 26 370 III 4 -- 5
375 -- 21 195 -- 22-23 285.302. IIII 3 342 -- 4 343 -- 5 12.161 -- 7
59.306.358. V 8 378 VI 12 289.383. -- 18 326 -- 19-20 370.393. VII 4 329 -- 7
53.240. -- 17 56.242.263. -- 21 271 -- 23 367.369.383. -- s XXIIII 237. etc. --
31 70 -- 36 91 VIII 1 6.62. -- 8 69 IX 19-22 383 X 11 158 -- 30 296 XII 4 7 --
s VII 49. etc. 242.257. -- 29 59 XIII 5 12 XIIII 37 56 -- 38 336 XV 10 395 2
Cor. 1. 19-20 200 III 17 367 IIII 4 370 V 21 220 IX 10 62 XII 7 6.63 Gal. 1. 10
134.374. -- 16-17 252 -- 20 398 II 5 372 -- 14 24 -- 19 379 III 10-11 380 --
24-25 285 IIII 4 285 V 1 285.365.373 -- 13 370.383. -- 18 379 VI 1 359 -- 2 393
-- 11 376 Ephesians. 1. 3 223 IIII 8 etc. 224 -- 16 67 -- 28 243.255. V 3 328 -- 6
373 -- 15 370 VI 5 -- 7 368.400. Phil. 3. 19 370 IIII 13 395 Col. 1. 10 398 --
20 285 II 4 373 -- 8 373 -- 22 371 III 5 370 -- 22-23 400 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5 376 --
16 221 V 23 362 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3 373 -- 4 372 III 6 242 -- 10 108.251. -- 11 242
-- 3. -- 12 243 1 Timothy 1. 8 90 -- 13 32.84.337. III 13 269 IIII 3 302 -- s IV
275. etc. -- 5 300 -- 12 4 -- 16 66 V 3 107.251. -- 8 244 VI 1 397 -- 3 -- 5
291 -- 8 399 -- 20 31.369. 2 Timothy 1. 6 31 -- 14 31.369. Tit. 1. 15 302 III 3
395 -- 8 70 Heb. 1. 3 300 IIII 1 208 -- 12 186 -- 13 11 VI 4 -- 5 178 -- 18 207
VIII 6 380 X 30 11 XI 8 398 XII 9 204 -- 11 217 -- 23 302 -- 28 398 Iam. 1. 6
61 -- 8 118 -- 17 52.60.278.337 -- 21 387 -- 25 367 II 12 367 IIII 12 10 -- 15
202 -- 17 88.337. V 17 374 1 Pet. 2. 13 116.391. -- s XVI 364. etc. -- 18 399
-- 24 220. v 3 371-2. 2 Pet. 2. 1 377 -- 15 347 III 18 33 1 Ioh. 2. 7 395 IIII
1 375 V 3 371.395. Jude 3 369 -- 4 379 -- 16 374

ERRATA.
Page Line For Read 22 A.3. deserved,) deserve,) 17 A.3. formerly formally 52
E.5. and from and for 66 B.1. But this By this 82 E.3. it is a it, as a 90 E.6.
deside decide 96 C.2. profitable probable 135 A.4. case care 155 B.5. over the
Lord, of the Lord, 199 A.5. a sign a sigh 214 E.2. imputions. imputations 306
C.3. glorifying glorying -- 9. glorifieth gloryeth 343 D.7. (...) (...) 372
B.6* part part 385 C.8. not in the not the 401 B.10. and obscene rimer, and an
obscene rimer, an In the Margent.
Page For Read 70 b 1 Cor. 15.1. b 1 Cor. 14.1. 82 c Joh. 3.3, 6. c Joh. 3.36.
114 b Romans 13.1. b Romans 13.4. 149 The Argument cited The Argument a cited 137 ^
Council. Trid. Council. Tribur. 177 b Tit. 12.4. b Tit. 2.14. 191 c Joh. 3.10. c
Joh. 3.10. 210 d 4 King. 2. d 4 King. 22. 226 d -- reddit d -- redit. 244 (...)
(...) 293 c Matthew. 8.7. c Mat. 18.7. 313 diebus diebus ac noctibus 325 b (...)
(...) 344 i (...) (...) 368 c Matthew. 13.9. c Matthew. 23.9. 375 b 1 John 4.11. b
1 John 4.1. 396 b 1 Samuel 2.50. b 1 Samuel 2.30. 398 c Heb. 12.18. c Heb. 12.28.
401 (...) (...).


