Viner Major.
Tuesday the eighth day of Nov. 1653.
ORdered that Mr. Strong be desired from this Court to Print his Sermon
Preached at Paul's, on the fifth of this instant November.

Sadler.

A Voice from Heaven, CALLING The PEOPLE of GOD to a Perfect SEPARATION FROM
Mystical Babylon. AS it was delivered in a Sermon at Paul's before the Right
Honorable the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London, on Novem. 5. 1653.

By William Strong, PREACHER of the GOSPEL at the ABBEY WESTMINSTER.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, and are to sold at the
Sign of the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1654.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS VINER, Lord Mayor of London, and the Right
Worshipful the Court of Aldermen of the City of London.
Right Honorable!
THough there be many reasons which might persuade met silence, especially at
such a time, in which some men are made Transgressors for a word, nay every
word makes them Transgressors; and been latere, wisely to conceal a man's self,
specially in matters of Religion, is one great part of the wisdom of this Age;
Yet by your Command, and in obedience to your Order, I have adventured this
Sermon into public view; which I confess I was the more easily induced to,
because it tends to keep up the memorial of that ancient mercy, which (I
conceive) God would not have forgotten by us: as also because (unto my grief) I
hear, that its commonly whispered by many, that it was only plotted by King
James, like to that of Gowries Conspiracy, for some Politic end. But who ever
shall look into the story, as related by Thuanus, (surely no enemy to the
Papists) shall see reason enough to conclude the story most true, and the
design on their part real; De liberate conscientiarum desperata, etc.
The occasion he tells us, was a deep discontent, for not attaining a
toleration of their Religion; Sic a Theologis suis disserebatur, Regem
deponere, and regna concedere penes supremum Ecclesiae judicium esse, etc.
that the Popish Divines had several Debates about it, to set the Consciences
of the Conspirators free from their obedience and Allegiance: great
Consultations were held with foreign Princes, great assistances promised,
persons brought from several parts, many of them related to the Jesuits, and
of that faction, to act in this design; E sodalitio Jesuitico machinatio
sanguinolenta, and si fuisset per acta, ipse ex animo and intimis sensibus
detestaturus erat. Et tam atrox and immano faci^s Catholicos suscepisse plus
morte sibi dolere.
as appears in the confession of Garnet, who did acknowledge when he came to
die, that the thing was so horrid, that it grieved him more then death it self,
that the Catholics should have a hand therein. And yet will men who cry out
against Antichrist, plead so much for him, as to make this a feigned story, and
by this means make all our former praises to be mockings of God, and taking his
name in vain, and bring the guilt of the blood of all the Conspirators upon
this Nation. But whither will ignorance and interest carry men? even to despise
the mercies of God, Condemn the practices of the Godly, justify the wicked, and
for some petty end, take part with their greatest enemies.

In this Sermon, warning is given unto the people of God against Popery, which
may seem to some men altogether needless; a melancholy conceit, and nothing
else, especially in such a time as this, when we seem to be so zealous in
departing from Antichrist, that we are ready to go too far the contrary way;
and to forsake the things of Christ, under the name of Antichristian. But I
have read of a Woolf in Sheeps clothing; and do never look upon Satan as a
roaring Lion, more then when transformed into an Angel, and do never fear
Antichrist more, then when he professes to fight under Christ's banner. But in
the Scripture we have variety of Notes by which Antichrist is described, and by
these we shall best judge who are Antichristian in their Spirits, Principles,
and Practices.

First, Antichrist came in with an Apostasy; when men fell away from God, the
way of truth and Holiness, which before they professed. (...), 2. These. 2.3.

2. He brought in a Lie in Doctrine and worship, (...), 2. These. 2.11. and that
even in fundamentals; Antichrist denying the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22.

3. Antichrist did impose upon all men under the danger of persecution; Papalem
excommunicationem notari. Mede
he did make all, small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive his
mark, and no man might buy and sell (trade with him in things spiritual) that
received it not, Revel. 13.16,17.

4. He speaks Blasphemy against the Saints of God, and their worship; he
blasphemes the Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell in Heaven, Rev. 13.6. And
there has not been an age since the mystery of iniquity began to work,
wherein more of these notes were to be found, then in that wherein we live; if
therefore the Spirit of Antichrist in these great things prevail so much among
us, and yet we cry out even against the things of Christ as Antichristian, it
may justly make men fear that this is the decoy, the great deceit being to
bring in Antichrist under the color of opposing him, and being zealous against
him.

And though we have cause to fear the effectual working of this deceit in all
parts of this Nation, yet who sees not that the great plot is upon this City?
by reason of its confluence from, and its influence upon all parts of the
Nation: here they shall be favored, followed, of what opinion so ever they be:
its your duty therefore Right Honorable, to look upon it with the more
watchful eye: take care of these wanderers, wandering Stars the Scripture calls
them, that have no fixed places, that have various motions; now they are here,
but if you look for them aanon they are to be found in some other part of the
Heavens: these are the men that raise Stirs, cause Tumults, make Factions, to
that end that they may swim in such troubled waters, and seem somebody in a
Party; who if they stood single, would be wholly inconsiderable. These prove
slanderers also, and whom they can not, dare not oppose, they dare asperse,
Jer. 20.10.
Report say they, and we will report it; this is but the beginning of evil.
Such are to be noted by you, discountenanced, warned; and so much the rather,
because all the disturbances that are among us, are because the people as
Clouds are carried about with such winds; if we could allay the winds, the
Heavens would be clear; We speak much of settlement; the best way to settle men
is to remove those that unsettle them; and to establish them, is to
discountenance those whose business is to beguile unstable Souls, that they may
make merchandise of them. And when in this work it shall be told you, that it
belongs not to you to meddle with Religion; your power is only in things Civil,
being a Civil Magistrate; Do you consider, the foundation of honesty is laid in
Godliness; and all the duties of the second, are grounded in the obedience of
the first Table. That men are to obey you for conscience sake, and conscience
respects God only; and if you set their consciences at liberty in the things of
God sinfully, you may expect that God shall let their consciences loose from
obedience unto you, judicially; for furely they that are to obey you only out
of conscience to God, if they make no conscience of obedience to him, it cannot
be rationally expected, that they should be conscientious in obedience toward
you. The Magistrate is to rule with God; and his great care is to be, that
nothing provoke God to depart from his Government; for (what ever men imagine)
it is the Lord that builds the house, that keeps the City: Ezech. 10.2.
and fire taken off the Altar, burns more fiercely, when scattered over the
City, then common fire. Let therefore the great things of Christ, and of his
Gospel be your care, and be you very vigilant against all the wiles of
Antichrist, for he is a Beast issuing out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11.
of a base original, and yet growing up insensibly; Stirpium more. Mede.
and his horns are like a Lamb, when he speaks like a Dragon. The more subtilty
there is in this Adversary, the greater circumspection is required in you. So
shall you be chosen Instruments in the Lords hand, to keep this people from
returning to Babylon; so shall you eminently serve your Generation, lay down
your sword in peace; and the ruin intended, endeavored upon this City, shall
not be in your hands, which is the humble and hearty prayers of him who is

Yours to serve you in the Gospel, VV. S.

A Voice from Heaven, Calling the People of God to a perfect separation from
mystical BABYLON.
REV. 18.4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my
People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.


THis Book sets forth the state of the Church, and of the Empire under the two
last heads of the fourth Beast: and it contains in it, in reference to the
Empire, three great Prophesies.

First, of the Seals, which I conceive refer unto Rome Pagan.

Secondly, Of the Trumpets, which refer unto Rome Christian, after the time of
Constantine the Emperor.

Thirdly, Of the Vials, which refer unto Rome Antichristian, after the
Apostasy spoken of 2 These. 2.3. There must come a falling away first, that the
man of sin may be revealed, the son of perdition: the rise of Antichrist is set
down in this Book, Chapter 13. under the representation of two Beasts, noting his
double power; one temporal; so he is a Beast arising out of the Sea with seven
heads and ten horns: The other Ecclesiastical: so he is a Beast arising out of
the Earth, having two horns like a Lamb, etc. and his ruin is described Chap.
16. where are set down the several steps and degrees thereof.

These words of the Text refer unto the time of the fifth Vial, which is to be
poured out upon the Throne of the Beast, Chap. 16.10. which in this Chapter is
more fully set forth, with the manner, and the several circumstances thereof;
when a mighty Angel shall cry with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

These words now read unto you, Quamobrem aliquot Electi delitescunt adbuc in
eluvione Romanae impietatis, quorum Deus meminit in communi perditione
improborum. Bright.
are taken out of Jer. 51.45. My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and
deliver ye every man his own soul from the fierce anger of the Lord; and they
contain in them two things first, An exhortation unto the people of God, who
are yet supposed to be mixed amongst the Romish Idolaters; yea even then when
Rome comes to receive its last plagues; in these words, come out of her my
people.

Secondly, The reason given thereof, taken from a double evil; First of sin,
that ye be not partakers of her sins; Secondly of suffering, that ye receive
not of her plagues.

Two things are to be spoken of by way of explication, before I can propose the
Doctrine which I intend: and they are these, First, What is meant here by
Babylon.

Secondly, What is the destruction which is here threatened unto Babylon.

First, what is meant by Babylon; for the understanding thereof, we read Chap.
17. ver. 3, 4, 5. Of a woman sitting upon a scarlet colored Beast, full of
names of Blasphemy, etc. and her name was written in her forehead, Babylon the
great, the Mother of Harlots; Babylon therefore here spoken of, is described to
be a Woman: and verse. 18. the Woman is interpreted to be that great City which
reigns over the Kings of the Earth; so that Babylon in the sense of the holy
Ghost, is a great City: and that ancient Babylon cannot be here meant, is
plain: partly, because the ruin thereof was prophesied, Isa. 21.9. Jer. 51.64.
Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not arise from the evil that I will bring
upon her. Which threatenings were inflicted long before Saint John's time: but
the City here spoken of did then reign over the Kings of the Earth: and John in
this book does speak of nothing but the things that were, and that should come
to pass hereafter: as appears Chap. 1.19. Write the things which thou have
seen: the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter; It appears
also, because the Spirit of God has given us two words of purpose to keep us
off from a literal sense; one, Chap. 11.8. which is (...), spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt: it is a City therefore that is here spoken of, that has the
name of Sodom and Egypt, yet not to be literally, but spiritually understood:
and the other is Chap. 17.5. (...), Mystery, Babylon the Great: it is not
therefore to be literally, but mystically interpreted: and what City in S.
John's time did rule over the Kings of the Earth, but Rome? called every where
in this Book the great City, and by Historians Orbis totius compendium: and
orbis terrarum lux and regina, etc. Cum caput illud O^bis ^ccidet and (...)
esse caeperit, quis dubitet venisse jam finem rebu^ humanis orbique terrarum:
Illa est enim civitas, quae adhuc sustentat omnia, etc. Ne Tyrannus lumen illud
effodiat, cujus interitu mundus ipse lapsurus est, Lactan. de divin. praem.
lib. 7. cap. 25.
Yea, and A Lapide himself, though a Jesuit, does acknowledge all this to be
meant of Rome, and can be understood of nothing else: only he refers it to Rome
in the latter days of the world: his Observation upon Chap. 18. is this, Nota,
Romam meretricem esse, and mercatricem, and cauponam, quae vine suo omnes
inebriat and dementat. And this is called mystically Babylon, upon a double
account.

First, because of their resemblance in sin: First in pride and Self
exaltation: Babylon the glory of Kingdoms, the Beauty of the caldeans
excellency, Isa. 13.19. So Rome, she says in her heart. I sit as a Queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Revel. 18.7.

Secondly, In Tyranny and cruelty: Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lords
hand, that made all the Earth drunken; the Nations have drunk of her wine;
therefore are the Nations mad. Jer. 51.7. So mystical Babylon is a woman that
sits upon many waters, rides upon the Scarlet colored Beast, and has a golden
cup in her hand, and she was found drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the
Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.6.

Thirdly, In their Witchcraft and Sorcery; therefore Caldeans and Southsayers
are commonly put one for another: most of them being Magicians, and addicted
unto those unlawful Arts: So Mystical Babylon; by her Sorceries are all
Nations deceived, Rev. 18.23. Which sometimes makes me fear Popery in England
much the more, because it cannot but be apparent unto every judicious man, that
Sorcerie grows common amongst us: and we have many instances, that as Heresy
and Cruelty, so Heresy and Sorcery have gone together.

Secondly, It is called Babylon, because of the likness in the punishment.

First, The Vengeance upon Babylon, was the Vengeance of the Temple, Jer.
50.28. the Violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the
inhabitants of Sion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Caldea, shall
Jerusalem say, Jer. 51.35. So it shall be with Mystical Babylon; in her was
found the blood of of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were
slain upon the Earth; and the Lord will avenge this blood of his servants at
her hand, and will give them blood to drink, for they are worthy, Rev. 16.18.
and 19.2.

Secondly, The destruction of Babylon did come suddenly; these two things shall
come to thee in a moment, in one day, the loss of children and widdowhood, they
shall come upon thee in their perfection, in the multitude of thy Sorceries,
and the great abundance of thy Enchantments; Isa. 47.9. So will the Lord deal
with mystical Babylon, she shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is
poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation: her plagues shall
come in one day: Death, and mourning, and famine: and she shall be utterly
burnt with fire: For strong is the Lord God who judges her, Rev. 11.10. and
18.8.

Thirdly, The destruction of Babylon shall be perpetual: it shall never be
built, never be inhabited, nor dwelt in from Generation to Generation, but the
wild Beasts of the Desert shall lie there, Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs
dance there, Isa. 13.20,21. The same is said of mystical Babylon also: No
crafts-man shall be found any more in thee, the sound of the Millstone shall be
heard no more in thee, the light of the candle shall shine no more in thee, but
thou shall become the habitation of Devils, and the cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird: Rev. 18.2.22,23.

Secondly what is the destruction threatened to Mystical Babylon in this Book?
Duplex Babylonis interitus in hisce vaticiniis, primo pro urbe Bestiae regia,
puta urbe Romana; deinde pro Civibus aut Civitate Romana quam constituit Papa,
etc. Mede clavis Apoc. Cap. 11.
there is a double ruin and overthrow denounced against her: First, as Babylon
is taken for the City called the Throne of the Beast, Rev. 13.2. sc. that which
was unto the Heathen Emperors the Metropolis or Imperial City, this was given
to this new Beast, and becomes his Throne also. Rev. 13.2.

Thus Babylon is to be destroyed under the fifth vial, Rev. 16.10. and unto
this destruction the words of the Text refer.

Secondly, Babylon is not only taken for the City, but the Citizens, the
inhabitants thereof; the chief part of which are the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops,
with their several Religious Orders, who after the burning of the City by the
ten Kings, shall escape by flight, and shall send forth their Emissaries unto
the Kings of the Earth, not subdued by the Lamb, and shall prevail with them to
join in the same interest, and stir them up to unite in that great Battle
Armageddon, where Antichrist with all his scattered troops, and his
confederates, even all the wicked of the Earth, shall be destroyed at once; for
the Lord loves to see them perish together, to bind them in bundles to burn.

This destruction of Babylon is reserved to the last Vial, that upon the Air;
and then shall great Babylon come up into remembrance before God to her utter
ruin, that her name shall either be blotted out, or become a Curse in the Earth.

Having thus opened the words, the Observation which I have pitched upon, is
this,

Doctr.
That it is a special duty which the Lord requires of his people, living in
such times, that they make a separation from Mystical Babylon, and that
especially when her ruin draws near.

For the opening of it, there are two things to be considered.

First, What separation is required.

Secondly, What are the grounds and the reasons of it.

First, What kind of separation does the Lord require of his people? this we
are the more narrowly to look into; because it is a controversy between us and
them; and the question, as Cardinal Perron proposes it, is, Liceatne a
communione visibilis Ecclesiae discedere? Cameron opusc. miscel. page 522.
therefore I must give you this distinction.

First, There is a separation that is a sin.

Secondly, There is a separation that is a duty.

First, There is a separation that is a sin; These are they that separate
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit, Jude 19.
(...), the Decompound may seem to note thus much, that they separate and
separate, till they have forsaken all the true Churches of Christ upon Earth;
many there are for this kind of Separation, who say, there are no true
Churches, Ordinances, Ministry, and with the foot of pride and contempt, not
only depart from them all, but kick at them.

Unto these I would only say three things; First, this Doctrine does at once
destroy the whole plot of this Book of the Revelation, wherein the Lord shows
unto John all things that should be acted for his Church unto the end of the
World; and the Spectators thereof, which are as the Chorus, and upon every
occasion give their Acclamations, are the Churches.

First, The Church is here meant, because first there is Gods presence amongst
his people, his Throne is there erected, Rev. 4.3. suitable to that, A glorious
high Throne is the place of our Sanctuary, Jer. 17.12.

Secondly, There is Gods worship, Rev. 4.8. They rest not day nor night,
saying, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty.

Secondly, It is a Church of men, not of Angels: for they sing, thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, Rev. 5.9. which cannot be spoken of the Angels.

Thirdly, It is a Church of men upon Earth, and not in Heaven; for there are
the seven spirits before the Throne, which notes the variety of the gifts and
graces of the Spirit, which are proper only to the Earth: for in Heaven gifts
shall cease, as also the present manner of administration from the Throne.

And there is before the Throne a Sea of glass, in allusion to Solomon's Sea,
which was for the priests to wash in, and that supposes defilement, which is
not in Heaven.

Fourthly, It is a visible, and not an invisible Church: for here are Beasts
and Elders, which are Officers and Brethren, which belong only unto the Church
visible: and they are described here as met together to give God glory, which
belongs only to visible Churches, Rev. 9.9. And there be Angels round about the
Throne, and the Beasts, and Elders. Rev. 5.11. which shall not be in Heaven:
for Christ shall put down all rule, and authority, and power, 1 Cor. 15.24.
which is to be understood de principatu Angelico, as well as of any other
power, and their shall be need of no such guard in Heaven.

Fifthly, It is spoken of visible Churches all the world over; for they say,
Thou have redeemed us by thy blood out of every Kindred, and Tongue, People and
Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign in
the Earth: Rev. 5.10. But they that maintain such a separation from all
Churches, must blot out this Chapter out of their Bibles; for the pure times of
the Church, its conceived, did not continue above 360, or 365 years, and then
The man of sin began to be revealed: since which time this Opinion does say,
there have been neither Beasts nor Elders to observe and give God the Glory of
his actings, during the whole time of Antichrists Tyranny.

Secondly, The Scripture does clearly tell us, that during the whole time of
this great apostasy of Antichrist, there are some that the Lord will preserve
pure unto himself, and which he will own as Churches during the whole time of
Antichrist: his first rise is set forth, Rev. 13. and then we have the state of
the Church described, Chap. 14.1,2,3,4. by which it appears that when the whole
world wondered after the Beast, yet there were reserved an hundred forty and
four thousand, who stood with the Lamb upon Mount Sion, having his Fathers
Name, (not Antichrists Mark) written in their forheads, and they sung a new
song, that is, did praise and worship God in an excellent and acceptable
manner, which was hid from the rest of the world who did worship the Beast:
these are said to be redeemed from amongst men, and were as the first fruits
unto God, and to the Lamb, of that general Conversion which shall be when
Antichrist shall be destroyed. Canticum novum pro eximio. Psalm. 33.3. Isa.
62.2. Rev. 21.5. vel novum de novo beneficio liberationis factae Isa. 42.10.
vel novum est innovatum, iterum atque iterum rep^tum.


And Chap. 15.1,2. we read of a sea of Glass, upon which those stood who had
gotten the victory over the Beast, his Image Mark, and the Number of his name,
and they had the Harps of God in their hands; they did worship God purely and
publicly, during the time of Antichrists reign, which is commonly interpreted
of the reformed Churches; And immediately after Babylons ruin, we read of the
four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders, who observe this, and give the
Lord the Glory, saying, Amen, Halelujah, Rev. 19.4. therefore during the whole
time of Antichrist, there have been, and shall be some that are gathered into
Bodies, members and Officers, Beasts and Elders, owned as true Churches by
Christ, who during the time of this Apostasy, have kept their garments, are
not defiled with women, but in reference to Antichrists fornications, are
Virgins, in whose mouth is found no guile, but they are without fault before
the Throne of God; Rev. 14.4,5. How then shall any man say, that all Churches
have been so corrupted by Antichrist, as that they remain no more Churches unto
Christ? when the Lord gives unto some of them this Testimony, that either they
have not received the mark of the Beast, or have gotten the victory over it,
and his Name, and the number of his Name, that is, whatsoever is Antichristian,
and they remain as Virgins and without fault before his Throne.

Thirdly, Let all such persons consider, that denying any true Churches of
Christ, they must of necessity place themselves in the Synagogue of Satan;
which appears so much the more, because they bring upon themselves the guilt of
the highest pride in the World, which was the Devils sin; 1 Timothy 3.6. To
unsaint a man is a great height of pride, much more to unchurch a Society, and
that under the name of Antichristian, who profess to disclaim Antichrist, and
whatsoever shall be made to appear to relate to him.

But what is it then to deal thus with all the Churches of Christ upon Earth?
Societies where the Lord has manifested his presence, to the Conversion and
Salvation of many thousand Souls, who have this Testimony from the Lord, that
they have gotten the Victory over the Beast, his Image, his Mark, his Name,
those whom the Lord owns, as having his Name written in their foreheads: And
yet to unchurch all these, and number them with the Antichristian Party to
destruction, is such a piece of Pride, as one would hardly have thought could
have entered into the heart of any but the Devil; And that this is more
immediately from Satan, I am inclined to think, from a passage I have met with
in Austin; When Satan could not prevail to keep the Christian Religion out of
the world, but the Gospel did spread even as a Sunbeam among the Gentiles,
(...). Eusebius.
he did then persuade the Heathen, and they were confident of it, that the
Christian Religion should continue in the world but three hundred sixty and
five years, and then they should return to Paganism again; but that so long
Peter had bewitched the world by his Sorceries, that they should believe in
Christ: Definitum est quanto tempore mansura esset religio Christiana: Petrum
maleficia subjungunt, ut coleretur Christi nomen per trecentos sexaginta
quinque annos; deinde completo memorato numero annorum, fine mora sinem sumet.
de civit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 53.
happily by this Prophecy he might intend, that about this time Antichrist,
the man of Sin should rise, and the Temple of God be given to the Antichristian
Gentiles (Popery being nothing else but Ethnicismus Redivivus) And so the
Devils prophecy was after a sort fulfilled, when after three hundred sixty
five years, or thereabouts, the apostasy of Antichrist did overspread the
World: But these men undertake to make it good, and that even in as large a
sense as Satan would have it understood; sc. that there are no true Churches,
no true Ordinances since that time; and so since Antichrists rise, the
Christian Religion has been destroyed, or in a manner utterly banished out of
the world. Qui fratres nullos extra suam partem agnoscere volebant, and
adversus orbem terrarum sacrilegae dissensionis altar erexcrunt. Aust. de
verit. Eccles. cap. 13.16.
There are another sort, who, though they deny not all Churches as the former,
yet like to the Donatists of old, they acknowledge none but their own, all
other they readily term Antichristian, and such as they can hold no Communion
with, though they profess to believe the same principles of Religion, and walk
in holiness of Conversation: yet they deny them Communion, as Churches, unless
they come under their form. Now because godly men may fall under this delusion;
therefore I desire all such persons seriously to consider these three things.

First, Christ in the days of his flesh separated not from the Church of the
Jews, though there were abundance, and those very gross Corruptions in it: Now
the Disciple is not above his Lord; it is not good to make our selves wiser or
more holy then he.

Secondly, When Christ holds communion as a head, we should not deny it as
members: Now Christ did not presently give Babylon a Bill of Divorce,
Corruption coming into that Church by degrees; and so long as Salvation was to
be had, there this Voice was not heard from Heaven, Come out of her my people:
they were not called to separate from her Communion; and it must needs be
dangerous for any person, to call a Society Loammi, which God has not so named.

Thirdly, Where the Foundations of Religion are held, though there be many
differences in circumstantials, yet it is not lawful to break communion with
such, much less under the name of Antichristian; For though the Sea of glass be
mingled with fire, the fire of Contention, and though there be great
differences in opinion, yet all may get the Victory over the Beast and his
Image, his Mark, and his Name, and they may join together to praise God they
have so, though it may be they are not all alike Victorious: Quas Ecclesias non
dissitemur retinere conjunctionem and communionem salutifera^ cum Christo
capite and fundamento sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae; cum illis decet nos
retinere fraternam Communionem. Daven. ad. hortat. ad pacem Eccles. cap. 8.
This therefore has been a Rule given by Divines in several ages, for the
reconciling of brethren among themselves that hold the head, Keep to the
Foundation, though in many things of less concernment they differ, and that is,
that with all such Communion is to be held, as with the Churches of Christ,
their Errors not being such as cut them off from Christ, or being inconsistent
with Salvation. Upon this ground the ancient Church did own the Donatists as
brethren, and held it their duty so to do. Optat. Mile. vit. lib. 3. and 7. de
Schismat. Donat. Nomen frateruitatis non putavit istis denegandum; immo
impietatis esse putavit de isto nomine vel tacere.
Donatistas ab Orthodoxis pro fratribus agnosci etc. Fraternitatis nomen
Donatistis fastidiosum, Orthodoxis vero necessarium, etc. For they durst not
deny Communion with them in Church Ordinances, whom they durst not deny to
enjoy Communion with Christ here, and of whom they could upon Scripture grounds
hope they should have Communion with them in glory hereafter. And if this be
not a Rule by which we ought to walk, there can be no Communion beetwen Parties
disagreeing in any thing: For so long as there is blindness in the mind of man,
and some things in the Scripture (...) hard to be understood, so long as there
are different degrees of light, and men not made perfect in love, it is
impossible that in every thing we should agree: Yet so long as we hold the
main, that wherein Salvation lies (for in brevi and facili stat aeternitas:
Hilar.) so long as we differ not in Fundamentals, such Doctrines which a man
cannot be ignorant of, as Austin observes, sine dispendio promissae Salutis,
without missing Salvation, this union in the great things of Religion should
engage men to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and to take
heed that they differ not in affections, where they cannot agree in opinion.

Secondly, There is a separation which is a duty; Come out from among them, and
be you separate, 2 Cor. 6.17. which is by Cameron and others said to be double;
Excessus internus and externus, That is, a separation from the corruption, and
from the Communion of a Church.

First, There is a separation from the corruption of a Church; so we are to
separate in any Church in the world, that is, to abstain from the evil thereof,
and in our place to bear our Testimony against it: Thus we see, though the Lord
Jesus did hold communion with the Church of the Jews, saying, I will declare
thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto
thee, Heb. 2.12. Yet he did separate from all the Corruptions thereof, and was
unto them a faithful and true witness against their Erroneous Doctrines,
Superstitious Customs and Traditions: thus it was the duty of Gods people,
from the first Working of the Mystery of iniquity, to come out of Babylon; and
therefore the Witnesses began their Testimony, as soon as Antichrist began his
Apostacy to tread down the Temple of God, or rather the outward Court thereof:
For they Prophesied in sackcloth and ashes a thousand two hundred and sixty
days, which is contemporary with the whole time of the Reign of Antichrist, as
appears, Rev. 11.2,3. But yet that was not an immediate separation from
Communion; For the Church of God did a great while lie hid among them; There
were tempora gemendi and latendi, as Cameron speaks, times of their mourning
in, and groaning under those corruptions before a total separation.

Secondly, There is a time also when the Lord does require a separation from
Communion; When his people are to withdraw all communion from such, to look
upon them as a Church of Christ no more, to abhor them in regard of Communion,
as an accursed thing: Thus when the Lord had given the Jews a bill of Divorce,
and broke off the natural branches, which is not spoken of breaking men off
from grace or electing love, for the Election obtained mercy, when the rest
were blinded; but it is here meant of being broken off from a Visible Church
state, the good Olive tree being a type thereof, Romans 11.24. When the Lord had
thus called them Loammi, his people were to hold Communion with them as a
Church no more, God having cast them off, and wrath being come upon them to the
uttermost: So though Rome were sometimes a true Church of Christ, and afterward
corrupted by degrees; yet when the Lord divorced her as an Harlot, as the
Mother of Harlots, calls her Babylon, and not Sion, then it is the duty of his
people, not only to separate from their corruption as before, but from their
communion also.

I come now to give the reasons of such a separation from Mystical Babylon,
which are these:

First, Because God has put her away, has said of them they are not my
people, but spiritually Sodom and Egypt, Antichristian Gentiles, ver. 11.2.
when the Lord thus forsakes any people, we should forsake them; when the glory
of the Lord departs from a people, the Angels withdraw their Protection, and by
the same degrees, Ezekiel. 10.4,5.18.19. and Chap. 11.22.23. whenever the glory
of the Lord removed, the Cherubims also did lift up their wings; And as the
departure of God is the ground of their withdrawing Protection, so it should be
of our withholding Communion.

Secondly, Such a separation is to be made, because in Babylon no Salvation can
be had; A Reprobate may in truth be made partaker of all that is contained in
the Religion of the Church of Rome. Ecclesia proprie dicta non probat quicquid
probant mali Doctores admixti ecclesiae, nec quicquid boni Doctores haud been
docuerunt. Melan. Daven. adhort. cap. 4.
It was Mr. Perkins his Observation long since, That a Papist by the Rules of
his own Religion cannot go beyond a Reprobate; where Foundations are destroyed,
Principles denied, or corrupted, and this not the Doctrine of some particular
men only, (for such there may be in the purest Churches of Christ upon Earth;
as in the Church of Corinth, there were those that denied the Resurrection of
the dead) but when it becomes the Doctrine of the Church, which they as a
Church do profess to maintain, and refuse to be reclaimed: then there is no
more Salvation to be expected there; which is conceived to be the pouring out
of the second Vial upon Mystical Babylon, Rev. 16.3. The Sea then became as the
blood of a dead man, and every living Soul died in the Sea: By the Sea is meant
their Doctrine, and the Comprehension or Collection thereof: as by the Rivers
are meant those that carry abroad this Doctrine in all places and all parts of
the World. This Doctrine is become the blood of a dead man, ex corrupta fit
corruptissima; it was corrupt before, yet some lived in it; but now every
living thing dyed: That is, there was no more Salvation to be had by the
Doctrine of their Religion; therefore with them no more Communion is to be held.

Thirdly, We are to separate from her, because she is become a persecutor of
all the people of God through the world: She rides upon a Scarlet colored
Beast: an Emblem both of Majesty, and Cruelty: she is drunk with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus, and in her will be found the blood of the Prophets, of
the Saints, and of all that are slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24. A separation
therefore is a duty, that we hold not Communion with her, whose trade is
Persecution.

Fourthly, Gods people are to separate from Babylon, because God has set
himself against her to destroy her with a great and eminent destruction. For
when she comes up into remembrance before God, she that made all Nations drunk
with the cup of the wine of her Fornication, shall be made to drink of the cup
of the wine of the fierceness of Gods wrath, Rev. 16.19. and shall with
violence, as a Millstone, be cast into the Sea, and be found no more at all,
Rev. 18.19. It was proclaimed long ago, That if any man worshipped the Beast,
or his Image, or received his Mark, he should drink of the wine of the wrath of
God without mixture, and be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.10. Cujus
vastitatis and confusionis haec erit causa, quod Romanum nomen, quo nunc
regitur Orbis, tolletur e terra, and in Asiam Imperi^ ^eveitetur, ac rursus
Oriens dominabitur, atque Occidens serviet. de praem. divin. sect. 7. cap. 15.
And this Judgment the Ancients did foresee, and do expect: Horret animus
dicere: dicam tamen, quia futurum est, Romanum nomen de terra tolletur, Lactan.
I am afraid to speak it, yet I will speak, because it shall come to pass, that
the name of Rome shall be blotted out, or taken away out of the Earth.

Fifthly, All Gods people are to separate from her, that they partake not with
her in her sins; it has been Antichrists business from her very beginning to
infect and corrupt others: and that she does after the manner of Harlots, in a
way of Love, and in the most enticing manner: for she gives the wine of her
Fornication in a golden cup. This has even been the manner of those men, whose
spirits Satan has touched, from that impression of devillishness left upon
their spirits, to desire and endeavor to draw others into fellowship with them
in the same sin, and the same condemnation: and as he that does not reprove his
brother, does bear sin for him, Lev. 19.17. So he that does not give Testimony
against sin in that way which the Lord requires, brings upon himself the guilt
thereof. It is not always enough to speak against sin, or to mourn for it, but
a man is to separate from them that walk in it; there is a time for Lot in
Sodom to vex his righteous soul from day to day: but there is a time when he
must come out of Sodom, unless he will perish with it.

Sixthly, A separation must be made, because they that partake in their sins,
shall surely receive of her plagues, and God is no respecter of persons, though
such as are justified, can never come under an eternal guilt: yet they may
contract a temporal, which may involve them in the same temporal Judgments
with the wicked, and so Sampson like, they may die with the Uncircumcised: The
good Figs shall go into Captivity with the bad, though not to the same end,
Jer. 24. If therefore Gods people desire to be delivered from their plagues,
they must not partake in their sins, which they will always do, until they
forsake their Communion.

Use. Let this be unto all the people of God as a voice from Heaven, to
persuade them to come out of Mystical Babylon: And the rather, because the work
of this day should be, as to exalt God in this mercy and deliverance, so to
make Popery odious ever after: therefore this day should always revive our
detestation, that being in our eye which Luther professed to be his aim in all
that he did, Brevi efficiam, ut anathema sit, esse Papistam.

And we have the more need to be stirred up hereunto; because since this Nation
departed from Rome, there were never greater attempts, nor higher hopes to
bring us back unto this spiritual Egypt, then there are at this day. To make
this manifest, I shall propose to you some of my observations upon the present
times, which seem to argue a tendency and inclination this way.

First, A Universal unsetling of all things in Religion: all the Principles,
and the Doctrines of Godliness are either denied or disputed, though it be
true, Spiritus Sanctus Scepticus non est: Luther.
which is to me a ground of fear that there is an intent to bring in another
Gospel, Antichrists Gospel, (...) that lie; I dare not say, I dare not think
that this is the intendment of all those that go this way: but surely it is
finis operis, though not operantis; Yet I am not without fear, that many do it
designedly, and speak lies in hypocrisy to that very end: when we look upon
the rise of Antichrist, we shall find that Satan before hand cast out of his
mouth a flood after the woman, which is interpreted to be the Arian heresy,
and abundance of corrupt Doctrines accompanying it, which though they pass too
and fro for some years, yet all settled and were gathered into the Sea of Rome
at last; and it is to be feared Satan has the same aim at this day, though
Magistrates and men in Authority may profess never so much against it:
Imperatores facti sunt Christiani, sed diabolus nondum factus est Christianus.
August.

Secondly, Consider the instruments that are abroad in the World; we read of
frogs sent out of the mouth of the Beast, Rev. 16.13. that is, by his especial
command and commission; and these go forth unto the Kings of the Earth in all
shapes; and we have cause to fear (nay apparent ground to believe) that besides
the men of corrupt minds risen up among our selves, there are many of those
sent in among us; it were well if we could look upon our Cities, Army, Navy,
yea Councels to be free: and so much the rather it is to be feared, because we
see all ancient Heresies revived, Arians, Macedonians, Montanists,
Patripassians, yea that conceit of Joachim Abbas, Joachim Abbas docebat,
triplicem doctrinam a tribus personis dimanare; doctrinam, sc. Legis a Patre,
doctrinam Evangelii quod consignatum habemus a Filio, tertiam doctrinam a
Spiriu sancto expectandam, quam appellat Evangelium aeternum. Daven. in Colos.
Cap. 2. v. 2.
that there is a Gospel of the Spirit, another Gospel then that preached by
Christ and to observe by what mean persons these doctrines are vented, and yet
all the ancient Arguments used to maintain them: A considering man observing
this, can hardly imagine but that there be some that do secretly, and with the
best advantage instill such things into them, and that in an unobserved way; for
they are said to be spirits, that is, though they act very powerfuly, yet
invisibly: their motions, ways and practices are not known.

Thirdly, Consider that constant pressing of liberty of Conscience, which if
granted, must be universal; for who has power to lay a restraint upon one man's
conscience more then another? and therefore the Patrons of this opinion do
plead for a toleration for Popery, upon a Religious account; and that it is no
more to be imposed upon, then any other persuasion: as also that doctrine of
Mariana the Jesuit, Marian. c. 10. Cont. Volit. l 2. Cap. 16.
now so generally insisted upon, and pleaded for, Princeps nil stauat de
Religione, The Magistrate is not to meddle with matters of Religion: there were
two Doctrines anciently, which of necessity brought in Popery; though a man
knew-nothing else of that Religion, sc. That the true Church cannot err; and
that the Church of Rome is that true Church: Now there are two other principles
sprung up in the world; First, that the word in the heart, and the Spirit
working there, is not to be tried and examined by the word in the Book, that
being but a dead letter, and for the Spirit to be examined by the word, is a
minoration thereunto.

Secondly, as the word must not try the spirits of men, so Magistrates have
nothing to do with their Religion. These two principles received, lay all open
to Popery or Atheism. And if Popery, as a Religion, receive but a Toleration,
and the same Countenance that others do, (it being a Religion most agreeable to
Nature, as corrupt, and so exactly fitted to it) it will soon have the most
followers: for when Popery first appeared in the world, the whole world wondered
after it, as it had done after Arianism a little before.

Fourthly, Look to the Apostasy of the present age, men falling from all things
in Religion, and with an impudent face denying deriding all; the Scriptures,
the Trinity, the Godhead of Christ, his sufferings and satisfaction,
Justification by imputed Righteousness, the Law of God as the Rule of
Obedience, and whatsoever Doctrines Christian Religion is built upon: now we
know that a great Apostasy did make way for Popery, 2 These. 2.3. God giving
them up to believe a lie: and by this means the man of sin, (...), the lawless
one, was revealed; and there is great cause to fear, that the present Apostasy
amongst us may have such a tendency: for we see men fall from one thing to
another, until they hold to nothing in matters of Religion: such an Apostasy
(as I think, I may without breach of Charity say) that has not been the like
in any Christian Church, since that great Apostasy before named: and being thus
become as it were an outward Court, may we not fear that God should give us
over to be trodden down of the Antichristian Gentiles again? and not receiving
truth in the love of it, he should give us up to believe that lie?

Fifthly, If we consider farther, that Antichrist shall have yet a day for it,
the time of the killing of the witnesses being yet to come: For they must
Prophecy in sackcloth and ashes, a thousand two hundred and sixty days, which
is Contemporary with the whole reign of Antichrist, which is two and forty
months; and if we take the beginning from the division of the Empire into ten
Kingdoms, The ten Kings receiving Power the same hour with the Beast, I cannot
find upon any account, the time of their Prophecy in Sackcloth and Ashes to be
fulfilled: and if so, their killing time, and the insulting of the
Antichristian party over their dead bodies, because they were dead that
tormented those that dwell on the Earth, must be yet to come, and that near
unto the time of Antichrists ruin; and who knows? yea has not every one
reason to fear that the present Apostasy and defection may lay the ground of,
and prepare the spirits of men for such a Persecution?

Sixthly, What means else that general revolting unto the Doctrines of Popery,
and Arminianism? The spirits of Popery, which the Jesuits (being the Popes
Janissaries) have labored most in, and had great contests with the Dominicans
about them, before ever the name of Arminius was heard of in the world: and
that they are Symbolical, and the passage easy from one to the other, the
examples of Bertius, Tilenus, Vorstius, and many others do make manifest: But
we need not go abroad for instances: We saw in Episcopal times, that those that
were most forward in receiving and propagating these Doctrines of the Jesuits,
they soon fell into the superstitions of Rome, in all their ways of Worship:
and we have reason to expect that it should be so in our time also: Those
Doctrines being as infectious now, as they have been in times past.

Seventhly, What may a man think of that general endeavor that there is to take
off the odium from Popery and Papists among us? That courting of them,
associating, and complying with them; so that with too many a Papist finds more
favor then a faithful Minister of the Gospel: Nay, what means that general
neglect of the observation of this day, In perpetuam Pontificiorum ignominiam?
Nay, why is it denied by some, and the Religious observance thereof, as if it
were not a thing plotted by them, but rather fained by us?

Eighthly, What is the meaning of that design now on foot against the Ministers
of the Gospel, and their maintenance? both being so clearly laid down in the
Scripture, and the latter having been so fully proved by the Law: Is it not to
be feared that all this is, because they are the men that are looked upon to
stand in the light, and do hinder the bringing forth of some such accursed
birth, according unto the Politic Counsel of Contzen the Jesuit, who exhorts
them to take away those that are forward and hot men, Zealous for truth:
Haeresiarchae and doctores errorum Repub. pellendi sunt una vice si commode
fieri queat, sin minus, sensim and paulatim. li. 2. Politic. ca. 18. modus
reducendae verae religionis.
and then error (for so he calls truth) cui patrocinium deerit, sine pugna
concidet: or at least they being removed, those may be be brought in who are
unable either to discern truth from error, or to convince the gainsayer, and so
the blind leading the blind, both may fall into the Ditch.

Ninthly, That general outcry that is upon all Truths, Ordinances and ways of
Religion among us, as Antichristian: Our Churches Antichristian, our Ministry
Antichristian, our Laws Antichristian, etc. For it is Satan's manner, when he
would set up Antichrist indeed, to blend all the things of Christ, with the
Name of Antichrist; thus giving the Wine of her Fornication in a golden Cup:
For Antichrist must blaspheme Gods name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
Heaven: neither has this been a late design only (for none of the Opinions or
Practices that are amongst us are new) but there was a book written many years
ago, Entitled, Praemonitiones Christi and Apostolorum, de abolendo Christo
vero per Antichristum: Wherein the Doctrine of the Trinity, the two natures of
Christ, his suffering in the flesh, and his satisfaction unto God for sin: All
these are said to be Antichristian Doctrines, and endeavored to be censured
under that Notion of a design of Antichrist, to undermine the true Christ; who,
says the Author, is Christ in the Spirit, and not in the flesh: Let none
therefore be moved to hear every thing now termed Antichristian, whether in
Doctrine or practice, according unto the licentiousness of men: but rather
fear, lest under the name of Antichristian, the things of Christ be cast off,
and he who is truly Antichrist brought in, who comes with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness.

Tenthly, When I consider also that general carelessness and inadventencie that
is even amongst the people of God concerning these things, a spirit of slumber
(and it is to be feared in Judgment) being come upon them: so that no man
mourns under it, no man lays it unto his heart. I can remember when the
Doctrines of Arminianism were revived in England by Mr. Mountagues Book, what
impression it made upon the spirits of the godly, called then the Puritans of
this Nation: what mourning, fasting, praying, writing there was against it; but
now even Godly men sleep, whilst the Enemy sows these Tares. This makes me to
see need of pressing this exhortation, that you come out, that you keep out of
Babylon. Oh that the Lord would make it a Voice from Heaven to you! For though
there be many abominable Heresies, Sects, and Errors in this Land at this day,
and in this City: Yet upon the forementioned grounds, I am inclined to
conceive, that they all play small game but the Papists, who insinuate
themselves under all these Forms; and thereby intend worse to us then a Powder
plot, if the Lord prevent it not: and I am persuaded they had never greater
hopes of it.

Use. 2. But seeing God has brought us out of Babylon, what may we do to keep
our selves from returning thither again? Here I shall offer to you these few
Directions, as Preservatives.

First, Receive the truth in the love of it, 2 These. 2.10,11. For this was the
cause that did provoke God to give men up unto that efficacy of deceit at
first: Endeavor therefore to know, and to be established in truth, that you be
not carried away with every wind of Doctrine; and do not plead for truth, as
Lawyers plead causes, by other men's evidences, but get an experimental
knowledge thereof in your own souls: Consider, it is the great depositum
committed unto you to keep, Buy it therefore, and sell it not: contend
earnestly for the faith, claim it as your inheritance for ever.

Secondly, Let all those that fear God, unite against this common adversary:
your divisions will always be his advantages, their way having always been to
fish in such troubled waters; Captare tempor a impacata, Rev. 15.1. though the
Sea of glass be mingled with fire, yet they that have gotten Victory over the
Beast, should stand together upon the same Sea, with the Harps of God in their
hands: Commune periculum concordia pulsandum. It is the observation of
Bullinger several times in his Book de Persecut. Eccles. That because of the
dissension of Brethren among themselves, God did give them up into the hands of
the Enemy, ad abstergendum aeruginem, quae quotidie magis as mag is crescebat:
Temporibus Aureliani Imperatoris, etc. Christiani optime inter se conveniebant:
sed ardens illud fludium imminutum, dissentiones auctae sunt, praecipue inter
Episcopos and doctores. Ideoque Dominus passus est infideles Ethnicos manum
Ecclesiae injicere. Ita temporibus Constantini, etc.
Yet let not this union be sinful, and unworthy: unto that I exhort you not;
For Castam Christi sponsum decet casta concordia: but you that agree in the
Foundations, the great things of Religion, though in certain forms you differ,
or in truths of lesser alloy, yet take Luthers Counsel to the Synod at
Norinberg, to silence your disputes until a fitter opportunity. Meum consilium
est, ut causam hanc sinatis ad tempus sopitam jacere, hoc tempore enim and
animis sic affectis venenum est disputare. And be sure in your diversity of
opinion, you endeavor to keep unity in affection.

Thirdly, Suspect all new Doctrines: For we are to enquire for the old way, the
good way, that we may find rest to our souls: we are to go forth by the steps
of the Ancient flocks: Novelty has always leaven in it the people of God
anciently feared not only novel Doctrines or Tenants, but new coined words,
(...), for with such, false teachers use to come: Felix Ecclesin cum nova de
Deo dicere lascivia crederetur; that Church is in a happy condition when all
Novelties in Doctrine are suspected to be barely the fruit of wanton wits and
profane hearts.

Fourthly, Take heed of hearing any of those that would bring in Popish leaven:
Your ears are not your own, take heed what you hear; itching ears seldom
consent to true, but ordinarily to unsound Doctrine, 2 John 10. If they bring
not this Doctrine, receive them not into your house, bid them not God-speed:
Those common civilities which unto some strangers are a duty, they cannot
without sin be performed toward men that corrupt truths, and hunt souls.

Fifthly, Let Magistrates do their duty toward Religion: It is Bellarmines
Doctrine, that they are Religionis defensores, non Judices: but you (Right
Honorable, with the rest in Authority) ought to Judge which is the true
Religion, and to endeavor to maintain it, Christianity taking in all our
relations: and the Lord having promised, Isa. 49.23. That Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers: that which is promised to the
Church as a mercy, Magistrates should make Conscience to perform as a duty. Do
you therefore afford favor and encouragement unto those that are good, and be
you a terror unto them that are evil: Mark those that cause Divisions, and
raise Distractions among you.

Sixthly, Give unto God the glory of the mercy of this day: Let your Vials be
gold, and full of Odours. The Enemies fall before the praises, as well as the
prayers of Gods people: Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he has
ordained strength, Psalm. 8.2. which is rendered by Christ, thou have perfected
praise, Mat. 21.16. and this shall be powerful, to still the Enemy and the
avenger. I shall conclude all with that, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. when they began to
sing, and to praise the Lord, the Lord set ambushments against the children of
Ammon, Moab, and Mounseir, that they helped to destroy one another.

FINIS.

