A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, On St. Andrews-day.

By THO. STRIPLING, M. A. and Chaplain of New-College.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, for Edw. Gellibrand, at the Golden-Ball in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

2 TIMOTHY II. 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him.
THERE never was any Nation so barbarous or illiterate, but still had some
notions of a God, and of that worship and adoration that ought to be paid unto
him, as the Author and Conserver of their Beings; but such is the corruption of
human nature, such the perverseness of our wills and affections, that even the
best of them have been always unwilling to obey his injunctions, when they went
beyond what the Law of Nature dictated unto them: To do as they would be done
unto, to love the man that did them a kindness, these precepts might be
consented to; but to do good for evil, to love those that hated them, and to
suffer afflictions with patience, and injuries without the least thought of
revenge, these are rejected as soon as proposed: To offer in sacrifice a Bull
or a Goat, the firstlings of their Cattle, or first fruits of their Grounds,
they are willing, when it is proposed as a means to appease the Divine wrath;
but to crucify their members, and sacrifice their beloved lusts, these are
more dear than all other worldly enjoyments; and to part with them they cannot
be wrought upon. Thus, although the Gospel for the excellency of its precepts,
the nobleness and generosity of its design, and its admirable fitness for the
accomplishment of it, was most agreeable to the purest and sublimest Reason,
consisting chiefly in a regulation of the mind and spirit, and such kind of
practices as might promote the good of humane societies, and most effectually
conduce to the perfecting our natures, and rendering them happy; yet because it
was fraught with such precepts as were destructive to their complacencies and
carnal securities, and laid the greatest restraints upon their passions and
inclinations, by no means complying with the former, or answering the
expectations of the latter, it found no better entertainment at first in the
Gentile world, than to be derided and scoffed at, and its professors persecuted
even unto death, by those with whose interest it could no ways consist: for
being immersed in all manner of sensual pleasure, and wholly become slaves to
their passions and their lusts, their judgments were corrupted and biassed by
their vicious inclinations, and 'twas as bad as death to them to undergo the
strict forbearances Christianity would oblige them to. This Religion, say they,
would force us to part with all whatsoever renders our lives pleasant in the
world, our lusts to be satisfied by no means, injuries and affronts not only to
be forgiven, but all kind of offices to be returned instead of revenge;
tribulation and persecution to be endured without the least regret, or the
greatest detriment, even to the loss of our lives, to be suffered with
constancy and patience: This cannot be endured, Nature prompts every one to
seek his own preservation, and maintain his being; this is the ready way to
destroy it: That which animates and enlivens our Souls, and makes them capable
of performing actions suitable to the dignity of their natures, is by the
severity of this Religion withheld; that which makes our lives happy and
pleasant must be parted with; Father and Mother, Friends and Relations, and
fair and ample possessions must be left and forsaken: This can be nothing but
the politic devices of men, to whom Providence has not been so kind, who
endeavor to render our lives as uneasy as their own. To bear injuries
patiently derogates too from that principle of magnanimity ingrafted in man,
who is not yet reduced so low, or become so degenerate as not to revenge an
injury, not to do harm to him that plots and contrives his ruin; and we may as
well deny sustenance to the body when its hungry, or take no notice of an
object presented to the sight, as deny to gratify our inclinations, or
satisfy our domineering lusts; Nature is equally concerned in both: But oh the
sottishness of carnal reasoning! How miserably art thou mistaken vain man,
making thy self no more than equal to the Beasts that perish? to what purpose
then have thou received those noble faculties of thy soul, thy understanding
and thy will, but with the one, that thou might apprehend aright what is
best for thee, and choose that which is so with the other? So that if thou have
the greatest aversation to what is commanded thee by thy sensual faculties, yet
here the intellectual are to be called in to thy aid, which presently will pass
their sentence, If what thou suffer be for thy good, it is to be embraced.
The certainty of which assertion we have evidently set forth unto us in sundry
places of Scripture, as well as in this of Saint Paul to Timothy, where he
stirs him up to caution, care and diligence, and fidelity in the discharge of
his office, on occasion of the creeping heresies of the Gnostics stolen in
among them, which had much debauched the people of Asia, by indulging them in
all manner of licentious practices: He advises him not to suffer himself, or
his flock to be enticed or to fall in love with their profane Discourses and
pernicious Doctrines, but to repel them and all their solicitations with the
greatest industry, and be ready to undergo the severest afflictions, rather
than to part with any precept of that Gospel delivered unto him, or to recede
from the least tittle of his Faith: And this Saint Paul does, by putting him in
remembrance how he himself had suffered at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra, and
how the Lord had delivered him out of all, Chap. 3. 11. However if it were
God's Will that he should not escape his enemies hands, but that they should
prevail so far, even to the taking his life, yet he had this comfort and
assurance, this was most certain, a faithful saying, That if we are dead with
him, we shall live with him; if we suffer, we shall likewise reign with him. In
which words we have a duty and a reward annexed unto it: In the Duty I shall
consider these following particulars:

1st. That to be a true Christian, does imply a necessity of suffering; and
that because Christianity is a suffering Religion. 2dly. The Reasonableness of
suffering, and that, 1. Because Christ commands it. 2. Because he suffered for
us. 3. That it is our greatest interest to suffer. 4. I shall consider the
Reward we purchase.

First then, To be a true Christian does imply a necessity of suffering; and
that because Christianity is a suffering Religion.

Christianity bears such a contrariety unto the inclinations of our natures,
and the inticements of our flesh, the allurements of the world, and the
suggestions of the Devil; that they who do sincerely embrace its precepts, must
necessarily suffer much by these Three potent enemies, against which we in our
Baptism are signed with the Cross, as a Flag of defiance.

First, We suffer by the inclinations of our Natures, and the inticements of
our Flesh.

If we look upon man as he is by Nature, and as he is a Christian, we shall
find a great alteration; by Nature he pursues every object that invites, and
makes use of any instruments that serves his designs; he resolves to compass
what he desires, and he will gratify his passions at any rate; he considers
only his present enjoyment, without the dismal consequences that attend his
actions: if his Endeavors are Disappointed he thinks himself miserable, but if
they succeed, in a most prosperous condition. The case is quite otherwise as a
Christian, he is so far altered from what he was before, that he seems to have
changed his very being; for whereas before his desires were as large as his
Nature, and he might let fly at whatsoever his humor or his fancy did suggest
unto him, his actions before free and directed to what his lusts prompted him,
now he is to steer by a regular Compass, to be circumscribed within the
straight limits of Right and Wrong, he is to scan over every object, and not in
the least to deviate from his Rule, or let a circumstance be wanting, or out of
its place; so far from giving way to his Passions, that he must stifle them in
their birth; so far from pampering his lusts, that he is strictly enjoined to
crucify them; so that the man must necessarily endure great conflicts within
himself: his carnal Inclinations direct him this way, and his Religion commands
him to steer a quite contrary course; what the one inclines him to pursue and
love, the other bids him fly and hate; what the one would have him cherish, the
other obliges him to mortify: For he that is Christ's has crucified the flesh
with the Affections and Lusts thereof; a severe Discipline this! in which a man
must act his fiercest Anger on his dearest Friends; thus man suffers by living
in enmity with himself, by stabbing his Desires and crucifying his beloved
Lusts.

Nature could never yet suggest into any one, the hatred of his own flesh or
the lusts thereof; but Cristianity which is not framed to the Dictates of
depraved nature, must, and will readily pass sentence upon them, if they were
good or profitable they were to be permitted; but being evil and hurtful by all
means to be suppressed: but alas! our domineering lusts, and rebellious passions
are not so soon conquered; it will be no easy thing to bring the body under,
when it has been given to Luxury; to use it to temperance and Sobriety when it
has been habituated to excess; 'twill be no easy matter to restrain and curb
the emissions of anger, when they have been permitted the loose rein; or to lay
aside the hatred of an enemy, when we have often tasted the seeming pleasure of
revenge: And then how hard a matter will it be to bring down pampered
wantonness, by the bread and water of affliction? For what a masterless Tyrant
is youth in the height of blood? how impatient is he if he is deprived of his
former caresses? how will he fret, and rage, and hazard any thing, estate and
life are both devoted to her, and he will part with the one, and lay down the
other, rather than he will quit his pleasures, or rest himself from the amorous
embraces of his Beloved? So that considering how prone our inclintions are to
vice, and how hard it is for us to overcome them, we must of necessity suffer
much before we can bring them under, and make them yield obedience to our
Reason and the Gospel precepts, that we may be true Christians.

The next enemy we have to engage with, and suffer by, is the world; Saint John
commands us in his Epistle, not to set our affections on things of the world,
for the love of the world is enmity with God, who ought to be the greatest
object of our love; so that we cannot be said to love God, if the love of the
world dwell within us. By the world is meant the wicked, the wicked world, the
greatest part of mankind, who are so far from obeying the Gospel maxims, and
those precepts Christianity obliges them too, that they may vie with the very
heathen in their evil customs. How do they admire and dote upon the
ostentatious bravery of their pomps and vanities, outdoing those that they used
in their, Triumphs and their Games? How do they indulge themselves in Luxury,
Riot, and immoderate drinkings, exeeding their Bacchanals and Saturnals? nay
how much more do they adorn it is honors and riches, Idolizing them as the sole
Divinities? how do they consecrate their whole care in their acquest, and make
them the design of all their projects, and center of all their actions? how
common is it to see the Ambitious man sweat with the pains he takes to arrive
to some eminency, where he may securely tread upon those, who before were his
equals? how does he employ his whole strength, and credit of all his friends to
be above them? how common is it to see the covetous worldling spending the
greatest of his life in oppressing and grinding the face of the poor, and then
set braiding upon his bags, thanking his Age that has made him deaf to the
louder cries of the Orphan and Widows? how do another sort of men indulge
themselves in all manner of sensuality, drowning their Reason, and suffocating
their bodies with the noisome vapors of putrefaction and rottenness, and then
declame against the severe life and devouter actions of the true Christian?

In the midst of these Sons of the Earth is the devout Christian placed, who
must exspect to suffer from them all; for his Innocence upbraids their vicious
Lives, and the Maxims he observes contradicts their beloved Principles; and
therefore he is derided for his Religious behavior toward his God, and
scoffed at for his great zeal in the observance of his Precepts. For his
humility and meekness, duties so often recommended to us by our Savior, and a
blessedness pronounced unto them, yet by the Ambitious man he is accounted as
one of a servile Disposition, a Temper fit only for the Abject; one of no
Spirit or design in the World; by no means qualified for the Devices of the
Politic, or fit to manage the weighty affairs, and subtle Intrigues of State.
For his Liberality and Charity to the Poor, Precepts so strictly enjoined, and
without which we are no better than sounding brass, or tinckling cimbals; Yet
he is accused of the covetous worldling, of the greatest Simplicity and Folly,
throwing away the greatest part of his Estate upon those, he can expect no
requital from; one that is short flighted, and looks not beyond the affairs of
a day, has no care for futurity; when hunger, or thirst, cold or nakedness may
oppress him, then he has nothing to supply the one, or cloth the other; whilst
he may sing a requiem to his soul, having secured himself, by laying up in
store for many years. For his Temperance and Sobriety, he is by the sensual man
reckned a mere puny, not fit for society, or to keep company with the most
refined sort of men, the wits of the age. And for his Chastity, that is imputed
to his Weakness, and Impotence. But his sufferings were very light, if his
enemies perceived no farther; but they often times take away his Liberty and
his Life too; for though one would think his innocence might here protect him,
yet those who are employed in a work by the Devil, have several ways to bring
it about, and boggle not at any thing to effect their Designs: if their first
Projects do not work effectually, they will themselves commit the greatest
wickedness (as Nero did in firing the City) rather than miss their aims, and
allege the poor Christian to be the Author, making sure of his destruction,
and avoid their own.

Thus is the sincere Christian looked upon as fit for nothing but to be imposed
on, a most abject, silly, pitiful Mortal; and the Precepts he obeys altogether
ineffectual to render his life comfortable here, or happy hereafter; but it is
by such that prefer the bewitching pleasures of sin for a season, that wholly
give themselves to their sensual Appetites, and that never were acquainted with
that Comfort and Satisfaction, that arises from a serene and quiet Conscience
in the performance of Christ's Precepts. The Devout Christian knows that the way
to be exalted in Christ's Kingdom, is to be humble and meek, and wonders at the
aspirings of the Ambitious, and that great Toil and Labor he takes to arrive
to the top of that Pinnacle, where his standing is uneasy and his fall deadly;
he despises the glittering of that gold, the covetous man's eyes are dazzled
with, and he himself enchanted by; he is so far from Idolizing it, that he
counts it no better than the Earth he treads on, and can part with it with much
more eagerness than he received it; by this means laying up for himself
Treasures in Heaven, and does not in the least distrust God (if he have
wherewithal) to feed when he is hungry, that feeds the Ravens, and Cloth him
too, that clothes the Lillies of the fields. He is content to go alone in paths
of Piety and Virtue, flying the Company and Jollity of the World, which may
make him hazard his innocence, if not contract their vices; he will not
converse with the Impious and Profane, and therefore they shoot out their
arrows against him, even bitter words: But makes his Virtue his companion, and
seeks his greatest Felicity in his Solitude and the Tranquillity of his Soul;
if his thirst be quenched, and his hunger satisfied, he matters not their
floods of liquors, or their costly Delicacies: In a word, if he have but food
and raiment, things convenient and necessary for him, he is therewith content:
But if they proceed, by their Hellish Policy, to take away this his Liberty and
his Life too, then he resolves patiently to suffer for his God, who he never
has seen; which is the Crown of his Faith, the Confidence of his Hope, and his
greatest Charity.

The next Enemy we suffer by, is the Devil, and he is the most inveterate;
whose chiefest business it has been, since he was banished, by his cunning
Artifice and crafty Wiles, to delude and entrap weak men, that he has a share
of those Torments into which he was cast, for his presumptuous sins; not that
he does it to alleviate his Pains, or render his Torments the less grieveous;
but that he endeavors to thwart Gods holy Purposes, in tempting those to
commit sin, whom God has consigned to happiness. Thus no sooner had Man his
being, but he Plots and Contrives his ruin; and having such lucky success in
his first enterprise, doubts not of a second overthrow: but he perceives that
the Christian is grown wary, and his bait that worked so effectual heretofore,
will not so easily decoy him into Destruction: it is not now to persuade them,
that they shall be as God that will effect his designs; and therefore he
considers the Temperature of our Bodies, and Disposition of our Minds; and
where he finds what sin we are most prone to, and where most inclinable to let
it in, there he sets up his Standard, and Assaults us in this Posture: he
stands using his cunning Devices to undermine us, and his Strategems to
overcome us; sometimes he subtily dissembles, making show of some Good that may
accrue unto us, to expel out of our innocent minds all jealousy and suspicion
of Evil; he gilds over his baits, to make them seem pleasant to the eye; but if
they be searched into, we find them (like the Apples of Sodom) nothing but
stench and rottenness within; if his specious pretenses are rejected, how
cunningly soever varnished over with the color of Virtue, so that his designs
are blasted, and his endeavors to work upon us rendered ineffectual, then he
will counterfeit flight to make us draw off our Garrisons; and when we are
eager in the persuit, as Hannibal did to the Romans, he returns, sets upon us,
and gives us a general Defeat. But he that is a good Soldier of Jesus Christ,
always keeps a strong guard about him, does not leave the least gap, through
which the enemy may enter; but plants his strongest Garrison there, where he is
most likely to be assaulted; and then though he suffer the greatest hardships,
undergo the greatest damage, and be beset with the greatest danger, even the
losing of his life; yet he girds up his loins, and summons up all his
faculties, and nothing is able to daunt his Courage, or dishearten his Industry
in withstanding all the assaults of his Enemy; he resolves to lay down his life
rather than yield unto him; and thinks not this Precept of Christ too severe
and rigid, grievous or unreasonable, boldly to follow the Captain of his
Salvation. Which brings me to the Second thing I design to speak to, The
reasonableness of Suffering; and that, First, because Christ commands it.
Secondly, Because he suffered for us.

Christ's Precepts are so full fraught with Purity and Holiness, Justice and
Goodness, that they may justly challenge their pedigree from Heaven, and to
have derived their beings from the Father of goodness; so that he does require
nothing, but what is most reasonable. He that acts according to the eternal
reasons of an Omniscient Power, of which ours in its primitive Perfection and
Purity was but a Glance and Reflection; He that appeals to the faculties of men
touching the equity of his Dispensations, as God did to his People; Are not my
ways equal? are not your ways unequal? Can no more discard Reason, than he can
his Being; and that not because he is not Omnipotent, but because it would
argue in him an Imperfection; but because whatever runs counter to our
inclination, is apt to be irreconcilable to our reason; and that was the Reason
that Christianity in its infancy met with such cold entertainment in the world,
because men so value themselves of their reason, that they will admit nothing
but what has stood the trial of that criterion; and thereupon some have
presumed to dictate to Heaven, and prescribe to the Almighty: Because, I say,
that some have arrived to that pitch of impudence, to reason Christ out of his
Divinity; its no wonder if others, when their flesh and blood is concerned,
endeavor to argue him out of his Humanity, I mean, the reasonableness of his
Precepts; they look no farther than their outside, and because they seem
terrible to their flesh, they presently conclude them against their reason, and
run like Children from their friends, when they have put vizards on: But if
they would take the pains to consider the design of them, and the reward they
purchase, they would find them to be for their greatest good, and exactly
consonant to the dictates of right reason. For what can be more reasonable,
than that hardships and sufferings should accompany those Precepts, to which
God has annexed so great a reward? and that the way should be steep, rugged and
difficult, that leads to eternal glory? Nature has prepared Crowns for the
Valiant, and Triumphs for the Conqueror; but he shall wade for them through
blood; he shall first undergo the Severity of Military Discipline, the
hardships of the Field, and the danger of a Battle. God has also provided a
Canaan for his Children, and a Land flowing with Milk and Honey for his
Inheritance; but they shall first run through an Egyptian bondage; they shall
travel for it through the Red Sea; they shall endure the hardships of the
Wilderness, and the taedium of a War: And he that shall murmur or repine at the
one, shall certainly be defeated of the other. For so it happened of all the
Children of Israel that were numbered in Sina, not one beside Caleb and Joshua
were permitted to enter into the Promised Land, because they provoked God to
Anger in the Wilderness, and murmured at him in the Desert. Christ has likewise
purchased for us a better Canaan, even eternal mansions in Heaven; but men must
not expect to go thither on a Feather-bed, lest it should prove but the
delusion of a Dream, and they awake into a worser Eternity; He that was made
perfect through sufferings, has told us, Mat. 7.14. that, that way is narrow,
and that there is not room for a Drunkard to stagger in, or the Latitudinarian
to expatiate either his Principles or his Practice; he must crucify his
Affections and Lusts, that will share with him in his Kingdom; he must endure
Persecutions and Sufferings, yea, and Death it self for his sake, who has
redeemed him from a worse: In a word, he must take up his Cross that will be
his Disciple; and he that will wear a Crown of Glory, must, at least, be ready
to wear a Crown of Thorns.

This being then evident, that because Christ has commanded us to suffer,
therefore it is reasonable; I shall farther make it appear to be highly the
reasonableness of it; and that,

Because Christ commands it.

Christ commands his Disciples nothing, but he inforces it with an Argument
from himself; he must first suffer for us, and through these sufferings enter
into Glory; then he enjoins them as the means for us to arrive unto it; for
thus he told his Apostles before they were sent forth to the conversion of the
world; You are my sheep, and I am the good Shepherd, yet I must send you among
Wolves, and expose you unto the unmerciful fury and rage of cruel Tyrants, who
will not only slight and contemn your Doctrine and Persons, but force you to
undergo the sharpest pains and exquisite tortures; and for your farther
encouragement, deprive you of your Honor and your Lives for my sake, after
they have dealt so by me. The sadness of the news might somewhat surprise them,
when but a little before they were questioning among themselves, which should
be greatest in his Kingdom; but it did not at all abate their courage! or
dishearten them from executing their office. Men certainly much strengthened
from above! most of them poor and of low descent, but Fishermen, who could not
boast of that sprightly blood, great Heroes pretend to have running in their
veins; but through Gods assistance, there was nothing able to daunt the courage
of a Christian, but they resolved to behave themselves as stout and undisturbed
in their sufferings for Christ, as they were willing to dye for him their Lord
and Master, who not long after was treated by his enemies, as he had foretold;
for his Conversation was slighted and contemned, his Doctrine derided and
scoffed at; and his Miracles were said to be done by the help of Magic, and
the assistance of the Prince of Devils: his person was vilified, and soon after
put to the most Barbarous, Cruel, and Shameful Death, that of the Cross: And to
behold the Son of God, Omnipotence it self, thus hanging on the Cross, cruelly
murdered, by the most wicked, evil and malicious men; to behold him, who could
have Legions of Angels to his rescue, or have destroyed his enemies with the
least blast of his mouth, willingly submitting himself to the will and power of
his cruel Murderers, and all this for our sakes, to make a full Atonement and
Satisfaction to his Father for our sins, and free us from the wrath to come;
Certainly we cannot grudge or repine when we suffer for him, or tax his
Precepts of the least unreasonableness; but rejoice, as did his holy Apostles,
who counted it all joy, when they were to enter into Tribulation; for they
betook themselves to their Officium, as soon as they had received their
Commission; and Preached Christ's Doctrine with the purest Zeal, and in the true
Evidence and Demonstration of the Holy Spirit; and for their pains and travel,
they were traduced for the vilest offenders, and made as the filth of this
world; they were hated and persued as enemies and disturbers of the Peace: In a
word, they were vilified and contemned, exposed to Pain and Tortures, and then
to Death it self; all which they suffered with perfect Constancy and Patience,
being assured that it was for his sake, who had endured much more for them.

Thus was our Religion and her Votaries treated for Christ, at its first
entrance into the world; no sooner had the glimmerings of the Gospel been
displayed, but presently clouds and vapors rise up, which strive to extinguish
its Light, or, at least, so to interpose, that they might hinder its progress
from comeing to those that lived in Darkness and in the shadow of Death: but as
they were altogether unable to put out its Light, so neither could they stop it
in its progress: For the Allwise Providence was pleased to design, that
Christianity should be propagated by Sufferings, and grow strong by those very
means which were used to weaken and extirpate it; for it was not to be done
with Arms, or Faction, or the Favor of great Men; not by the cunning Sophistry
of Philosophers, or the persuasive Rhetoric of Orators; only by a naked
proposal of plain evident Truth, with a firm resolution of suffering and dying
for it; by which it has subdued all kind of Persecution, and surmounted
whatever discouragement or resistance could be laid in its way; Sanguis enim
Martyrum erat semen Ecclesiae: which suddenly grew up and spread its branches
through every City of the World and Province. For their greatest Enemies, when
they beheld such an undaunted courage in asserting, such constancy in
professing that Religion which would infallibly work their destruction; were
inclined to believe the hand of God to have upheld, and strengthened them, and
that it could proceed from no other but him, they presently commenced
Christians, and believed that to suffer for Christ, was their greatest
Interest, and to dye for him their greatest Gain. Which brings me to the next
particular in order to be spoken to:

That to suffer for Christ is our greatest Interest.

It has always been found a very hard matter to persuade the Sensual man to
believe, that Sufferings can either procure his Pleasure or his Profit; for
looking no farther than his sensual Pleasure, and his present Enjoyment, he
lays out his whole care in the Preservation of himself, in the Satisfaction of
his desires, in defending his body from harm, and securing himself from any
thing that may annoy or hurt him: This Principle is pressed so home unto him by
the Dictates of his Nature, that he takes it for granted, he is to deny all
commands, neglect all injunctions to the contrary; for he is sure, if he fails
in this, all his pleasures suddenly vanish, and his greatest enjoyments come to
an end; and poor man he miserably perishes, and for want of due care of
himself, procures his own destruction. But, alas! if he would but consider and
search into himself, it would presently appear unto him, that by how much the
more Pleasure and Satisfaction a man takes from the delight of his Mind, than
he does from that of his Body; by so much he is the happier, as to his present
estate; for besides the excercising of his Virtues, Humility, Patience, and
Charity, which otherwise would lie hid, he enjoys the security of his Mind, a
quiet and peaceable Conscience void of offense, that fears no evil, because it
has done none: And that there is such a real Joy concealed under apparent
Miseries, is evident from the Sufferer himself; that holy Pride he discovers in
all his actions, those pleasing looks that continually possess his Countenance,
are certain evidence of the tranquillity of his Mind. Tempests do not disturb
his repose, and he never seems more unshaken, than when he is tossed about; he
is so stable and permanent in all his disasters, that if the world should fall
in pieces, he would not be concerned. Then let the Worldling lay aside his
Honors and his Riches, his Pride and Luxury, which are so far from procuring
real Pleasure, that there is nothing arises from them, but trouble and
dissatisfaction. The Greatest the Ambitious man aims at, is no longer pleasent
unto him, than when he is in the persuit; for when he possesses it, he is
pushed on by the inquietude of his desires, and thursts after fresh honors:
Riches never satisfy, for when they are locked up in the Chest, the desire is
still after more Pride and Luxury have so little content in them, that one is a
Disease of the Mind, the other breeds diseases to afflict the Body; nothing can
be said to be permanent, or to have contentment in it, but the joy of a wise
man, who rests secure when the greatest violence is exercised on his person;
whose Mind stands firm as a Rock, when his body is shaken asunder; and the
afflicting body does not so much lose his courage, as it strengthens and
confirms it; he resembles those Stars that are clearest in the most Tempestuous
Weather, and have the greatest luster when they shine through Mists and Foggy
Exhalations. This being premised, I shall proceed to make it appear, to be his
greatest interest to suffer for Christ, even the loss of his Life; because it
procures his eternal happiness in the world to come: But here we have him
objecting, that God-Almighty cannot love the man who he makes the object of his
wrath; or consign him to happiness whom he so miserably Punishes and Afflicts;
that he can never be fit company for Saints and Angels in Heaven, who was
contemned and hated, afflicted and tormented even unto Death here on earth. But
the Example of our Savior is a sufficient answer to this, who was a man of
sorrows, rejected and despised, Wounded for our Transgressions, bruised for our
iniquities. We are assured that God is Holy, Wise, and Good, and that he can do
nothing misbecoming or unworthy of those Attributes; and therefore we ought to
rest satisfied, that it is his Will that we shall be thus qualified for Heaven,
that he brings us unto him by the very same means and method he did his Beloved
Son; for he chastises every one whom he receives, that these light afflictions
may work for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

But Christ, he reply's, died for us to preserve our lives, and he will not
have us to dye, or destroy us, after he has given us our lives; but he dyed not
to preserve our temporal lives, but to procure for us eternal life in Heaven;
to obtain which, we must suffer even the loss of present life for him; for he
that endeavors to save his life, shall lose it; and he that loses it for
Christ's sake shall save it, Mark 8.35. Life must be despised here on earth, if
we will enjoy an honorable place in Heaven; so that Martyrdom is an ingenious
Tyrant, that kills us to save us; and an innocent crime, that overwhelms with
confusion, to Crown us with Glory: If we believe Tertullian, it is an obliging
Cruelty, that tears away our lives, to give them us again; that despises us, to
make us rich; and making us to be imitators of the Son of God, assures us to
have part in his felicity. This made St. Paul to rejoice, that he was thought
worthy to suffer for Christ Jesus; and this made the Primitive Christians
prefer Disgrace to Honor, Poverty to Riches, Torments to Pleasures, and Death
it self to Life; their minds were so enchanted with the hopes of Futurity, that
it charmed their Grief, confirmed their Constancy, and rendered them victorious
in the midst of all their Afflictions. For with what Patience and Constancy did
they suffer in the times of Persecution, when they were hurried from one place
to another, not suffered to confer with freedom, or breath with safety! when
they were driven into Prisons, and and loaded with Chains, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, and then brought out to their Execution upon the Rack,
Wheel, or Gridiron! they were so far from murmuring, or being disturbed in
their Sufferings, that they rejoiced in the midst of their Tortures, and
thanked their Executioners for tearing them in pieces! Since then we have had
such a cloud of Witnesses who have gone before us, and obtained the end of
their Hopes, even the Salvation of their Souls, let us not be discouraged, or
be disheartened in our duty; but run with patience the race that is set before
us, resolving boldly to follow the Captain of our, as well as their, Salvation.
But we cannot become Martyrs for Christ, as did his holy Apostles, and those in
the Primitive Times, since our Religion is generally embraced, and the Cross
sits as an Ornament on the Foreheads of Kings and Emperors: but although we do
not suffer for him in the propagating his Religion among Heathens and Infidels,
yet we may suffer nearer home; we have enemies in our breasts, for this house
of clay is divided against it self, and wageth more than Civil War within us;
so that every Christian is permited to be his one Executioner, and without
swerving from his Duty, to be his own Tyrant and Persecutor; and he that
suffers by afflicting his Body, and contending with infamous pleasures, by
conquering his Passions, and Subduing his Lusts, by humbling his Pride, and
stifling in his Breast the desire of Riches and Honors, may very well boast
himself to be in the list and number of these Illustrious Heroes, whom God was
pleased to honor with Martyrdom in the first ages of Christianity, and then
received them into his Eternal Mansions in Heaven: which brings me to my last
Particular.

The Reward we purchase by Suffering. We shall also reign with him.

Christianity is a life of Faith and Hope fastened on future Promises, which God
will accomplish when we have done what he appoints us in the interim to do or
suffer; for we cannot expect that he should satisfy our longing, or fulfill our
desires to all eternity, unless we fulfill his Will; for our Time of Trial in
this Life, we must behave our selves like our forerunner, to be worthy of him,
and gain the victory here on Earth, before we Triumph and wear the Crown in
Heaven. To describe this place, express its joys, or determine where it is,
surpasses the understanding of Man; since that very Apostle that seemed to
have a glimpse thereof has left us only a negative Description, which neither
Eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor entered into the heart of man to conceive. Let
us not then endeavor to search out what God has thought to conceal, Quid
animum divinis consiliis minorem fatigas? say the Poet, Why do thou vex thy
mind with the Decrees of the Almighty beyond thy reach? It is Heaven, what
can thou know? that there is such a place, we may assure our selves, since
Truth it self has spoken it, and in it many Mansions too, where our Souls
shall receive the full measure and compliment of Happiness, being rewarded with
the Participation of Christ's Glory; and the boundless appetites of those
spirits remain cempleatly satisfied, In having a full and perfect knowledge and
the fruition of the Beatifick Vision.

Knowledge is man's greatest perfection, it distinguishes him from his fellow
creatures, and makes him to be Lord over them; nay, it makes a difference
between one man and another; for by how much the more a man advances in it, by
so much he is thought worthier and better than another: this makes us Toil and
Labor in its acquest, and willing to increase in sorrow, that we may increase
in knowledge. But what is it, we with so much difficulty have acquired? it is no
more than that which shall be then, a Molehill to the greatest Mountain; nay,
a Drop to the Ocean: For our greatest knowledge is but the least part of what we
are ignorant; and Socrates himself said, that he knew nothing. Here indeed we
do but darkly apprehend, and can but guess at Causes by their produced Effects;
for if we endeavor to discover the Motions and Operations of the most
inconsiderable creature, our understanding is presently gravelled, and our
strongest reasoning at a stand, and we are forced to cry out, How unsearchable
are his Judgments; and his ways past finding out? But there we shall have a
full and perfect knowledge, and be able to discern all things in their most
Intricate and hidden Causes; for our knowledge shall be advanced into a full
grown Science, and we shall arrive to the perfect Man, at the measure of the
stature, and fullness of Christ. Here we like the Spouse in the Canticles, seek
our Beloved only in the dark, view only the Picture of his Habitation, which
is this Visible World; behold only his back-parts in the Glass of his
Creatures, and taste somewhat more of him in his comfortable Ordinances, and but
sufficient to make us Sick with Love: but hereafter we shall see God face to
face, know him as he is; nay, as we our selves are known; and knowing him, we
shall know all things, for he is all in all. Nor shall we only know him as he
is, but enjoy him too; our Happiness shall consist in the Contemplation of his
most Divine Perfections, which must needs create Pleasures as infinite as
themselves, that neither trouble nor sorrow shall interrupt; for all tears
shall be wiped from our Eyes; here shall be a perpetual joy, without the least
mixture of the Gall of Bitterness; and continual Praises issuing from our
mouths; for the Psalmist says, That those that dwell in his House, will be
still praising him. Here the wicked do not approach to hurt us, nor the workers
of iniquity to do us any harm; for the oppressor cannot take away our goods,
nor the cruel Tyrant deprive us of our lives; we being as far above the envy of
the one, as we are the malice of the other. Here a David may enjoy his beloved
Jonathan, and be for ever free from the Fury and Rage of a persecuting Saul.
Here pious Souls enjoy, what Socrates of old could but wish for, the intimate
converse of those brave Heroes that have gone before them; and Here with Angels
and Spirits of Just men made perfect, we shall always be celebrating the
excellencies of the Divine Perfections in the Beatifick Vision.

Having an Eye then unto this so exceeding great reward, Let us resolve
(notwithstanding the Malice of Men and Devils) faithfully to adhere to this our
profession, to obey its Precepts of suffering, even unto Death, with Patience
and Constancy; that at the last our Innocence may break forth as the Lightning,
and our just dealings as the Noonday; and for this Life of Temporal
Sufferings, we shall have an Eternal Life of Joy, in his prescence, where there
is fullness of it; and at whose right hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

To which God of his infinite Mercy bring us all through Jesus Christ our Lord;
to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed, as is most due, all
Honor, Glory, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now and for evermore.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore, Amen.
FINIS.

