CLAMOR, RIXA, JOCI, MENDACIA, FURTA, CACHINI, OR, A SEVERE ENQUIRY into the
late ONEIROCRITICA Published By JOHN WALLIS, Grammar-Reader in Oxon.

Go tell the Assembly of Divines,
Tell Adoniram blew:
Tell Marshal, Burges, Case, and Vines,
Tell now and anon too.
LONDON, 1657.

Reader,
THou have here two Title Pages. He who communicated the former Letter to Mr.
Hobbes, thought the Doctor for his insolent and contumelious language toward
him deserved no other Reply, then to be thus posted: But least the whole work
might not be carried on by the same hand; I thought fit to join with it such a
Title as the Author himself had prefixed to his Letter,

O. V.

(...). OR AN EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE GRAMMATICAL PART of the CONTROVERSY betwixt
Mr. HOBBES and J. WALLIS D. D.

By the Author of the Former Letter.

Stolaeus. (...). Theocrit. (...)
(...)
LONDON. 1657.

To the Understanding Reader.
AFter that the contest betwixt Mr. Hobs and our Geometrician had alarmed the
world, I was requested by a Gentleman of the Middle Temple to send up the
answer to those Six Lessons as soon as it should come out here: I did so, and
found my self obliged to give him some account thereof, which I intended should
be brief, but after the descant upon his childish Prosopopaeia, the Examen of
his Critical remarques drew from me some sheets of paper, of which (I
dispatched them, amidst other employments, in three days, and never
transcribed them) I can give no further account then that the import of my
thoughts is contained in that extract of a Letter published by M. Hobbes since,
without my being privy thereunto, or acquainted therewith until it was too
late to recall it with civility. Upon a review, I was well satisfied therewith,
and with the entertainment it found amongst the Learned and Ingenuous; but I
was a little moved, to see my self linked in the same cause with Mr. Hobbes. I
know his Adversary (it is a sufficient Character to name him) to be JOHN WALLIS
D. D. One who has so merited by his Scurrili^y and O^scaenity, that his
English writings may become Appendixes to Pasquill's Ieasts, or the merry Tales
of Mother Bunch. There being no name put to the Letter, it might have been
answered, and I not concerned: But then he had lost his railing accusation,
(Iud. verse. 9.) whereunto whatever I shall reply, it is Responsum non
maledictum, quia laesit prior. I have put my self to the trouble of un^aseing
this r'anverse of Alcibiades his Sile^us, and let all men to see what an
Adversary I have. Certainly Antonio's Nurse was adiscreet Woman! when ever she
met any pe^ite Gramma^ian, she would cross her Child, and repeat those Charms,
which the old Wives of Sicily make use of against mad Dogs, least they bite. He
calls me Scribler: I confess it was penned in haste: but that is not the
Doctors contumely: he is so in love with his own works, that whatever is
written either against him, or not after that strain, he esteems it as
scribbling: but there are others that do not. Where I said, and that truly, how
Calepine's Authority should not outweigh mine, if his reasons did not. He
observes that Ingenium plumbeum est ponderosum, that he did speak but in jest
too! The charge of ignorance amounts to nothing; since he would not acknowledge
it himself, he could not but lay it upon me: and I thus far join with him, that
one of us two is grossly ignorant. Sawciness, I understand not: I know no
betters, but such as maintain the truth. As for the title of BOY, I have so
handled the Professor, that he may wish he had that plea to excuse himself.
But what help could he seek from personal aspersions? Must all I say be false,
because I was once injured? How come I also to be Mr. H^^bss Iourney-ma^? I was
never entreated to this task, much less in the pay of ^our and four-pence a
day: if I had (and done nothing) I should have admitted of that residue of ill
language SLAVE and Rascal. I would not be mistaken in what I say to this
passage: I think the Scarlet Gown advantageth not a man's merit, nor is it a
certain sign of extraordinary worth: yet I would not at present be understood
to detract from it. Neither would I so prosecute my revenge as to prejudice the
true Ministers of Christ in the w^^k of the G^spel: I have a real inclination
for those who disperse the sincere milk, and do not pester the heads of their
flocks, ( theirs if they are chosen by them, and with a subordination to the
fraternity,) with the burlesque of the Fathers, or jargon of the Schoolmen,
(as if we were to go up to the Philistines to whet our too^s, or to fetch our
interpretation of the Gospel from those to whom it was hid!) nor urge the
Gallimaufry of Critical Learning: who deliver what the Spirit attests with
their spirit to be the Word of God, and the comfort whereof they have
experimented in their daily communion with Christ, not transcribed by usual
converse with Books. These I have in all due esteem and regard, and I shall
desire to employ my Talents in no other way so much as in the promotion of
Christ's cause under them. Something about the Ordinary Ministry I have said in
an account of Doctor Wallis's Thesis to a Member of the Army in Scotland, which
thoughts I have long since enlarged, and put in Latin, but could never hear yet
that his discourse merited a censure: some have thought that his repute might
give a greater credit to the declining cause, then any Arguments he had
brought, wherein Generals are only handled, and nothing accomodated to the
times: which is the customary procedure of those that intend to deceive, not
inform. But I have here attacqued his reputation, and having weakened that in
this present work, I may well expect the vacancy of the Press in Oxford, (that
the same place may publish both discourses) to divulge what I have meditated in
order thereunto: wherein I do promise my self such an answer to Matthew. 28. 19.
20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. (the only material places in the Controversy) that they
shall never be produced again conclusively. This present work had not been so
long delayed, but that it was long ere my occasions, (which afford still
diversions) and long ere my laughter upon the reading Dr. W. would permit me
the use of a Pen: And being then rather to proclaim my victory, then to gain
one, I supposed I might take a greater time to prepare for triumph, then had
been otherwise necessary to the dispute. Nor do I now go about to triumph over
the single Doctor, (the conquest is too mean!) but over all those whose
interest or ignorance may have lead them to approve his writings, who are
numerous at least; and since the vogue of the people will have them deserving
too, I have thought them worthy the passion of

Thy affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Stubbe.
Oxon. June 17. 1657.
SIR,
I Doubt not but you are al^eady sensible of what you have done, and what
trouble you have now drawn upon me by communicating my letter to Mr. Hobbes.
Though I have an entire respect for his person, a great esteem of his learning,
and honorable resentments for his civility at that one visit I gave him, which
as vulgar reports had rendered unexpected, so it begat in me an opinion that he
was one of the most free, and obliging Gentlemen in the world: yet I durst not
adventure a line to him by way of censuring his Antagonist, lest it might
distaste those, who would not stick to entitle me to all his Heterodoxyes, (to
which I am so great a stranger, that I know no more of them then common talk
has acquainted me with, having never had leisure to examine his books,)
because I agree with him in some few inconsiderable points of Critical
learning, and make me guilty of his sentiments, because I excuse his Latin.
With such as think all manner of correspondence (which cannot be denied without
incivility) with him, to be scandalous; all agreement even in Philology
transcendently heretical; what can I hope for, but that they repute it Apostasy
to appear for him in public? But Sir, for this you are accountable: I wrote a
letter to you, you by publishing our privacies made it a reply to Dr. Wallis: I
defended the Truth, you made it a vindication of Mr. Hobbes: and let me tell
you, could he have discovered you, the TEMPLE had been no privileged place
against the assaults and arrests of our high- Priest, you will say there needed
no rejoinder, since he has invalidated nothing I said; but how many will think
so besides your self? If La Taupiniere does not overcome, yet he triumphs, and
though the beck be despicable, yet there wants an Apology against the title
page, which yet is absurd enough, thorough the (...) of undoing Mr. Hobbes's
points, after he had corrected him: duly! (but what will not these humble
witted souls do to compass a jest?) Lest you should question my integrity, and
suspect henceforth that I go about to impose upon you those things which are
not veritable, I have penned a further discourse upon that subject; which you
may suppress from going any further, if you find that my early repute abroad
does not call for the publication, nor the applouse of the ingenuous (whose
praises were the more to be regarded, because they were directed to the piece
which was public, not the Author, who was concealed) if this does not deserve
it, then you may let it fall, and suffer me (in the opinion of the illiterate)
to seem foiled in my first essay. I have enlarged upon particulars, that so I
might prevent in the Dr. all possibility of cavilling, and I have observed that
conduct in my reply, as to speak not only what the Drs. pamphlet, but what the
present case required. I have spoken the more concerning adducis malleum, that
so important a business might not be overruled, nor the university debauched in
their style. I was essended at his Philologysermon, and reflected upon it in
the letter, as no Apostolic way of preaching: he does nor remove now that rock
of offense, but tells me how I mis^ite him there, for he did not say Sobrius
was but once in Tully, but very often: I trusted to my memory as to what I
(...) more. And Vessius in his book de constructione cap. 47. expressly
teaches, Ablati^os (...) sed ^ praepositione omissa, a, vel ab, de, (...)
exp^imi; nisi qued cum Ablativis (...) and afterward he says of this latter,
it is, haud (...) If this be (...), then did Mr. Hobs speak Grammatically, and
with Tully, but not usually. And might not one retert upon the Doctor, that
Vossius is as great a (...) he?

Dr. (...) To defend you here he brings two places of Tully, and one rule of
(...) And tells (...) that Alvarez made a Grammar. But tells me no news all the
while; (...) knew it all before. I knew that (besides many others) Emanuel
Alvarus has written a Gram^er, (which is the same I suppose, with his
Alvarez.) And I know not that (...) wrote against him: but what then? The two
places of Tully I had seen cited in (...) Thesaurus (...) ^s (from whence he
borrowed them.) but I found them not to the purpose: The judgment of Vessius I
knew very (...) and that it makes nothing against me. The places of Tully do
not come home to the business; the Authority of Vessius is against you. In the
first place (...) et molesto; that (...) labor, etc. was not intended to
design the cause of that endeavor, but only an (...) (and the like of
ad^^nientem cum fer^^^. etc.) and if you mean no more here, it was at first
allowed you; but not (...) meant by cum to ^mply a causality. The ^^le of
Vessius is against you; and so is your own Advocates decision. Vessius tells
you haud ^emere invenias, and if at a^l, yet haud temere imita^^um. And all
that your advocate dares affirm in the business, is, but a peradventu^e, [If
so] it may be said Grammatically, but not usually.

Defen. That I have not wronged the Doctor I suppose he will here bear me
witness; but how he has wronged me, I leave it to his own conscience, and the
judgment of the (...) partial Reader. He t^lks high, as one whose reputation
is at stake, yet his (...) so incoherent, inconsistent, that it seems to be the
Resve^y of a person, who places the greatest hope he has of carrying the
case, in his confident manner of speaking. The reader will easily perceive that
the Doctor does pervert the state of the Question, which is, whether the
Ablative case of the manner may have the prep^^^on Cum going before it? The
other Question, whether the preposition cum may be joined with the Ablative
case of the cause or instrument, Ought not to beget any dispute, seeing the
mentioning of it proceeded from the Doctors not knowing what Mr. Hobs meant;
th^^ is ^^ear. The Doctors exception to Longitudinem percu^sam (...) uniformi,
(...) etc. was, that Cum were better out, it being the Abl ^^tive case of (...)
cause or in^^rument: Mr. ^^bs to rectify his intellectuals, tells him it is
the Ablative case of the m^^ner. So that whatever can be objected against the
Abla^ive of the cause with Cum* it is impertinent to the case in hand, and had
not been mentioned by ^e, but that the Doctor says, there is the same reason
for cum when it is joined with the A^lative of the manner, and instrument: and
in this latter case he says positively, that though we may use in its
expressi^n, with in English, yet NOT cum in Latin. So that what I objected was
directly contradictory to his saying, viz. That in both case, we might make use
of the preposition Cum. My allegations out of Tully are evident and und^^iable,
unless the Doctor show a disparity betwixt invadere cum ferro, and (...). As
for what the Doctor talks of advenientem cum ferro, it shows his reading, that
he has not consulted Tully, but Car. Stephanus Thesaurus Ciceron* for he that
reads the oration will find that Caecina came without arms, ex jure manu
conser^um, but his adversary came non ex jure manu co^sertum* sed mage ^erro. I
have pointed it here* according to the edition of Ianus Gr^terus, which I use,
that the Doctor may not stake the point in question. And now, if the D. D. D.
Dr. did know this (as he says he did) let the Reader judge of his impudence to
e^^^ce the allegation: or if he did not, of his (...) in not knowing what he
ought to have consulted, before he denied: and withal he will find what
allowance is to be made, that the Doctors assertions may be current, seeing he
does profess he knew all I had said, whereas it is evident he neither knew what
I said, nor yet what was the matter in debate; which brings me to examine my
second proof, (...): If this be not the Ablative case of the manner, I know not
what is; and that was all I was to prove, and if this place do not come home to
the purpose I give the ^eader leave to B^and me as ^gno^imously, as I do the
^octor That the (...) of V^ssius is against Mr. Hobs is false, for he in the
rule grants, and in the exampl^s proves that the Abla^ive of the manner is
governed of the preposition cum. What he saves of the Ablative of the cause,
that it is haud temere imita^^um; that does clearly evince his judgment in the
other cases: Exc^ptio (...): and does not at all oppose us, who ex abundanti
only spoke of the Ablative of the cause. This the Doctor knew too! But that the
Doctor may learn a little more, I shall add the judgment of Iul. Scaliger in
his appendix ad (...) Gelli^^s. Sect. XI.

(...). dixit Sepcimum casum^^^ Quintili^^ as well as Servius accounts the
Ablative of the in^trament to be the seventh case ^ cum praep^^^^^^nis n^a
pani, quand, instrumentum Significat? Q^^d Prisciaous aliquo m^do voluisse
videtur cum dicit: desunt vero interdum praepositiones, his magnum Alciden
contra stetit. An quod ex art ^^cueus est; et ex antiquis aliquos habebat quos
udduceret, qui nostro savore sunt intercep^^? Non adduxit enim in re manifesta
et incontroversa restes non necessarios: et nos ^^^ucemus Ovid. 4. Fast^r:
adversus calumniatores.

Haec modo verrebat ra^o cum pectine pratum. Franciseus Sanctius also says as
to that very case, de cause. lingu. Lat. lib. 4. c de instrumenti
praepositionibus. In instruments sign^ficando derst Cum, Graec^ (...). Sed
vita^de ambiguiratis gratia non a^^ibatur. Quum enim dicis tetigi illum cum
hastd* nescit^^, (...) illum (...) hastam tetigeris, an vero instrumentum
significes. Sed ubi dubi^ non est ^ratio, venuste app^nitur: ut, vidi gladium,
CVM quo se percuss^t. Ovid. 1. M^tam: Con^^ssie Terque quat^rque. Caesariem,
cum qua terram, mare, sidera movit. Idem in Epis^^^. Acentii. Testis et
Actaeon, quondam sera creditus illis,
Ipse dedit letho cum quibus ante seras.
Idem 4. Fast. Haec modo verrebat raro cum pectine pratum. Aldus aliter (...)
it, quod non pre^^. Plin. libro 9. c. 28. Gaeteri cirri cum quibus venantur.
Sic habet (...) lectio. Paul. Orosius l. ^. Ipse imperator cum sagitta saucius.
Et quid Eleg^^tius qu^m illud non inceleb^^s Auth^^is (gladium, quicum se
percu^^era^, eduxit.) quod imperite (...) Valla lib. 2. c. 6. The book has an
high esteem amongst learned men, and the licenser (no mean person) gives it
this commendation, est enim ^pus, unde hujus aetatis Gr^^mmatici, (si tandem
ali q, uando serio sapere velin^) vera, bret^a, claraque p^^^cepta discere
possunt. What the Doctor shall say for elevating his Authority. I believe will
justify me in what I did against Calepine; he will answer out of Vessius (in
the place alleged before) his proofs, and then his assertion m^st be
countervailed with a nega^ion. And, (that the reader may not be ignorant) it
was Francisens Sanctius whom Vossius (without naming him) answer there; and
having replied to the proo^s out of the ancients, by reading the places
otherwise, or expounding them in a different sense; he proceeds no further, but
(reflecting I suppose upon Orosius, and that other eminent writer taxed very
peremptorily by Valla l. 2. c. 6,) concludes, Neque, (...) aliter ^spi^m
usurpetur, temere liceat imitari. But how haud temere imitandum, comes to be
construed, not to be used in Latin, I do not understand. I should have glossed
upon it otherwise, and thought it a prohibition not of the use absolutely, but
frequently; as in the case of him who imitating Salust, because he had found
(...) (or the like once) he inc^lcated that expression upon all occasions: this
was temere imitari Antonius Nabrissensis in his Grammar lib. 4. Ablativus
Caus^^, Excess^^s, aut medi, quo aliquid ^it, omnibus verbis adjungitur, qui
semper pende^ (...) pr^positione. (...). And, Hi^ce eculis eg^met vidi, etc.
CAUSAE, Excessui, aut MODO eleganter (...): Instrumento non ita eleganter. It
is not long since this Grammar was as Authentic in Spain, as Lilly is in
England, (out of whose rules Doctor Wallis con^utes us) and whether he be so
still I cannot tell, I know nothing to the contrary: I find good writers to
praise him, and if the Doctor produce more Grammars against us, I will allow
him two to one, and venture my reputation against his no-credit; though all
this be nothing to the controversy, which is about the Ablative of the manner,
which I have proved to be good Latin, and (if the Doctor please) elegant also.
He says, I tell him Alvarez (betwixt which and Em. Alva^us, there is no other
difference then that of Wallisius and Wallis) made a Gram^ar. Good reader do
thou find any such impertinency, in the Letter? I say Alvarez would have
taught him more: and it is true, for Alvarez says, Medus actionis
praepositionem, Cum, inte^dum desiderat. And is this no more then to tell him
Alvarez did write a Grammmar? I believe indeed that was all the Doctor knew of
him, but no man could think that was all I meant; though writing in haste, I
did not cite his words. Who that Orlandus Pescetius is, I do not know, but had
he in his writings produced any thing that might avail the Doctor here, I doubt
not but he would have alleged it. The Advocates decision is not against Mr.
Hobs, but for him; I shall never censure any man for using Cum with an Ablative
of the manner: nor yet if he use it once (or so) with an Ablative of the
instrument: (and more you do not object to Mr. Hobs) because I find it in
Tully. Cum uno Cicerene errare milo, quam cum illis sapere. He says, all that
the Advocate dare affirm in the business, is, but a PERADVENTURE (if so) it may
be said Grammatically, but not usually. was there ever any man guilty of such
horrid falsification! If so! It is Ratiocinantis, not Dubitantis. Could ever
any man force such a remark out of these words. If this be so, then did Mr.
Hobs speak Grammatically, but not usually; but you proceed.

And therefore say I, (as I said before) it were better ^ut! This is not all
good Doctor, you said it could not be in: as is evident, and that not only
where the case was of the manner but Instrument also. Your reason why it were
better out, being, because it could not be in. And now you see, that you have
afforded us nothing hitherto but falsities, and falsifications, (...).

2.
The next passage is concerning Praetendit scire.
Dr. W. Fourthly, you say, (i. e. Mr. Hobs) that you think. I did mistake
(pra^tend^^ scire) for an Angl^cisms. Your words were these at first, (as that
Paragraph was first printed, page 176.) tamen quia ^u id nesci^, nec pr^^tendi^
scire (...) auditu, etc. as appears in the torn papers. And then (after you
had^ modelled the whole paragraph, as it now is page 174.) tamen quia id
nescit, nec pra^tendit scire, etc. This I did, and do still take (not mistake)
for an Anglicisme. And you cannot deny but that it is so. Where is the mistake
then? You say it is a fault in the Impression; yes that it is, and that twice,
for failing. But was it not a fault in the copy (...)? You say it should have
been, pr^etendit S^ scire. That I confess helps the matter a little But why was
it not so? The printer left cu^se (yes; at both places!) And why? But because
the Author had not put it in?

L. L^. His next reflection is upon pr^tendit scire; this he ^aith is an
Anglicisme. If this be all his accusation, we shall lose upon this score many
expressions that are used by the best Authors, which I take to be good Latin
^mes, though they be also Anglicismes, the latter being but an imitation of the
former. The Doctor therefore was too fierce to condemn upon to general an
account, that which was not to have been censured for being an Anglicisme,
unless it also had been no Lati^isme. Mr. Hobs replies, that the Printer had
omitted se. He says this mends the m^tter a little. It is very likely, for
then it is just such another Anglicisme as that of Quintilian; Cum l^ricatus in
foro ambularet, praetendebat se id meru fa^ere. The Doctor certainly was very
negligent, ^relse he could not have missed this in Robert Stephen. O^ happily, he
was resolved to condemn Quintilian for this and that other Anglicisme,
Ignoranti^^ p^^^tendi non potest; as also all those that have used praetende,
which are many, and as good Authors as Dr. Wallis who makes his own E^^omi^st
(not an English man) amongst them to write Anglicismes.

Dr. W. repl. The next is praetendit scire, which I took to be no great
elegancy. You suppose that (...) it for an Anglicisme; and I confessed I did.
Your defense was, that it should have been praetendit se scire, (thereby
confessing, I suppose, that without se it was not good,) but that se was
omitted in the impression (twice for failing.) Your Advocates defense is, that
praetendo is a good Latin word (as though any had questioned it) why did he not
bring the same for Cum in the former place? For doubtless that is a good Latin
word too. The easiest defense had been, in both places, as well as one, to put
it upon the Printer; (in the one place he put in cum, which were better out; in
the other he left out se, which should have been in:) or else, that it was but
the stumbling of an hastypen, which had been excuse enough, and would have
passed without any more ado.

What the Doctor said in his Elen^^us I have not the book to see; yet I fear he
mistakes the terms no great elegancy, and an Anglicisme! An Anglicisme may be a
very great elegancy: and I think the Doctor did not do well in a Philosophical
discourse to condemn phrases for not being great elegancies: but surely he took
it for a Barbarism; upon the former account he must seem impertinent, and on
the latter score, ignorant. In the construction of these two words, I imag^ned
that his quarrel lay against the verb praetendo, to pretend, (and he I think
must confess it, for the infinitive mood without an Accusative case before it,
as here Se was omitted, is frequent in Latin Authors, even in Tully) hereupon I
said praetendo was a good word in that sense, and proved it. But that I said
simply that pr^^tend^ was a good Latin word, without any relation to its
English signification, is a thing imposed upon me by the Doctor, that so he
might seem to reply something, though he said nothing. What the printer might
leave out, the Doctor will tell us anon in his own case; if he expect any
favor, he must learn to allow more. You have had enough concerning Cum, and it
is as easy for a printer to leave (...) se, (in my poor conceit) as He would
have us credit him concerning the gr^^ver. If he had acknowledged it the
stumbling of an hasty pen, the Doctor would hardly have let it pass, who will
not let alone other passages that are not such. Let any body compare both, and
see to what the Doctor answers. The mention of his Encomia^^es, who is a
public Professor of Mathematics, of known abili^ies, and beyond exception,
obliges me to present the reader with some part of his Latin letter: I am very
charitable to think the Doctor did alter some of his Solaecismes, yet as it is
after it has passed both their hands, I here tender it.

Cum a^state praeterita in m^nus inciderit Thomae Hobs elementorum philosophiae
Sectio pri^^^ abstinere non petui quin tractatum istum leviter evolverim.
Instigabat me ad hoc, tum Authoris hujus celebritas, ^um^tiam quod plura in
eodem tractatu offendebam Geometrica, quae si Philosophiam non excolerent,
saltem ut quam maxim illustratura f^rent, opinabar. Sed me illum perlustrante,
cum talia ibi invenerim ejus de Algebra five Analysi judicia, ^ quibus mihi
facile fuit colligere, quod Author hic in ^adem art parum debere^ esse
versa^us: (quandequidem hac illa Ars existit, u^ si liber su^s in Geometria
egregii ac ardui quid con^^neret, qualia se passim invenisse PRAETENDERE mihi
videbatur, id ipsum huic arti, judicio meo, in tetum deberet;) C^mque adhuc in
perlustrando dum pergebam, nonnulla de rectae ac curvae aequalitate, aliaque
complura animadvertebam quorum cognitionem nunquam mihi pollicebar ac inter
seponenda notabam, ve^^^e si spes aliqua inveniendi illa mihi superesset, quin
Algebram in parts vocarem non dubitabam: Aliam excude de ipso opinionem
concept, credens quod ill^ quaeillum ante e proprio penu deprompsisse
autumabam, non nisi altorum inventa esse, sed i^alium sensum ab eo traducta aut
correpta: Ideoque siquid boni in es comprehende^etur, id quam maxim esse
ventilandum ac ex^u^^^ndum.

Here is such a premulsis out of Dutch-land, as I have not the patience to
transcribe any more: If the Doctor will excuse him, he must ^lie to Tullies
Epistol, nostrae debent hallucinari. He that had exhibited to us such a letter,
might have spared the stumblings of a contemplative mind in a large treatise.
This man the Doctor fayes needs not Mr. Hob's praise: If he did, I believe he
would not obtain it: he gives not praises to them that stand in need, but which
deserve them. If he have no better ornaments then we see here, (that I may use
the Scarlet Doctors phrase) the ragged regiment will scarce allow him the
benefit of a muster^^. Mr. Hobs called him Dun^ (...) the Doctor hints us out
an Apology for him, ( p. 10.) viz. that Duns should not be written with an S.
well now that I have exhibited the letter, do as you see fit. Minshew (from
whence I may as well say you have plundered the Etymology of Hob-gobbing, as
you charge me with Nizolius, etc.) says it comes from densus: and then it may
be Duns; (with an S.) thee being wanting is a Dugardisine. When I read it I
think there may be an allusion to his name, which having some affinity with
Scotus, he surnamed him Duns. But I go on.

3.
Dr. W. In like manner Page 222. Tractatus hujus partis tertiae, in qua mo^us
et ^magnitudo per se et abstracte confideravimus, terminum hic statuo. This was
the Printers fault too, was it not? Or at least a fault in the impression?

L Lr. Here I must confess the exception is colorable, yet I can parallel it
with the like objection made by Erasmus against Tully, out of whom Erasmus
quotes this passage: Di^ti^s commorans Athenis; quoniam venti negabant solvendi
facultatem, ^rat ani^^s ad te scribere: and excuses it thus, that Tully might
have had at first in his thoughts volebam, or statuebam, which he afterward
relinquished for erat animus, and did not remember what he had antecedently
written, which did not vary from his suceeding thoughts, but words. And this
excuse may pass with any who knows that Mr. Heb^ values not the study of words,
but as it serves to express his thoughts, which were the same whither he wrote,
in qud mo^us and magnitu^o per se et astra^^^ consideati sunt, or
consideratimus. If the Doctor will make this so Capital, he must prove it
voluntary, and also show that it is greater then what is legible in the ^uny
letter of his Encemiast, whom he would have to be beyond exception.

Dr. W. repl. And the same defense ( viz. that they were the stumblings of an
hasty pen) should have been made for the third and fise place; m^^us et
magnitu^^ considera^^nus: and mulia ejusm^^i (propositi^nes) for to defend such
mistakes, is worse then to commit them. And the like of many other elegancies,
of which I gave you a taste the last time, which now are passed over in
silence. And it would not have hurt you to have said as little of these. Such
slips are no great blemish till they come to be defended. And I should not have
thought it worth while, so much as to note them, if you had not ^ ^ manner
challenged me so to do.

De^. That these were not the stumblings of an hasty pen in Mr. H^bs, I cannot
say: if he had acknowledged it; how the Doctor would have passed over his
faults, whereas he makes such ado concerning the printers Errats, any one may
conjecture, what I wrote in the letter, I wrote not as if it had been the rule
he proceeded by, but excuse. And what more might have been said, for those that
I passed by, let the reader judge by what I have said, and shall say for these.
I cannot allow the Doctor that TO DEFEND SVCH MISTAKES IS WORSE THEN TO COMMIT
THEM, greater men then I ^re concerned in this: the reader sees that Tully and
Mr. Hebs are in the same condition, whatever then has been said for the one,
may justify the other (^^tatis ^^tandis) and what the Doctor objects against
the Apologist for Mr. H^bs, will interest the Advocates of Tully in the
controversy. It is not one, but several Solecismes that E^asirus carpeth at in
Tully. I shall set down Ial. Sca^gers defense (though it be long, it cannot be
tedio as to the diligent reader) in gross, not omitting things remote from the
present controversy, because the Oration is hard to be got, and contains very
remarkable things. Thus then Julius Scaliger speaks to his supposed auditors,
concerning E^asmus.

(...) in Ciceronis scriptis deprehensos tradit etiamne id nebulo? Quis tibi
dixit ita scriptum esse? Nihil enim est quod a maledicentissimo, ^odemque
mendace non imponi poss^t. Quasi vero non aeque invidi atque inepti sit, ita
^eriptum suspicari reliquisse, et candidi ingenii in libratiorum culpam
rejicere. Quanto facilius mihi sidem ^^bebunt omnes temporum injuriam
accusanti, cujus tractibus atque an^^^ctibus, multa latent, multa invertantur.
plu^ima depravantur, alia intereunt. Nolo enim hic tractare hunc locum, quasi
communem, deplorareque saeculorum acerbitatem; neque si ^elim, sciam, sed
tu^ipse qui hasce Tragaedias movere soles, qui nequaquam integro nobis Cicerone
per tempestatum injurias frui licere clamitas, qui supposititios atque
adultetino^ libros sub ejus nomine falso circumfer^^ indig^aris; quid hoc est
negotii, ut calumniam istam de uno verbo, immo vero de unius ver^i syllab^
mutueris? Quid inquies, si contendam aliter a Cicerone scriptum fu^^^e, quid ii
unde ea desumpsisti? Quid ^^^^m d^rmitantis manum Tyronis accusem? Sed ut haec
omnia omittam, qu^^ro de ^e number in Ciceronem prima Grammaticae ^udimenta
nescisse dicas? Id vero est, quod a veteribus dici solet, nihil esse
perniciosius arr^gante homine, cum ^i semel ansapraebita est ad calumniam.
Ageita sit, in libris Ciceronis vel illius ipsu^s manuscriptis Solaecismos
deprehensus est. Hic vero scire pervelim, ubi gentium tam impurus veterat^^
vitam vivat, qui illi id adscribere andeat. Sed non mirum est te id improbare
quod tibi incompertum est, cum multo majore impudentia recepta quoque
retractare s^udea^. In potestatem esse a Cicerone dictum, (...) desendit in
problematis Gelli^rus.
inquis, atque id minus Latinum quibusdam visum esse. At scin quibus? Barbaris
aliquot, aure rudi atque agresti, judicio corrupto, quorum ineptiae ^eque abs
te primo ^es^runtur, neque a me prin o ^^^^lluntur: sed sunt nobis authors
multo qu^m Cicero antiq^^ores, quibus a Graecis fontibus ea^^ta deducere
placuit, Quam rem qu^ci iam a p^litishmo autho^e Gellio (...) tractatur,
diflusius non occupabo. Sed qu^^ ^^modem Q. Claudius in mediton relinquere
dixit, quemadmodum in rem esse Latin di^^mus, in re esse pro eo quod est utile
esse* non dicimus, sed ^^e esse^* atque alia (...) in m^dum apud alios
infinita: ita esse in potestatem. ALIUD enim est (...) esse, qualis tu, c^^us
in angustias sordesque nos detrudere vis; al^ud populi con^^tudini, doctorum
auctoritati, numeris orationis, purgatis auribus inservire. (...) Gellio qui
hoc te docuit ex calumniatoribus, si tam candidus else in, quam ille vir bonus
fuit ac doctus, defensionem quoque mutuari de^ui^^es.

Marcus Tullius vocem piissimus, inquit (Erasmus tanquam barbaram proscindit,
qua multi probati authors usi sunt. At Cicero id inter eos vires vitio
ve^te^at, qui neque ^uncr^^lan ^runt. Ex quorum consensu semel assertum, quod
dixistet, postea pro bono probat^que agnovit^ Nec si (...) voce usi sunt ii,
qu^ tibi probi videntur, continuo tanquam (...) a toto Senatu rej^ci non debet;
sed tu illis qui tuo permissu ea voce usi sunt, quoniam sin ilem ^ui vocem
amplecteris, assentiris; Ciceroni qui totius Sena^^s, consensu, totius spe
posteritatis candem ignominia notavit, dissimili tui auctori nonassentiris.

Facere contumeliam, inquit, I at^^ ^ dicitur, at id Ciceroni quasi non pro^e
dictum taxatur. In Eu^^cho n^mque Terentiana Thais ita lequitur. Nam si ego
digna hac contumelia sum maxim, at tu indignus qui faceres tamen: Opinor,
inquit, tacit repeti contumelia^, M^^isicum sibi facinus ^ecisle videtur, si
candem vocem alteri verbo reddidetit. At id etiam pueri sciunt, quod si tam
praestantis esses memoriae, quam acerbi animies, si observationes non
irrisisses, non tantopere nunc laborares. Quare non agam tecuminimic^ ^ed
humaniter ^o labor te levatum mea opera volo, Audistine unquam ex oratione
Catonis, quam pro se contra C. Cassium habuit ea verba? Atque evenit ita^
Quirites, ut in hac ^^niumelia, quae mihi per hujusce petulantiam ^actumitur.
Ex Plauti item Asinatia pot^ras hune servam excitare, cujus testimonium futile
atque ineptum hoc in judicio put^^^ non d^b^isti, qui ista tua tragaedia Da^um
agis. Is igitur servus ita loquim: Tu alteri contumeliam facias, tibi non
dicatur? En quanto beneficio meo uteris, qui te tam multa doceo, quae aut nullo
modo noveris, aut perperam didiceris, aut turpiter oblitus fueris; Te tanta in
calumnia deficientem excito, collapsum sublevo, tantu^ abest ut tua ista ven^na
pertimescam. Quamo^^ rem tot tantaque edoctus, id quoque a me doceri debes,
Ciceronem non id rejecisse tanquam nemo unquam sic locutus fuerit, sed quod
tunc ista nemo loqueretur. Non enim dicit, Quis sic unquam l^cutus est? Sed
quis sic lequi^ur? Idem porio vitium est et inaudita, et obsoleta loqui. At ita
evenit ut quod tanta aetatis illius authoritate desitum erat, tu pari
arrogantia instaurare coneris. Nan enim quaecunque veteres IMPOLITIVS
dixissent, statim ab ea elegantissima aetate recep^a sunt. Et cumidem Cato,
idem Plautus multis dicendi formulis usi essent, id CASTIORES ling^ae
haudquaquam sibi licere voluerunt. Quod ut apeiti^s cognoscas, vel ex
Terentianis elocutionibus amplius intelligere est, quarum quasdam quamlibet
puri authoris, ne probamus quidem. Non enim post illum quispi^m oratorum dixit,
tibi, aut mihi decere, quod quidem extet: qua dicen^i tamen forma ille usus
est. Neque multa alia quae ne ^astidium pariamus aponere supersed^bo.

A voce n^vissime et novissimus, inquit, abstinuit Cicero, quibus vocibus
Salustium optimum authorem, and M. Catonem ^sos serunt. Etiamne id vitium, ac
non prudentiam Ciceronis dicis? Eum ho^inem qui Latinam linguam tanta cura
illustrate studeret, novissimam vocem formidare prudentiae ^uit; prolata autem
^ententia non damnare, qua caeteri uterentur, modesti^^. At quare n^n secutus
est Cicero tantorum virorum judicium? Quare? Quia maluit solus culpa ca^e^e,
quam cum caeteris veniam poscere. Quia maluit Laelium sequi, cujus judicio ea
vox damnata esset; cuius judicio qui loquebantur, recte loqui putabantur: cujus
judicium maluit sequi Cicero, quam contra illud mereri, ut se sequeretis. Aliud
enim sonat auribus tuis improbo nunc verbo ^ssuetis, Era^^e, aliud Romano viro,
qui tamen Asinianae calumniae Patavinitatem Livio objectare ausus es, quam tu
quo loco, quo tempore cognoscere, quo modulo Baraves metiti potes? Qui ratione
Teutonicus vitium illud conslari, quo iudicio dignosci dices? Si omnes voces
Romanae sunt, si universa structura ex veterum cementis, lapidibus redivivis,
incorrupta materia constat, si candor ille illam faelicissimam aetatem etiam
superat, si omni invidia, omni calumnia major est, quam in lacteo ^lumine labem
lebes deprehendas? Cum tamen illius sententiae ne his quidem qui objecerat,
cateros Romanos habuerit assertores.

I have taken the pains to transcribe all this, that the reader may see what
entertainment Erasmus his Ciceronianus found in the world, and also because
there are in it several things that may have a great influence upon some
passages, which will hereafter be debated betwixt the Doctor and my self: I
thought it therefore much more convenient to present you with the whole
paragraph, then to detract any thing from so exquisite a piece, by retailing it
in parcels. Another that has made an Apology for Solacismes (...) Stephanus
Deletus, an exact imitatour of Tully, and to whom the Latin tongue
(notwithstanding what can be said to his disparagement) is very much beholden.
He in his reply to Erasmus upon the same account, videl: quod eruditi non
negant in Ciceronis Scriptis inveniti Solaecismos inexcusabiles, QVALES et ^lim
exciderunt, et excidunt hodie vi^is multum doctis, dum in vari^s res distracta
cogitatione, magis sentent^^ praecedentis meminetint, quam verborum, eoque sit,
ut periodi clausula prioribus non respondeat. Quod genus sit. Diutius (...)
Athenis, qu^niam venti ne^^^^ solven^i facultatem, et at animus adie Scribere,
etc. VIL: vulgar est, ^uique esse linguae multas loquendi formas, quae
duriores videantur, and omnibus Grammaricorum regulis normisque solutae, quas
si legibus et praeceptionibus adstringas, linguae illius dignitatem violes, et
vim libettati adseras. EO loquendi genere si Roman ut Romani, usus est modice
Tullius, id ne ut vitiosum animadvertendum ducet? An^ ulta Romans domi inter
loquendum usurpasse dubitas, quae Scriptis elata, posteri ab illa aetate
remotiores, asperiora judicarunt? Quorum nulla constet ratio, sed in usu tantum
et loquendi consuetudine ^uere posita. Roman it^que scribens Tullius verbum
priori sententiae non addidit: Erat animus ed te scribere dixit. Piaculum hoc
purat Erasmus publicis supplicationibus expiandum!

This he says by way of defense of what I alleged agianst Doctor Wallis; and
whereas Sir Th. More in the dialogue objects again.

Ciceronem dixisse quaedam, quae nemo doctus putavit imitanda: veluti in
potestatem esse pro in ^^^state esse. ^ursus in edicto M. Antonii M. Tullius
veluti Barbaram et Latinis inaudit^m vocem proscindit, piiss^^us a (...) cum ea
apud probatissimos linguae Latinae Scriptores (...) p^riater. Idem ut Solacon
in eo reprehendit, quod Scripsisset, facere (...), idem ab his vocibus
novissime et novissimus, ceu male Latinis abstinuit, cum eis non veriti sint
uti M. Cato and Solustius. Vill: Libenter, unde aliquis invidiae flatus
oftenditur, veladat Erasmus, (...) in Ciceronem instruit, atque idoneam ^actus
tempestatem, prora et puppi totum se ad obtrectationem rapit, Tullii navem
veluti ad ba^ba^iei Scopulum allisam ridet. Dixit Cicero (inquit) multae quae
nemo doctus putat imitanda, veluti cum ait in potestatem esse. Tam vino
madebant, More, qui potessatem pro potestate, descrip^erunt, quam ridiculus est
Erasmus, qui haec minutula consectatur, librariorum negligentia orta, non a
Cicerone profecta. At in M. Antonii edict^, piissimus a pio tanquam barbaram
vocem non satis r^cte notat, apud (...) lingua Latinae Scriptores frequentem.
Idem hunc lequendi modum improbe reprehendit, facere contumeli^^: qua locutione
uti non veritus est Terentius: novissim^ quoque et novissimus nimium religiose
fugit. PIISSIMVS, facere contumeliam, novissime, novissimus, si veluti partim
barbara, partim ut noua et dura vitavit Cicero, non hoc certe temere. Neque
mehercule mihi persuasero, ut, quae tolerabilia novisset, ea in Senatu coram
linguae Latinae principibus, tanquam ^arbara and Latinis hominibus ignota
reprehendisset. QVIS Ciceronis ingenium usque adeo ignorarit, ut, quorum
reprehensione* in reprehensionis periculum venisset, ea illum reprehendere
voluisse arbitretur? Sequitur ut qua^e a novissime et novissimus abstinuerit,
paucis Ipse audias, et illum verborum delect^ sapienter usum, non religione
vitiose abusum cognoscas. In Italia, in Gallia, in Brittani^, in Hispania, vel
in qu^vis etiam urbe, pervagata multa verba, multosque loquendi modos esse
saepe intelligas, quos elegantiae cupidiores, aut ut duro^ and male proprios,
aut ut recenter natos, aut ut insulsos et venustate carentes negligunt. Sic
prorsus multas quondam Romae percrebuisse voces non ambigo, plebi et rudi
multitudini gratas, oratoribus et exactiori aurium judicio viris non continuo
arridentes: qu^s, si Catonem obsoletae dictionis peramantem, aut si Salustium
audacem verborum architectum opisicemque imitemur, non rejiciemus: si Tullium
locutionis mundae et purae observantissimum et undique splendentem sequemur,
veluti faecem, aut ex lacuna aliqua erutas sorde^, resp^em^s.

You have here the defense of two learned men (as learned as Dr. Wallis) for
Tully: and you see what pains they take to commit a worse error, then that is
which they defend. I should not say any more, but that the Doctor has
misrepresented me to that honorable personage in the dedication of his
Pamphlet, as if I had said motus and magnitudo consideravimus were true Latin.
That I said no such thing, the letter does bear me witness, yet this I shall
say; it being debated by the Popes legate at Paris concerning the introduction
of the Infantae of Spains title against that of H. 4. (I may mistake in the
History) one opposed the Salique Law to her plea. The legate demanded where
that law was to be found? The other suddenly replied, upon the back side of
the donation of Constantine to Pope Sylvester. So I say that (if we may believe
H. Stephen de Criticis) motus and magnitudo ^^^sideravimus, is to be found
written upon the back of that verse in Virgil, Aen^id. l. 2. Cui matter media
sese tulit obvi^ sylva
Virginis os habitumque gerens.
Latinae linguae consnetudo poscit ut dicatur, illa tulit se ei obviam: Quo
modo igitur haec Cui matter sese tulit obviam a Latinitate non discedere
dicemus? Nam ineptum quidem (meo judicio) fuerit illud obvia a verbo tulit
separare; hoc modo, Cui matter obvia (id est veniens obviam) se tulit. Quid n.
hoc est? Aut ubi lectum? far se alicui. Non video cerre quod ex hoc loco
pateat effugium, nisi ut dicamus tulit se dictum esse pro ^btulit. Sed quamvis
simplicibus pro compositis utantur poetae, esse tamen nonn^lla constat, quorum
talis usus nimium insolens et dur^^ effet; nec dubito quin hoc in numero
po^endum sit istud. Alterum exemplum peto ex Aeneid. 12. T^lis se (...) nocte
tulit. Nam si talem se sata nocte tulit, scribendum dixero, hoc ex aliis locis
facile mihi evict^rus videor. But what if I had said it had been a Grecisme^
And said the like had been frequent amongst them. (...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
And that Eustathius has defended these; and therefore I am not the first that
have defended Solaecismes (which I did not then, but only excused them) adding
out of Eu^ipides. (...),
(...).
(...).
And after all concluded with that of Eustathius (...) had not my Poets, been
as good as his Poets? Has not Cat^llus imitated this, Ph^selus ille, quem
vide^is hespites,
Ai^ fuisse navium celerrimus.
which has been imitated by several Parodes thus; Sabinius ille, quem videtis
^ospit^^,
Ait fuisse Mul^o celerrimus.
and Deletus ille, qui necavit hospites,
Ait fuisse carnifex Sacerrimus.
and Magirus ille, quem vide^is hospites,
Ait fuisse litigator optimus.
and Maranus ille, quem fugastis hospites,
Ait fuisse pinsitor niger^imus.
and Colonus ille, quam videtis incolae,
Ait fuisse ^iles impigerrimus.
It was such an ordinary Grecisme as made Terence say
Quae sese optavit in^enest^ hic parare divitias,
Quam in patris honest pauper vivere.
and Horace, Patiens (...) Caesaris ul^^r, and Ovid.
Acceptum refero (...) sibu^ esse nocens.
And in imitation of this (as I favorably conceive did your Panegyrist lately
say, Cujus ulti^a la^s est inter nos esse primus. Besides, the Doctor cannot
pretend ignorance of Solaecismes in the N. T. which to excuse I do not believe
he will say is so horrible an attempt as he charges me with; his friend Beza
had better have excused that of Iuke (no bad Grecian!) Acts 26. v 3. (...) as
Camerarius did, then to insert into the text (...) upon the account of one old
copy, which might have been transcribed by some such knowing Grammarian as the
Doctor. Not have the ancients only, or those of mean parts used or imitated
those kinds of expressions: Osorius that accurate Ciceronian in his book
against Hadd^p has presumed upon this Solaecisme. l. 2. Res (inquis Haddone)
politicas civilis magistratus exercet, Ecclesiasticas administrant episcopi.
Quos episcopos narrai? ^LLINE qu^s sedibus exturbastis, et invincula
conjecistis? An illi potiut, qu^s ex triviis et (...) a^repro^, in sanctorum
pentisicum (...) collocastis' Haddon in his rejoinder charges him very fiercely
hereupon with a double Selecisme. Itane, noster supe bissime cens^r, contra
Grammatices elementa tam evidenter p^^^as, and ILLI ^^nis pro ILLOS? Quare ex
deli^a familiarituo D^^mada: castigabit hunc errorem tuum, et merebit adeo te
pue^iliter esse prelapsam. S^io Cicereni nonnunquam ipsi tales (...)
ob^^psisse, sed tibi nihil condonare deb^o, c^m me^^ orationem, etiam quae
Latina et (...) est, t^ucibus verbis odiosissime exagitaveris. There is also
one Petrus Alcyonius who wrote a book de exilio, (wherein he showed to what an
hiegth of eloquence a genuine imitation might bring us at present) I do find
him amongst his other elegancies to have let fall this affectedly negligent
passage. Finem (ai^hat Hannibal) faceret Antiochus sperandi, se A^iam pacatam
et tranquillam habiturum, sed potius c^gitaret, de illo Imperio, propediem cum
Romany certandum sibi esse terra marique; et ^ut illis Imperium or bis
terrarum praesumentibus eripiendum, aut victum et regni possessione cedentum,
accipienda^ quascunque pacis conditiones victor hostis dedisset.

Thus much I have chosen to say upon this point, that the Grammar reader may
see how valid his rules are, how little need there was of that excuse he
suggests, and how many are concerned in that absurdity he so exaggerates
against me, for defending Solecismes, though I did only excuse an ordinary
(...) in Greek. Let the Doctor take notice of what I have now said, hereafter,
and if in any thing that shall proceed from me he chance to find some places
parallel to what I have produced out of Tully, Homer, etc. I shall never secure
my self against his rules by excuse of haste, but without fear of shame
acknowledge it VOLVNTARY.

As for that false sunt -- and multa ejusmodi (propositiones) I do still wonder
that ever he should think that to be unusual: I brought him that place in the
beginning of Tullie paradoxes, Animadverti sape Catonem, cum in Senatu
sententiam diceret, locos graves ^n Philosophia tractare, abhorrentes ab hoc
usu forenst et publico, sed dicendo consequi tamen, ut illa etiam populo
probabilia viderentur, The Doctor excepts not against the place, he does not
show that locus is ever taken for a common place when it is of the neuter
gender plural: I referred him to another passage in Acad. Quaest. l. 2. An tu,
cum res occultissimes aperueris, in luce^^que protuleris iuratusque es en te
comperisse (quod mihi quo que dicebat, qui ex te illa cognoveram) negabis esse
remullam, quae cognosci, comprehendi, percipi possit? Many more examples might
have been produced, but I thought it needed not: neither do I think it now very
necessary, but only to reflect upon the Doctor the more. Had not those
Grammarians, who are, as I may phrase it with the eloquent Mr. Milton, bonis
Authoribus transcribendis et divexandis nati, varied the text, Plautus would
have furnished us with a multitude of examples, wherein the Substantive and
Adjective had not agreed in gender, as eamus intro, non utibile [ now utibilis]
hic locus factis tuis: and the like, which those puny critics have altered.
But in the like case to that of Mr. Hobs, it is common. Hoc pecus omne meum est,
multae Stabulantur in antro. So Ovid. Crescunt arbusta, et f^tus in tempore
fundunt,
Quod cibus in totas usque ab radicibus imis,
Per truncos ac per ramos di^^unditur omnes.
Several of the like examples are produced and defended by Giphanius upon
Lucretius in Collectan. gener. mutat. not only out of Poets, but va^rro In any
sentence where the substantive of one gender has a Synonymous word of another,
the adjective (not co^ering immediately, but following at a distance) ma^^
agree either with it, or it is Synonymon, as in particular here multa may agree
with prolo quia, enunciata, dicta, and not with propositiones, as Scelus
postquam ludisicatus est virginem. Vbi ille scelus est* qui me p^^^idit?
Scaliger. exercit. 31 c. Euclidae theor^mata reducenda sunt ad p^uctores. And
without doubt in that piece of Scaliger may be found affectedly used all (or
most) of those Solecismes which the Doctor censureth in Mr. Hobs. I find in
very good ^udges of the Latin tongue these things proposed as imitable, populo
ut placerent qua^ fecisset fabulas. Cujus mo^^ est consimilis vest^um, by se ad
vos applicant, etc. Omnes repudiandum est arts. Vestri adhortandi causa.
A^iquod fuit principium generandi animalium. These and the like I shall not
decline occasionally (not frequently) to make use of, and give the Doctor that
ad^antage, which h^ has not in this case, that he may say they were out of
(...).

4
I shall leav^ the order of the Letter at present, and pursue the Doctors
method, according to which, the next passage to be debated is Tanquam d^cer^mus.

Dr. Wallis. I might add that of tanq^^^m dicerem^s, (as if we should say) and
(...), and elsewhere, instead of a^^t, quasi, (or some such word) or (...),
which is Tullies phrase, ((...) si ^ua res aga^ur, tanquam si (...) esset,
(...) Asia for tanquam without ^r, signifies but a^, not as if^ but because I
know you are not the first that have so used it, of modern writers, and that
even of the (...)^, some of them do sometimes leave out si, I shall allow you
the same liberty, and pass this by without bl^^e (as passable, not accurate)

L^r. Now he disallowes tanquam (...), as if we should say. But why is that
less^ tolerable them anq^^^ secerts, as if you had done. It should be (...)
(forsooth!) or (...), or (...), which is Tullies own word, (what is tanquam si
become but one word?) Tanqu^m (...) agatur, etc. Good Doctor leave out Tully
and all (...), or you will for ever suffer for this, and your add^cis (...). Is
not this to put your self on their verdict, when you oppose Mr. Hobs with
Tully? but the Doctor gives his reason. And though he had the l^ck in his (...)
to follow the first part of the s^^ing (...) yet now it is senti^^dum cum
(...). For (...) without ^i signifies but as not as if. It is pity the Doctor
could not argue in Symbols too, that so we might not understand him, but
supp^se all his papers to carry evidence with them, because they are
Mathematically scratched. How does he construe this, Pl^^^e, (...) al^o
Drus^^um sanguine, taxquam
F^^^^^is ipse aliquid propter quod ^^bilis esses.
So Gaelius, one much esteemed by Gicere, who has inserted his Epistles into
his works, says (Tull. ^^m. ep. lib. 8. ^p. 5.) omnia desiderantur ab (...),
tanquam ^i^il denegatum sit ei quo min^^ pa etissimus esset, qui publico neg^^^
praepositus est. But it was not possible the Doctor should know this, it not
being in Stephen, where his examples for (...) si are.

But the Doctor having pitched upon this criticisme, and penned it, some body,
I believe, put him in mind of the absurditu thereof: yet the generous
professor presumed no body else could be more intelligent then he, who had
perused Stephen. He would not retract any thing, but subjo^n^, that he will
allow it as passable, because other modern writers, and some of the ancients,
have so used it, as Mr. Hobs has done. I know not what Authors the Doctor
meant, for, if I am not mistaken, I do not find any in Stephen. His citation
of Celumella is not right l. s. c. 5. (not can I deduce any thing thence till I
have read the passage) but if he take Iuvenal and Caesius for modern Authors, I
hope he will admit of Accius, N^^vius, and Garma^ta for the only ancients. Let
him think upon this Criticisme, and never hope pardon for his adducis mall^um,
which is not half so well justified, and yet none but madmen or feels reject
it. I have here exhibed the letter without any variation, no not of that place
out of Columella, which the Doctor might well presume I had looked into, and
found to be (...) (as many else are, and are observed by Franciseus Floridus)
though either the transcriber or printer did me that wrong to alter the
figures: for which I am no more responsible, then for that verse out of Dienys:
(...). which is v. 725. and not v. 21. ^s it is printed: if the Doctor had
consulted the place, he would not have spared me, there, as he does not in his
ensuing discourse.

Dr Wallis. That of tanquaem, is but a mee^ cavil, as well as the rest.
Ianquaem dicerem^^s, and tanquaem pessent, I said were Ellyptical. And are they
not? That tanquaem signifies only (...) and not as if; and does it signify any
more? That Tully's word is tanquaem si (which is proper enough ad hominem, to
you that will needs be Ci erenians, forsooth!) And it is not so? (That is, and
is it not so?) [yes and O^^^'s too. Met. 7. tanquaem si parvae dedisses Den^,]
has not your journey-man made search in Rob. Stephanu's These. ling. lat. These.
Cicerentanus (or Nizolius) and cannot find any one example of Tully to the
contrary? But he says, tanquam si is not Tully's word, it is two words; (a
pretty exception, let it then be Tully's phrase) but why not if need be, one
word, as et-si, ac-si, etiam. si, etc. If et iam-si, why not as well tam quam
si, one word? Or quam ab rem? But I said further, that though elliptical, yet I
would allow Mr. Hobs so to speak without blame; because some modern writers,
and some of the ancients, do so speak. Well; was this the fault? Yes that is the
fault. He would have had me condemned it absolutely, that he might have had
some what to cavil at.

I shall omit what follows, this being all that is material: yet all that the
pevish Doctor says, shall be answered in its proper place. The intelligent
reader will easily perceive who plays the Caviller: for if this be not a
cavil, I do not know what is; to condemn a thing as absolutely bad. TANQVAM
without si signifies but (...), not (...) if. And yet to allow it now so far as
to confess it to be in Caelius, Iuvenal and other authors? Ought not that plea
to be sufficient with you, which is all you allege for adducis malleum?
Custom and popular use being the rule of elegancy, it should have sufficed
you, that so much favored Mr. Hobs: we would have added that the vulgar know
little what belongs to Ellipsis, they are not governed by Grammar. It is
considerable how the Doctor varies his phrase, he said before tanquaem without
si, signified as, and not as if, now he says, that it was an Elliptical
expression. The difference is this, an Elliptical expression may be good (such
are all ablatives of cause, instrument, or manner, as Vossius proves, and
others,) but the use of a word for what it signifies not, cannot be. Of the
signification of words use must be the judge. All that I say of Stephen, is
that I did not remember any example in him: the Doctor finds three, a least
three examples; which if he knew before, every body can judge, what a petulant
caevil it was for him to engage in, and how much he has amended this matter.
Stephen's having examples was but accidental, and if the Doctor do prove he
have, he overthrowes his cause, and only puts me in mind of what I professed I
did not remember. If I said it was not possible for the Dr. to know more then
Rob. Stephen would tell him; I had not only for the ground of my assertion, his
being taken (...); but I also knew that being asked by a Gentleman (a familiar
acquaintance of his) not much younger then my self, (if so young) how he might
attain to the knowledge of the accurateness of the Latin tongue, he put him
over to the reading of Rob. Stephen. the same Gentleman told me that he
wondered how he pretended to the world so much Philolegy, since in a long time
of converse with him, he could not perceive any excellency of his that way. He
tells me he finds my quotations in Charles Stephens Thesaurus Ciceronianus:
might not I as well tell him the texes he cites in his Latin or English
sermons, are to be (...)

5.
I Am at last arrived at the main controvesse, Adducis malleum here is a
tolerable case so (...), that it is spoiled. A heavy work (this is the Doctors
(...)) about (...) is mall^^m! And the Doctor in the management of it so
deporteth himself, as (...) once did in a quarrel about the learned men the
A^^^pagi, the defense whereof found work not only for the Gentlemen of the
Assembly, but that excellent pen of Mr. Mil^^n! The Grammar quarrel was carried
on with as much animosity, as if the rise or downfall of (...)-presbytery
depended upon that Sol^cisme: nay, some have said that the (...) are justly
expulsed Ox^n. for being so absurd as to think that those divines (of which our
Doctor was a Scribe) which could make rules of faith, could break those of
Grammar. The Doctor being de^^ended from these infallible (...), it is not to
be wondered that he will not acknowledge, but defend himself (and which is
more) as (...) did Althou^h I need no more th^n to transcribe or (...) the
reader to the letter for his satisfaction, wherein all the question is so
stated that any person of intellectual beyond D^cto Willis may receive a^^
account of the case, and of the rule of (...) grace ((...) He that reads a book
(...) not his Author the rule of elegance, but himself, and follows not the
other but his own ph^nsy, and of the validity of Mr. Heb's exception: yet
because I perceive our Mathematician not to be so perspicacious as others are,
I must crave leave to accommodate my self to his capacity, the letter being not
intended for satisfying him, but one of more ingenuitie. The preliminaries are
all couched in the letter, which yet I shall now more largely set down, and
then subjoyn the text itself.

It is to be noted that I make Tully the sole rule of Latin elegance, and other
Authors no further useful (as to language) then they speak conformably to him.
Vnus Cicero omnium elegantissime est locutus: pure quidem (...) quod est in
maxima laudis part poncudum; press alii, ac prope (...) in brevitate divini
extit crunt. Sed unus Cicero laudem omium ac virtutes in se transl^^^ omnes,
pure hic in loco, nec mulus cum res postulat, agit; in uno au^em illo
illustrande orationis genere DEUS est, verborum delectum eloquenciae originem
Caesar esse di^ebat: atqui alii SEMPER aliquid habent, quod aut prorsus
damnetur, aut saltem aeque non probetur, vetustatem alii nimis dedita opera
consectantur, in agrestibus ac parum cultis sese alii magis oblectant, alii
alio vitio laborant, UNUS Cicero tantum abest ut tate quicquam in se admiseret,
ut messem illam nobis, atque verborum omnium copiam omnem perpurgarit, qui
NIHIL in sermonem, quod non Romanum oleret, quod ab aetatis suae (...) atque
dignitate quicquam abhorreret, quod omni derique splendore non elucesceret,
prorsus intertextuit.

I shall not engage at present in a defense of the imitation of Tully: that the
Latin tongue is to be gained by imitation and converse with Authors, is
confessed: that not the imitation of any single author, nor the framing of a
new style out of the reading of many, or all, promiscuously, is to be preferred
before the bare imitation of Cicero (quod non tam hominis quam eloquentiae
nomen est!) This has been asserted with sufficient advantage to the cause by
Cortesius against Politian, Bembus against Picus M^andula; Riccius, Doletus,
etc. against Erasmus, whose dialogue entitled Ciceromanus did so disgust the
learned of that age, that he was more declaimed against for that insolent and
malicious piece, then any other work of his; he found that it was more facile
to decry the Popa^y, then Tully; he found his reputation as to all manner of
learning so lost thorough the publishing of that Pamphlet, that there was no
possibility to regain his esteem but by a recantation, which he did, professing
himself redress in gratiam cum Cicerone.

Now for what is conformable to Tully's style, I do not leave to the Umpirage
of LILLIES Grammar, nor yet to the determination of Nizolius or Charles
Stephen's Ciceronian dictionaries, nor Doletus commentaries, or Schorus, or
Riccius, nor any other of that kind. He that would be a competent judge of
elegance, must be thorough-paced in Tully, and have weighed attentively his
words, phrases, periods, the (...) of the one, the choice and use of the other:
In order to the latter, I expect either that the same phrase be produced, or
some other of the same nature and kind, which may be equivalent. But the
Doctor must pardon me, that School (whither he removed the case:) very wisely!
For he knew nothing of the customs there, for that is the true construction of
those his words, what belong; to the (...) Westminster School I do not so well
know, as perhaps this (...)) and in his Prosopopaeia has been as happy as the
Scotch painter, who being requested to paint London, drew Edenborough; which
did not tend to the disgrace of the (...), but painter:) that School never
permitted me to argue a genere ad genus, from the Metaphorical use of the word,
to the proper use of the same. Nor to conclude from the use of the Simple verb,
the use of the compound: nor from the use of one or more compounds in a certain
sense, to the using of another in the same manner. It being a way of reasoning
from possibilities to reali^ies, from the imaginary use of the word at some
time, to the real use of it in the best and (...) times: in which manner of
arguings though the divines of late have much pleased themselves, and
especially the Doctor in his thesis; yet I cannot approve it in them, or allow
it in him. These things being premised, (which any body might have observed in
the extract, which was sent to a person of understanding, however it came into
Doctor Wallis's hands!) It is evident that whatever the Doctor has produced of
Adducere febrem, sitim, fastidium, rem in iudicium, discrimen, periculum^
controversiam, (...) angustiam, locum, statum, ordin^m, ad manus, ad
concordiam; vitam (...) extremum. (Which are all or most of what he has
alleged in adduco) are impertinent: the question being concerning local
transportation. Again, it is clear, that whatever he has alleged out of
deduco, reduco, educo, perduce, produco, traduce, abduco, obduco, duco, amount
not to a full proof of the case in hand, were they as significant as the
Doctor would have the credulous reader to believe him in verbo sacerdotis!

Another thing the Doctor should have considered, that I having fixed my rule
of elegance otherwise, I am not to be refuted out of Pliny, Farro, Columell^,
etc. If I allege any author of that stamp, it is a valid argument ad (...),
where Doctor Wa^lis is concerned; because he makes use of them as the rule of
speech: but against me the procedure is as foolish, as if I should measure by
the ^ard, and the Doctor mete with an Ell. The difference is about principles,
not inferences, and therefore the Doctor should either have disputed what I
took for a principle, and he did not; or else not have entermed^ed. But the
Doctor is a professor of Mathematics, and not Logic; I would fain know
whether this be any part of Logistica Speciosa? Or the new Analysis? If I were
to write of Physic, Husbandry, etc. I should not doubt to supply Tully's
defect of terms out of those kind of Authors, yet I should not make use of
their expressions further then they are vocabula ^rtis. If the Doctor had
considered his quotations, he must either fall into a gross paralogisme ex
particularibus, or tell us that whatsoever the drag-net of Authors (ancient and
antic, Poets and prosaick writers) has drawn down, and tendered to us in
gross, prawn, Crabfish and Lobster, Seaweed, shells, shrubs, unpicked,
ungarbled, this is the RVLE of Elegance. Otherwise his reason is no more then
this, There are some expressions in Varro, Colnmella, Pliny, etc. which are
passably elegant: Therefore this of mine is such. Though it be not in terminis,
nor by any thing equivalent, to be found there, for ought either he, or I know.

What esteem is to be attributed to Terence, Scaliger tells concerns facere
contumelians: decere vobis: in his defense of Tully: and as for (...) who
fitteth his Latin to his persons, I shall never account his virnil^^er dicta
(eduxi ^erum, abduxi clavens) for elegancies when any body hereafter shall use
them, but Dr. Wallis. His argument from them, must be ex particularibus. I
desire my allegations out of Scaliger and Doletus abovementioned may be
considered in this place.

As for the Poets, if he mean they shall stand for any thing, he must argue out
of them, as he did out of the others, or else every man will be apt to throw
dirt in his face; for, can any man defend all that ever Virgil, Horace, Ovid,
etc. have said, I will not say to be good inprose (though that allone is to the
question,) but in modern verse something in order to this has been said before
out of Stephen, and it is infinite that might be objected against the three. I
profess I am not disposed to converse in Meter; yet I shall then do it, when
our judicious professor, shall versifie in Tullye's prose; or that he may
better it* in Tully's poetry. Ovid is said to be such a master of elegancies,
that he has been charactered as one in quo nullus est verborum de^ectus, nulla
ad solutam or ationem accomodata locutio. I shall not disparage Virgil, nor
Horace (whose non been pro multo li^ertas venditur auro, may vie with cum
impet^ percurrere, I think) they are all Canendi non loquendi exempla. As for
his urging passages out of Mr. Hobs against him it is vain, as if he had urged
them against me. Mr. Hobs intended to inform our judgments, not to write what
either should be an example or rule of elegance: he desired to be understood,
to be read for improvement of knowledge, not the advancement of the Latin
language: I believe the Doctor does think better of his own English, then Mr.
Hobs of his Latin; yet I hope neither he, nor any else, will write thereby. The
Doctor therefore did herein, (as in other things) mistake himself, when he used
that for his defense of elegance, which the other never intended for such, yet
Mr. Hobs might justly. (upon contest) except against the Doctors (...), though
he had used them himself, because he did not pretend to, nor aver them to be
imbells, ^ments of speech, however significant enough.

Having entertained you with these preliminaties, I see no reason yet why I
should transcribe all that the Doctor has said in his due correction p. 15, 16
17, 18, 19, 20, 21. I desire to give my thoughts as little diversion as may be,
from other studies: and yet I would not omit any thing unanswered that this
(...) Pygmy has objected. I shall therefore next subjoyn the letter, and then
survey his scattered exceptions, as they fall in: And (which is more) show in
the close that I can allow of the Doctors conclusion, however he has wrang^ed
about the premises.

Now follows his ridiculous Apology for adducis malleum, ut ^ccidas muscam, the
occasion why he made use of that proverb (of his own phrasing) was this. Mr.
Hobs had taken a great deal of pains to demonstrate what Doctor Wallis thought
he could have proved in short: upon this occasion he objects, add^cis malleum,
ut ^ccidas muscam, which I shall suppose he intended to English thus, you bring
a beetle to kill a ^^re. Mr. Hobs retorted, that add^co was not used in that
sense. The Doctor vindicates himself thus, duco, deduco, reduco perduco,
preduco, etc. signify strange things, erg^, adduco may be used in that sense:
which is a most ridiculous kind of arguing, where we are but to take up our
language from others, and not to coin new phrases. It is not the Grammar that
shall secure the Doctor, nor wea^ Analogies, where elegance comes in con^est.
To justify his expression he must have showed it usu tritum, or alleged the
Authority of some Author of great note for it. I have not the leisure to
examine his impertinent citations about those other compounds, nor yet of the
simple verb duco; nay, to justify his saying he has not brought one parallel
example. He talks indeed very high, that duco (with its compounds) is a word of
a large signification, and amongst the rest to bring, fetch, carry, etc. is so
exceeding frequent in all Authors (Plantus, Terence, Tully, Cas^^, Tacitus,
Pliny, Seneca, Virgil, Herace, Ovid, Clandia^, etc. that he must needs be
either maliciously blind, or a very stranger to the Latin tongue that does not
know it, or can have the face to deny it. I read what will be my doom for not
allowing his Latin; yet I must profess I dare secure the Doctor for having read
all Authors, notwithstanding his assertion, and I hope he will do the like for
me. And for those which he has read, had he brought no better proofs then
these, he had, I am sure, been whipped soundly in Westminster School for his
impudence, as well as ignorance by the learned master thereof at present. But I
dare further affirm, that the Doctor has not read in this point any, but only
consulted with Robert Stephen's thesa^^us linguae Latinae, whence he has
borrowed his allegations in adduco; and for the other I had not so much idle
time, as to compare them. And left the fact might be discovered he has
sophisticated those Authors whence Stephen cites the expressions, and imposed
upon them others. If it be not so, or that the Doctor could not write it right
when the copy was right before him; let him tell me where he did ever read in
Plautus, adducta res in fastidium. I find the whole sentence in Plinye's
preface to Vespasian (out of whom in the precedent paragraph he cites it) about
the middle: (...) vero it^ ^^ltis prodita; ut in fastidium sint adducta, which
is the very example Stephanus uses, although he does premise his adducta res
in fastidium. Let the Doctor tell where he ever did read in Horace Ov^ (...)
etc. adducunt taedium vini. Did he (or any else, with the interposition of an,
etc.) make Trochaicks? I say, and Stephanus says so too, that is in Pliny lib.
13. c. 15. near the end; the whole sentence runs thus, Ebriosis Ova noctuae per
triduum data in vino, tadium ejus adducunt. I doubt not but these are^ the
places he aimed at, although he disguised and minced the Quotations: if they be
not, I should be glad to a^gment my Stephanus with his additions.

These things premised, I come to consider the Doctors proofs: Res e^ adducta
est: adducta vita in extremum: adductares in fastidium: rem ad mucrones et
manus adducere: contracta res et adducta in angustum: res ad concordiam adduci
po^est: in ordinem adducere: adducere febres, filim, taedium vini: (all in
Robert Stephen) betwixt which and adducere malleum, what a vast difference
there is, I leave them to umpier qui teretes et retigioso^ nacti sunt aures,
who are the competent judges of elegancy, and only cast in the verdict of one
or two, who are in any place (where the purity of the Latin tongue flourishes)
of great esteem. Loosaeus in his Scopae linguae Latinae, ad purgendum li^guam a
barba^ie, etc. (would any think that the Doctors elegant expression, frequent
in all Authors, which none but the malicious or ignorant can deny, should
suffer so contumelious an expurgation?) Loosaeus (I say) has these words:
Adferre plerique minus attenti utuntur pro adducere. Quod Plautus, in Pseudole,
insigni exemple notat. C. Attulihunc. P. Quid attulisti? C. Adduxi volui
dicere. P. Quis iftic est? C. C^arinus. Satisigitur admonet discriminis inter
ducere, reducere, ad ^ucere, et abducere, quae de persona; et far, adferre,
etc. quae de re dicuntur. Idem. Dometium, quem ego novi, adduce; argentum non
moror quin feres. Cavendum igitur est ne vulgi more, (let the Doctor mark this,
and know that this author is authentic amongst the Cicerenians) adserre de
persona dicamus, sed adducere; licet et hoc de certis quibusdam rebus non
inepte dicatur. In this last clause he says as much as Mr. Hobs says, and
what the Doctor proves: but that ever the Doctor brought any example which
might resemble adducis mallcum, is denied: for I have mentioned already his
allegations every one of adduco. Another Author (a ^it Antagonist for the
elegant Doctor) is the farrag^ so didorum verborum, joined with the Epitome of
L. Valla's elegancies. He says, Accerse, adduc Pet^um, latin dicitur pro eo
quod pueri dicunt, adfer Petrum. And this may suffice to justify Mr. Hobs's
exception, who proceeded no further then this Author, to tell the Doctor that
adduco was used of animals. But the Doctor replies, this signification is true,
but so may the other be also. I answer, if it never have been used so, it
cannot be so, for we cannot coin new Latin words, no more then French, or
Spanish, that are foreigners. A man may lawfully add some words to a language
that is in vogue, because use may in time naturalize them: but we must leave a
dead language such as we find it in the monuments of antiquity, and it is
sacrilege to meddle with it. Mr. Hobs was upon the Negative, and not to
disprove the contrary opinion. If the Doctor would be believed, he must prove
it by some example (which is all the proo^e of elegancy) and till he do so, not
to believe him, it is sufficient not to have cause. But Doctor Wallis, why ^ot
adduco for a hammer, as well as a tree? I answer yes, equally for either, and
yet for neither: did ever any body go about to mock his Readers thus solemnly?
I do not find (to my best remembrance) any example of it in Stephen, and the
Doctor is not wiser then his book; if there be, it is strange the Doctor should
omit the only pertinent example, and trouble us with such impertinencies for
three or four pages. In Stephen there are adducere habenas, and adducere lorum,
but in a different sense. It is not impossible I may guess at the Doctors aim:
In Tully de net d^or. (as I remember) there is this passage: Quum a^tem ille
(...), in agro (...) adductum, ut remissus esset, in or^lum suum recidisse,
where it signifies nothing else but to be ^ent, bowed, or pulled back, and in
that sense the (...) of a clock, (...) that of a smith when he fetches his
str^ak, may be said (...). And this I conceive the Doctor would have us in the
close think to have been his meaning; else what does he drive at in these
words? When you have done the best you can, you will not be able to find
better words then adducere malleum and reducere, to signify the two contrary
motions of the hammer, the one when you strike with it, (excellently (...)!)
the other when you take it back (better and better^) What to do? To fetch
another (...). If any can believe that this was his meaning, I shall justify
his Latin, but must leave it to him to prove it sense. If he intended no more,
why did he go about to defend the other meaning, and never meddle with this?
Which yet might have been proved by this one example of mine? May not therefore
his own saying be justly retorted upon him in this case; Adducts malleum,
uteccidas mus^em?

The Doctor deals very intricately in his reply, and seems therefore to have
been more confused, that so he might make the better flourish, and that might
pass for a sufficient answer, which was not in the least manner applicable to
the case in hand. Once for all I shall acquaint the reader with a piece of the
Doctors Rhetoric* wherein he does much please himself: It is a bad imitation
of what was excellently used by H^rte^^^, whose custom it was Accusarienis
membra divider^, et in digitis suit singulas parts causae constituere; et
deinde unumquodque transige^e, expedire, absolvere. In imitation of him the
Doctor seems not to have we^ghed the whole context of what I had said, but
(divine like) takes all the frame into pieces, and then examines each parcel
and fragment, as if it were a sentence integrate, absolute, independent of what
precedes or follows. As for example, the Pantomine thus flourishes it. Enter
Mr. Hobs's second, what says he? He says it is ridiculous. That is easy
said: but saying so does not make it so. This is his reflection upon that
passage of mine: Now follows his ridiculous Apology for adducis malleum. It is
true I wrote an Epistle, not a treatise, to a person of ingenuity, not to the
Doctor, and therefore I did rather hint then urge the proofs of my assertion:
But any body now may see the vanity of his exception, that shall but read these
prelimma^ies which I have here inserted, not as a ^^w addition, but by way of
explanation of what was evidently contained in the text before. I did as little
dream the Doctor should have ever been a judge of that letter, as he prophecy
by his argumentum ad h^minem, that some Ciceronian should attacque him* If I
had thought so I should have accommodated my self to him. If the Doctor when be
u^locked the Kings cabinet of letters, did use him as he has abused me, both
in gloss and text, it is very possible that he may have done that cause to
which I was still a friend, good service, but I cannot commend the means.

Such another reflection is that of his p. 21. To say there is a vast
difference, and not to tell us where that difference lies, are but empty words.
This is his an^ma^^ersion upon that saying of mine, these things premised
(which are now explained in the preliminaries) I come to consider the Doctors
proofs. Res eo adducta est: addecta vita in ext^emum, etc. betwixt which and
adducere malleum* wh^^ a vast difference there is, I leave then to umpier qui
teretes et religiosus nacti su^^ ours, who are the competent judges of
elegancie. I suppose by this time the difference in clear, and the (...) from
the use of the figurative significa ion to the proper one evin^ed: which they
to whose arhitrement ^referred my self could not miss (...) our little man (but
great Critic) could not perceive it. I did not mean by (...) aures, a (...)
head, (which name I take to suit with those that engaged in an holy war, for my
part I adhered to the Parliament and the liberty of the subject) nor did I ever
intend that any should construe Aures religiosas for Presbyterians. This kind
of elocution discovers it self in all the Doctors controversal writing, but yet
with a different success then did attend Horte^sius, who where he could not
decei^e, he did delight: our Doctor I believe ha^^^ been as far from pleasing
as he has been from imposing upon them. In his ^xamen of Locsaeus and C^ecius,
in his discourse of (...) and else where he does lie at this open ward: but
that I shall consider in its peculiar place.

I must now invert the order of what the Doctor has delivered, and so apply
them to the parts of the letter: his first exception is.

Dr. W. repl. He observes further that in some of the allegations we have not
the word add^^^, but the simple verb duco, or some other compound: And
therefore that all these are impertinent: because (forsooth) it is not Granmar,
or Analogy that will secure us. But we are still besides the business. The
original charge is against duco; and against adduco but as one of the train,
not as a stragler from the rest of his company. And therefore the allegations
are all pertinent: and that Analogy is ag^^^d argument in the case, we shall
hear from his own witness by and by.

To this there needs no further reply, then that the reader consider my
preliminary positions only that the Doctor may learn hereafter to read with
more attention I shall here give him so much light out of the text of the
letter as may be requisite for to rectify him, though it may be impertinent as
to others. The question is concerning elegance; proof of elegance is to be
deduced from the use in such ages as Latin eloquence did most flourish in:
since that age cannot be recalled, our recourse must be to such authors as
wrote then: many of those are lost, others corrupted, if therefore we would
determine any thing of Elegancy we must apply our selves to those whom the
general vogue of all ages has represented unto us as the most pure and
eloquent writers; and such are only Caesar and Tully: whose expressions we may
acqui^sce in and safely conclude it good, because found in their wooks. If we
find ought in any other author, (whose authority is suspected) we can only say
possibly it may have been used, but neither their using it, nor any conformity
with Grammar can secure us, so that I did justly say that where we are but to
take up our language from others, the Doctors arguing was ridiculous: neither
could Grammar, or Analogies secure him, where elegance comes in contest. That
the original charge lies against Duco is false; for the ground of contest was
adduco: and that the case of the simple and compound verb may be different, is
a preliminary hypothesis: so that his allegations are not pertinent, if they
were significative: my witnesses lay not that Analogy in any case is a good
argument: and how any argument can be good in one case and not in another
(caeteris paribus) I understand not.

His second exception runs thus.

Dr. W. He takes notice (for so he was told in the Catalogue of Errata) that
page 19. l. 23. Horace is put for Pliny, (that you may see how quick sighted he
is, to spi^ a fault when it is showed him) and that line 7. there is Plau. for
Plin. (which had I discovered it in time, had been put amongst the Errata with
the rest) which was the printer's mistake, etc. Then he observes, that these
allegations are to be found in Robert Stephen's Thesaurus linguae Latinae: that
is, some of them, (or else 'twere a wonder) but I hope he will not undertake so
all. If he find those of page 20. 21. (and those are a competent number) in
Robert Stephen, he has good luck. And it is more then I know if all the rest be
there. But he supposes that I consulted with Stephen. It is very like so, if I
had had him at hand, (he would have thought me a fool if I had not) and did not he
consult with him also for cum, and tanquam, (yes and with Charles Stephen too)
and with Henry Stephen for (...) Nay he dares affirm, he says, that I have not
read in this point any, but only consulted with him. He Is a valiant man, you
see. He dares affirm, what I durst not, who have best reason to know. Perhaps
he means, I did not read over all those Authors to make that collection. (No
truly: I would not have him think I was such a fool.) Or that for what places I
sound in Stephen, I did not consult the original authors. (For some, I did; for
some I did not: for I did not think it worth the while, the controversy did
not deserve it. Much less to examine all the C^iticks and Commentators upon
them, as it seems Mr. Hobs would have had me^ but what is all this to the
purpose? I never took Robert Stephen to be a wee^er of the Latin tongue, as if
all that he had gathered were but to be thrown away; or that a phrase were ever
the worse for being found in him. We have so much of the flourish, that I am
afraid we shall have little substance.

I answer, that in the Catalogue of Errata Plin. is substituted for Hor. But
that I was any more told that, then that Plau. was put for Plin. I hope the
reader will believe me: I neither read his thoughts, nor his table of Errata: I
thought he could not commit any, who will not allow any in another: it was but
a lesson of his own teaching, that I did then read him: it will require some
grains of allowance, for him to verify that ever I was showed that catalogue:
and if it were not showed me, I am as quick-sighted as another, notwithstanding
that I might have seen it, if I had looked in the latter end. But henceforth I
shall look for Synod-man's Errata, and if I do not find all at the end of
their books, I will imagine they have some mental reserves, which they did
intend to put in, but that they did not discover them timely enough. But have
not I as good reason, to judge of him, as he of Mr. H^bs, that the printer did
print it so, why? Because the Author had written it so. Thus much for that,
where I must take his word, for his thoughts; as he must mine, for not having
seen his Errata. As for his having plundered Stephen, I never saw such a
justification in my life, as our Ambi s^^^ister Hortensius mak^s. I said he had
borrowed h^s quotations in adduco, out of Robert Stephen: and for the rest, I
had not time to compare them. He makes me to speak as if they were only found
there: whereas I saw him transcribe them, he hopes I will not undertake for
all: I never said I would; I told you I had compared only adduco* he says I
have good lu^k, if I find those of p^g. 20. 21. (and those are a competent
number) in Rob^rt Stephen. I am of the wi^ty-pos^s mind: for the quotations of
those pages, are all out of Mr. Hebs him^^lf, and I may then hope to find them
in Stephen, when he fi^des the universal Church and it is Catholic ministers
(distinct from those called by the people,) in Scripture. He says, that I
suppose he consulted with Stephen: It is no groundless supp^sal, both as to the
quotations in this first, and second pamphlet: I SAW HIM: The sentence
following is somewhat dubious, by reason of a parenthesiss (...) in wrong: I
think he says, It is very likely so (that he had consulted with him) if he had
had him at hand. It is very probable the Doctor has not one of his own, and
that made him repa^r to the public library to transcribe him. But does not
this carry an import as if he had never looked in him? It is a pretty piece of
(...)! I pr^^ess I had never I ^ked there, had he not reminded me thereof, and
so I resolved to see the bottom of his dea^^ng, which now I see depends not
upon converse with good books, but with (...), ordinary dictionaries and
Grammers, as his div^nity (...) no higher then the (...) Catechism. As for
what follows, I never intended to put him to (...) into the several authors on
purpose for this controversy, but I hoped he would no^ allege that place, of
the import and sense, whereof he was not asce^tained by au^cy^* Some places he
did examine, some he did not. It is an easy thing for to reply, that h^^ had
done well not to have alleged such places as he could not be certain they made
for him, because he had not considered them i^ their relation to foregoing or
ensuing passages. He had also done well to have pitched upon those he was sure
of, and for the credit of the rest have referred us to Stephen. But then the
reputation of having read so many Authors, with such acc^rateness as not to
understand them (which was all Mr. Hobs I suppose did require of him; whether
he were beholden to a commentatour or his own invention for the intelligence,
it mattered not) this had been Cost, and we had not known what a Brav^ in
Critics two universities and the assembly of divines had produced. But he
further excepts, that my exception is not to the purpose. If he mean that it
does not prejudice the allegations, I grant it: but my purpose then was to
expose the Paracritick, and I believe he will not doubt that what I said did
conduce to this purpose. He never took Stephen for a weeder of the Latin
tongue. No indeed, not I neither; he gives a good account of words and phrases
poetical, oratorical, historical, etc. so that the book is a good book, and of
good use, when the reader does not so far mistake as to seek for the defense of
oratory amongst his Poeticks: so that I allow Stephen, as I would approve of
the Physic garden, wherein there are simples applicable to several uses; but I
look upon the Doctor as a Quack salver or Mount bank in his defense.

And now I leave any body to compare what of flourish has been produced, I
come now to examine his little substance.

I shall herein desire that my preliminary positions be not forgotten: And that
it may be remembered how in the conduct of the letter, I had two things in hand,
one thing to consider the controversy as stated betwixt the two combatants,
Mr. Hobs and Dr. Wallis: and another to consider it in it self, and according
to the truth. You heard my judgment in the preliminaries; to excuse Mr. Hobs I
cited Loosae^^s and Cro^ius, (I might have cited others, but that I thought
them the most fit counterpose to the Doctor) who say as much as he: and if that
they be impertinent, you see Mr. Hobs has company: though for my part I doubt
not but that they intended to restrain adduco to persons, and affero to things:
Neither would they have been put off by the opposition he makes: no more then
Laurentius Valla, whose elegancies have still a great esteem, though
Mancinellus has endeavored to disgrace them by better quotations then our
Doctor brings: against all which it is a sufficient defense, that Valla did
make only Quintilian (for he he made Tully truckle under him) for his rule, and
by that rule he did condemn those barbarismes, which others had made use of.
But I shall tell you more! Amongst those Authors that say duco is used of
animals, and affero of inanimates, there is one Henry Stephen (my name^ sake)
in his These. Gr. L. having observed how (...) was used of inanimates (...),
etc. concludes, at LATINI dona aut vestes aut au^um Adducere NON dicerent, sed
adferre, aut advehere. But he is a School-Author, and there I read him all
over, but Loosaeus at the (...) He says they both are two School-books: It may
be so, but I do not know what Schools in England use them. That they are in
request in the Iesui^s-Schools, that Iacobus ^ontanus and others have commended
them, I know: But is it an exception against Loosaeus and Crocius, that they
are School-books? And shall it not be against Lilly? Are Stephen, Calepine,
Tho^asius, Rider, I^nius Nomen^lator, the less School-books, because they are
in a bigger ^^lume? Or are not those books that are taught in Schools, the
best? I thought so; but it may be the Doctor has been educated otherwise. He
charges me over and over ^^in for reading Animals instead of bodies animate:
and then substituting as equivalent to both, that of persons. To the first I
answer, that if it be a slip, it was occasioned through have: and not
voluntary, with an intention of stating the question otherwise: Again, the
discourse being concerning language, which has had always it is rise from
^ulgar conceptions, I am not to be blamed for using their thoughts, who were to
justify ^e in the use of the word: Now I doubt not but that the most of men
understand Ani^als and bodies^ animate as Synonyma: and what they are in my
philosophy, I shall tell him when he tells us his opinion of rare-faction, or
of those in whose power it shall be to call those vice-pastores, vice-domini,
vicars of Christ which he speaks of in his thesis. As for my substituting of
persons instead of both, I think I do not do it, but do truly cite Loosaeus. I
suppose that the dispute is not to be ended in Metaphysics; I take persona in
this vulgar sense, id est persona, quantum ad ipsam actionem, quod in se habet
quod possit agere, vel non agere. And so there will not be any great
difference: whether you call them bodies animate, animals, or persons. In the
place, Loosaeus does not say, that Analogy is a good argument, which the Doctor
said he did. His example is of adduce, and what he infers, sa^is igitur admonet
discriminis inter ducere, Reducere, adducere, abducere, quae de persona; et
Far, Adferre, etc. quae de re dicuntur. Are as full proof as was required
for Mr. Hobs, and as much as needed to be inferred: and I was not to maintain
my own opinion there, as is expressly said in the Letter: which if it did not
reach the controversy as now stated, yet it was full proof as to what was
intended. And for my judgment it stands irrefragably balanced upon those
preliminary suppositions. But the Doctor says how he does argue by way of
Analogy from one particular compound (which is adduco) to the rest: but he does
not say, that the arguing is good, as my preliminaries evince it not to be: and
therefore the Doctor was out, in arguing from the fact to the equitableness or
validity of the thing. I am not to defend him, I did not allege him to that
purpose: and the Doctors Hortensian discourse about adsere, is nothing to the
matter, but that he would be silent. I say my observation reaches no further
then that adduco is used of persons, or of things considered as persons; and
affero of things, and even of persons if they be not considered (...) such:
thus lecti^^ ferri, adferri, referri, is sometimes good of men: but then, they
are not considered as any way contributing to their local transportation. And
thus may be solved all the Doctors allegations out of Tully, and Loosaeus be
never concerned in it; who meant I doubt not the same that I do now say: of
figurative motions I give no rule, but regulate my self by use. Loosaeus,
Crocius, etc. will be no more moved at his quotations of Virgil, (for horses
and such animals are considered as persons) then I, unless it had been to
laughter. And that Epiphonema of his, Now would any think that Virgils elegant
expression should suffer so contumelious an expurgation, has little of weight
in it, for the question is about elegance, and he does but beg the (...), which
in citing Tully I do no^. What validity the citations of Poets have, I have
already discussed, and more may be collected out of the passages of Scaliger
and Dole^: and that Broom sweeps clean, if the other do not. And thus I have
done with that tedious discourse about Loosaeus, and have given a just account
of every thing relating thereto, (as I think) yet amongst such an hotch-potch
of talk, something may have passed not as unanswerable, but as unanswered. It
is false that I oblige to the Pedantry of proving each phrase to a syllable;
how far I require the testimony of old authors, I have so far explicated as is
necessary. He says some that are no fools take a greater latitude, and would
rather forfeit that title of Ciceronianus (...), (it is Erasmus his Echo; who you
see could jumble languages to make a clinch) then be so confined. He does not
tell us that in so doing they did wisely: and therefore notwithstanding this;
other that are no fools, may have committed folly. That (...) would as well
Echo to Presbyterianus, Walli^ianus, Puteanus, Salernitanus, as Ciceronianus.
And for the (...) clinch in the Echo it is more excusable, then otherwise,
(...) the Doctor uses it: and Ianus Deusa has pestered us with a poem operose
nug^x, (...) the same quality: it is well that all men's actions are not
examples. But to proceed that adduco to bring, in reference to local physical
transportation, it is to be used of men I deny: but in reference to a moral
transportation it may. That adduco to bend, o^ how, (wherein there is not a
local transportation of the whole) may be used of any thing capable of such a
motion, I do grant. Thus adducere ramum may be good: adducere cortin^m,
adducere ostium, adducere nervum: all pass. And so does the Doctors piece of
Latin, ad incudem adducendo m^^lleum, (et abducendo, is without example)
ite^umque reducendo, cum labor operoso et molesto admodum, and iteratis
ictibus, si muscam fo^te feriant, occident proculdubio. Thus you see I can
allow him adducere ramos, to bend, but not to bring boughs, nor yet trees: It
is a pretty allegation out of Ovid, Metam. l. 8. near the end. -- adductaque
funibus arbor. Which does not at all satisfy me as to a tree, and I wonder how
he could ever hope it. The case is this: Erisichthon had been long in hewing
down an old oak, which being now ready to fall, he tied ropes to the top of
it, and so pulled it down. Persequitur scelus ille suum, labefactaque tandem
Ictibus innumeris, adductaque funibus arb^r
Corruit, et multam prostravit pondere sylvam.
This does not convince me for a local transportation at all: And now I have
done with his proofs of Adduco, which are all impertinently pertinent: The
other proofs are taken off by my preliminaries, and were so by the letter
before, but the Doctor would not see that: yet that it may be observable how
secure the Doctor is in his quotations; I desire not only that adductaque
funibus arbor, be taken notice of; but also Atque satas alio vidi traducere
messes. Virg. Eclog. 8.

This allegation occurs no less then twice, and then the second time it has
this annotation, i. e. transfer. But these are plants only, not trees! I know
not where to hope that the Doctor has weighed his citations, if not here: yet
I cannot think he understood it, for it signifies no more here then does Ducite
ab urbe domum mea carmina, ducite Daphnim.

The ancients did imagine corn might be conveyed by Magic out of one field
into another: a case whereof we have in Plin. l. 18. c. 6. and in the twelve
tables the Law was, Ne pelliciunto alienas segetes excantando: Pellicere and
excantare being the Pontifical words, (which make it clear that the messes were
considered personally,) how can any one wonder if Virgil made use of traducere,
to express the same act? Seeing he does very frequently either retain or allude
to those vocabula artis: as in porricere exta, oss^^gere, etc. Another place
out of Tully near the end of his oration for Quinctius, is; Quod ibidem recte
custodire poterunt, id ibidem e^stodiant: quod non poterunt, id A^ferre et
Abducere licebit. These words though twice inculcated by the Doctor are not
Tullies, but the Praetor's, whose edicts are of no more validity for Latin,
then our own law-discourses are for English. The case, again, is this: by this
edict all the goods, chattels, etc. were consigned over to Quinctiu's
adversary, together with the rest of his estate: with this proviso, that what
they could not keep safe upon the place, that they might carry away: from
whence if any will argue that adduco is used of things, it is as gross a
paralogisme, as if because the Greeks did express the depopulation and
despoiling of a country by (...), and the Latins by agere and far: therefore
(...) was used of pots and pipkins, and (...) of cattle.

But I have now done with this point, there being no disagreement betwixt us as
to the using of the hammer, but fetching it: Adduco when it signifies to fetch,
or bring signifies it in a Moral sense, and so is appropriated to persons, or
things considered personally; and therefore the Doctor was out (notwithstanding
his question whether an hammer be a person? Where the sense is different,) when
he used Adduci^ milleum for to bring by a local transportation an hammer. As
for the signification of duc^, which he says Mr. Hobs and I were ignorant of;
and with a rela^ion and proof whereof he troubles us for some pages: I would
have him know I was not ignorant of it, but declined it as impertinent, since I
did not regulate my ^atin by reason, but custom: and had long since concluded
with Tully, usum l^quendi populo relinquere, scienti^m mihi reservare. I knew
of the promiscuous use of words, and how the significations of words were
altered and changed in popular discourses, it is no wonder then if we did not
miss of what we should have blushed to object. I wish him more discretion in
his choice and use of Authors hereafter: and not to bring nullities.

I observe that he does several times correct Stephen in this piece, and in
this discourse; yet I noted above, that he seemed to disown him (if I had had
him) the truth is Robert Stephen does often err in his citation of Authors,
and sometimes in the thing it self that is cited. And in this case I cannot
think of the Doctor but I remember what Fran^is^us Floridus Sabinus relates of
D^letu^, that having stolen his commentaries de lingu^ Latina out of Robert
Stephen and others, he braved it as if they h^d been his own collections: but
in the controversy betwixt him and Bayfius (or Charles Stephen) he defends his
mistake in Remul^us, thus: At Robertus Stephanus antea ^rat reprehendendus, qui
in dictionario sus Remulum pro Scapha posuerat. Recte quidem, (says Floridus)
sed tu quum ad ejusmodi defensionem cenfugis, et te furti alligas, (ut est res)
et cum Roberte Stephan^ e^rare pulcherrimum putas. And afterward he shows how
Doletus had followed Stephen in his miscit^tion of Pliny for Vlpian. Hircius
for Caesar. etc.

And now let the Reader judge of that clause wherewith the Doctor shuts up his
whole discourse concerning adduco.

The reader may hereby easily discern, how little these scriblers do understand
either of the agreement or difference of fero and duco, or the true Emphasis of
either.

I hope we know that duco and fero were not written with the same letters; and
as for the true Emphasis, (not that which was in use formerly) it is to be
sought for in Tully, and Caesar, in which who are the better versed, or who has
approved himself the scribler, let the reader judge.

6.
AFter so long a discourse concerning nothing, and so much Latin, to little
purpose, we come to Greek, wherein the Doctor has gained this repute that
having outdone all others that pretend to Criticismes in Latin, he has in his
Greek gone beyond himself: So of that all the Critics known in Lumber-story
none has surpassed Doctor Wallis for Latin, except Doctor Wallis in Greek. The
Epistoler having done Doctor Wallis no wrong, I shall abbreviate the
controversy, by falling immediately upon the text of the Letter, which runs
thus.

LL. I am now come to the main controversy about Empusa: the Doctor says
nothing in defense of h^s qui^ble, nor gives any reason why he jumbled
languages to make a silly clinch, which will not pass for wit either at Oxford,
or at Cambridge, no, no^ at Westminster.

It seems he had derived Empusa from (...) and (...). and said it was a kind
of Hobgobling that h^pped upon one leg: and hence it was that the boy's play
(fox come out of thy hole) now adays in use, came to be called Empusa. I
suppose he means Ludus Empusa. This derivation he would have to be good, and
that we may know his reading (though he has scarce consulted any of the
Authors) he says Mr. Hobs did laugh at it, until some body told him it was in
the Scholiast of Aristophanes, (as good a Critic as Mr. Hobs) Eustathius,
Erasinus, Caelius Rhodiginus, Stephanus, Scapula and Calepine. But sure he does
not think to escape so. To begin with the last, Calepine does indeed say, uno
incedit pede, unde et nomen. But he is Modern, and I do not see why his
Authority should outweigh mine, if his Authors reasons do not. He re^ers to
Erasu us and Rh^diginus. Erasi^us in the adage Proteo mutabilior, has these
word of Empusa. Narrant autem uno videri pede, (this is not to hop) unde et
nomen inditum putant, (...). He does not testify his approbation of the
derivat on at all, only lets you know what conject^ral Etymologies ( unde nomen
inditum putant) some have given before him. And does any body think that Doctor
Harmar was the first which began to show his wit (or solly) in Etymologizing
words? Caelius Rhodiginus does not own the derivation, only says, Nominis
ratio est, ut placet Eustathio, quia uno incedit pede; (is this to hop?) Sed
nec desunt qui alterum interpreten^ur habere aeneum pedem, and inde appellatam
Empusam: quod in Batrachis Aristophanes expressit. And then he recites the
interpretation that ^ristophanes's Scholiast does give upon the text, of which
by and by. If any credit be to be attributed to this allegation, his last
thoughts are opposite to Dr. Wallis; and Empusa must be so called, not because
she h^pped upon one leg, but because she had but one, the other being br^ss.
But for the former derivation he refers to Eustathius.

As to Eustathius, I do easily conjecture that the reader does believe, that
the Dr. (for Rhodiginus was an understanding and well-read man) does mean
Eustathius upon Homer, for that is the book of most repute, his other pieces
being no way considerable either for bulk or esteem. But it is not that book,
nor yet his History of Ismenias, but his notes upon the 725. verse of Dionysius
(...). The Poet had said of the stone I^spis, that it was (...).

Upon which Eustathius thus remarks: (...) (forte (...) Steph.) (...). This
testimony does not prove any thing of hopping, and as to the derivation, I
cannot but say that Eustathius had too much of the Grammarian in him, and this
is not the first time, neither in this book, nor elsewhere, wherein he has
trifled. It is observable out of the place that there were more Empusa's then
one, as indeed the name is applied by several men to any kind of frightful
phantasme, and so it is used by several Authors; and for so much as phantasmes
are various, according as the persons affrighted have been severally educated,
etc. every man did impose this name upon his own apprehensions; and so Empusa
came to be so diversified in the fantasies of men, as they were fearful of
different apparitions, for who will believe that she was not apprehended as
having four legs when she appeared in the form of a Cow, dog, etc. in which
shapes she was at that time phansied by Bacchus and his man, as well as that of
(...)? I do not find that she appeared in any shape but such as made use of
legs in going, whence I imagine that Empusa might be opposite to the (...),
which appellation was anciently fixed upon the Gods (propitious) upon a twofold
account. First, for that they were usually affigiated as having no feet: which
leads me on to a discourse, which however digressive, is neither impertinent
now, nor will be otherwise disuseful.

The ancients, being sensible how the deity was not to be comprehended, and so
not to be effigiated; and yet withal finding how prone men were to entertain
themselves with corporeal thoughts of God, they did at first erect not statues
to him, but Symbolical Columns, which might have that use as to reminde them
that there was a God, and yet take them off from those low apprehensions of h^s
A^thropomorphisme, or other such like sh^pe. And hence the Herma had their
original. Materia illis lign^a, v^l (...): f^rma ta^is, faciem Mercurii
praefer^bant, desin^bant non in pedes, sed epis^ytium (...), (...). Vnde et
Pa^sen^as (...). Thus Dr. (...) in his excellent notes upon Longinu^. They
raised their Hermae in form of a square pillar, pilae quadratae, cui caput
imp^nebant: quo niminum (...) ^mnes emnem human arum firmitatem, quam
quadrqngulas figura not^t. a capite cert^ pendere. These heads were of various
and different forms, according to the different intent of the designer. Cum
enim perfectam dei (...). Hinostatus Veneris in hortis, (...), in (...) Venerem
Uraniam, (...) convenientibus ad (...) This is the observation of G^r^pius
(...): and may be illust^ted from those passages (amongst others) out of (...)
(...) in Messen^ and in his description of Megalopolis, (...). Such were the
statues of Pallas E^gane, Hercules, Lucina, etc. as any body may inform himself
out of (...) his Arcadica. Clement Alexan frinus in h^s Paraenesis adgent.
says that the ancients had no statue-Gods, but the Scythians did worship their
Acina^^^, and the Persians (...). The same writer says in his (...) l. 2. That
the Israelites were lead by a pillar of fire, (...). And that Thras^bulus when
he went to restore the exiles had a pillar of fire that did conduct him
thorough waves [otherwise] impassable* in a dark winters night, and disappeared
there where ^ood the altar (...) whence he infers (...). (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...) (...) (...),
(...)
(...).
(...) (...)
(...)
Upon which Hervetus does thus comment. (...) apud Graecos pro Statu^ et pro
column^ dici^ur Genes. 1. 19. uxor Lothi dicitur versa in statuam salis, ita
enim habet nostra [^ulgaris] versio; sed Septuaginta ve^terunt, (...). Quod
iter nostra habet, lapis iste quem erexi in titulum, vocabitur domus dei.
Genes. c. 28. in Gra^^ apud 70. est, (...), etc. id est, lapis quem erexi in
statuam, etc. est autem utrobique idem v^cabulum, and in Hebraeo, et in Graeco:
illic (...), Latin titulus, id quod in alicujus honorem erigitur. And then
concludes, Lapis ergo qui erige^atur in dei honorem, et quo significabatur
Deus, et Latin erat titulus, et Graece (...), et Latina Columna. But to return
to what I was speaking of at first. (...) was not the name of a particular
deity at first, but of such a compages, (...), which represented God
symbolically, according to this or that attribute with accessional distinctions
and diversifications: all were (...), but tho Greeks in process of time added
the (...), which were not used (that I know) by the Egyptians, from whom these
kind of statutes had their original: I shall not go about to prove that they
gave the same shame of (...) to them: yet they had their Hermes Trismegistus,
which was such a column (with several inscriptions of note: which was usual in
old time; neither did they only serve to acquaint people with the way, but to
instruct them in morality, and actions of daily concernment, and also in
natural philosophy) the ignorance whereof has begot several discourses
concerning the life and books of that imaginary Trismegistus, who should give
rise to the Hertnetick philosophy. Of the same nature were the Roman Gods until
the time of Tarquinius superbus: such was their Terminus, Ianus, Vertumnus:
(which whether they were several I shall not dispute now:) and though Ianus had
two faces, (and sometimes four, as at Falisci) yet it was but one Column.
Delubra sic dicta, qued ligna essent delibrata, id est decorticata, more
veterum in simulacris deorum: some such thing is either expressly delivered, or
hinted by Asconius Padianus in Verrina.

Secondly they were called (...), for that they did not walk, but rather swim,
if I may so express that non gradiuntur, sed fluunt; which is the assertion of
all the commentatours I have ever seen upon that verse of Virgil,

Et vera incessu patuit dea. -- This whole discourse may be much illustrated
from a passage in Heliodor. Aethiop. l. 3. Sect. 12, 13. Calasiris told C^^non
that the Gods Apollo and Diana did appear unto him, (...) replied, (...) (...);
upon this the old priest answered, that both Gods and Demons, when they appear
to men may be discovered by the curious observer, both in that they never shut
their eyes, (...) (...). (...)
(...).
(...). Fa^naby upon the place in Virgil observes that Deo^um incessus est
contin^^s et aequalis, non dim^tis pedibus, neque transpositis, (...).
Cornelius S^^revelius in the new Leyden notes, says, Antiquissim^ quaeque
(...) sim^la^hra, quod observant viri magni, erant (...), ^iique ipsi non
gradiuntur, sed fluunt. How their most ancient statues were ef^^giated, has
been above explained at large: those that were afterward erected became more
polished, being not only faced, but so carved as to represent the upper parts
of a man complete, (if they were made after that way) but without hands; their
nether parts were not divided into legs, but one continued piece, lessening
continu^lly, (...) it came to the base, which carried a little of the
representation of a foot in some; in others, not at all. Thus I have seen (...)
represented, and Orus in ancient sculpture; and others are said to have been
expressed in the same shape. The Giants contrariwise were represented with the
nether parts as of a serpents tail wound up in circles; whence they were called
angripetes: The symbolical meaning of the one and other being, that the Gods
did what they pleased directly, and by way of absolute power, but the wicked by
crooked and indirect means. To this way of picturing the Gods, did that heathen
Emperor allude, who meeting with a man impotent and bedridden, cut off his feet
by the ankles, and pared off the flesh on the inside of his legs, saying, that
since he was not able to walk like a man, be would make him stand like a God.
Yet after that they came to be represented in the ^ull shape of creatures.

These things being prem^sed, I suppose it easy for the intelligent Reader to
find out the true Etymology of Emp^sa, quasi (...), from going on her feet,
whereas the other Gods and Demons had a different gate. If any can dislike this
deduction, and think her so named from (...), whereas she always went upon two
legs (if her shape permitted it) though she might draw the other after her, as
a man does a wooden leg: I say if any, notwithstanding what has been said, can
join issue with the Doctor, my reply shall be, (...). Now as to the words of
Aristophanes upon which the Scholiast descants, they are these: speaking of an
Appartion strangely shaped, sometimes like a Camel, sometimes like an (...), a
beautiful woman, a d^g, etc. Bacchus tells his man, (...). The Scholiast
hereupon tells us that Empusa was (...). And this is all that is material in
the Scholiast, except that he adds by the by, that (...), is all one with the
leg of an Ass.

This text and Scholiast is that to which all the Authors he names, and more,
do refer; and is all the ground can be alleged for that derivation of (...)
quasi (...).

I come now to Stephen, who in his Index, and in the word (...), gives us the
derivation of (...). (...) gradior, incedo, ( not to (...)) sic Suid^ (...)
dictam (...), quod uno incedat pede, quas^ (...), alterum enim pedem (...)
nabet. But neither Stephen, not any else (except Sui^^^ whom the Hypercritical
Doctor had not seen, who has a multitude of abs^rd deductions, as (...), a
can^le, (...) etc. and Eustathius, whose authority is alleviated before) no not
the Scholiast of Aristophanes (that better Critic then Mr. Hobs!) does relate
the Etymology as their own. Nay, there is not one says that Emp^sa HOPPED upon
one leg, which is to be proved out of them. The great Etymological dictionary
deriveth it (...), to hinder, let, etc. Its apparition being a token of ill
luck. But as to the Doctors deduction, it says, (...). It does only se^m so:
And it is strange that (...) should not alter only its aspiration, but change
its (...) into (...), which I can hardly believe admittable in Greek, lest
there should be no difference betwixt its Derivatives and those of (...) the
proposition.

When I consider the Gods, their Herm^, in Greece, how they stand in the
streets at every turning, being only capitati obelisci, how they were placed in
their highways, fields, etc. I can think that the origin of this name may have
been thus. Some fearful person going out in the dark, phantafied to himself an
Apparition, which his companion might tell him was nothing but one of the
several Herm^, that stood upon every turn; against this the other might reply,
that they were nothing but squared Columns with head^ set upon them, but this
new phari^sme (...), this is none of those (...), those trunci Hermae, this
has feet. Or it may have had its name (...), sive (...), because that after
they had attributed complete shapes, and feet to their Gods, yet they did not
then suppose them to go accordingly as w^ go, moving first one foot, and then
another. This is the observation of Dionys. Petavius in his notes upon the
second oration of Julian. Apost. referring to that verse in Homer, speaking of
Neptune, (...). Crediderunt veteres Deos non (...), ac promovendo pedes
ingredi, sed continuo velut impetu fluere. But they did imagine then to move
(...); and therefore our Night-walker being surprised with an unexpected
phantasme, cries out in a different expression from that of Aeneas in Virgil,
incessu patuit Cacodamon: it goes upon feet after the usual manner, and so is
no good, propitious Apollo, (...), but ill-aboding (...), for which
apprehension of his some body might fitly coin this name of (...). It may also
possibly have been deduced from (...), so that (...) be reduced in time to the
single term of Empusa. Nor do I much doubt, but that those who are conversant
in languages, and know how that several expressions are often jumbled together
to make up one word upon such like cases, will think this a very probable
origination. I believe then that Mr. Hob's friend did never tell him that that
absurd derivation was to be found in the Authors alleged by the Doctor. But
that the Doctor took this occasion to let us know how many books there are to
which he pretends, but will not certainly profess that he has read or looked
upon in this case. Empusa was no hopping phantasme; it had two legs and went
upon both, as a man may upon a wooden leg. (...) was also a name for La^^e, and
such was that which Ma^ippus should have married, which I suppose did neither
hop, nor go upon one leg, for then he might easily have discovered it. Philost.
l. 4. de ^it. Apollon. Vx^^ (...), where (...) a^e Synonyma, and (...) seems to
me not a partiti^^ of species but individuals.

But Mr. Hobs did not except against the derivation (although he might justly;
derivations made after the imposition of names carry more of fancy then
truth; and the Doctor is not excused for asserting what others barely rel^te,
none approve.) But asked him where, that is, in what Authors, he read that
Boy's play to be so called? To which question the Doctor (to show his reading,
and the good Authors he is conversant in) replies, In Iunius's Nomenclator,
Rider, and Thomas's Dictionaries, sufficient Authors in such a business. It is
to be remembered that the trial now is in Westminster School, and amongst
Ciceronians, neither whereof will allow those to be sufficient Authors of any
Latin word. Alas! They are but vo^abularies: and if they bring no Author for
their allegation, all that may be allowed them is, that by way of allusion our
modern play may be called Ludus Empusae: but that it is so called, we must
expect till some Author do give it that name. These are so good Authors, that I
have not either of them in my library; but I have taken the pains to seek out
and consult, first Rider; I looked in him, who was only Author of the English
dictionary, and I could find no such thing. It Is true, in the Latin dictionary
which is joined with Rider, but made by Holyoke; (O that the Doctor would but
mark!) In the appendix of obsolete words, there is Empusae ludus, vid.
Ascoliasmus: and there I find Ascoliasmus, Ludus Empusae, fox to thy hole. The
same is in Thomasius, who refers to Iunius in like manner. But could the Doctor
think the word obsolete, when the play is still in fashion? Or does he think
this play so ancient, as to have had a name that thorough length of time should
grow obsolete? As for Iunius's interpretation of Empusa, it is this, Empusa,
spectrum quod se infalicibus ingerit, uno pede ingrediens. Had the Doctor ever
read him, he would have quoted him for his derivation of Empusa, I suppose. In
Ascholiasmus he says, Ascoliasmus, Ludus Empusae, fit ubi altero pede in aero
librato, unico subsiliunt, (...), Pollux. Almanice, Hinctelen. Belgice, Op cen
been springhen. Hinctepincten Flandris. But what it is in English, he does not
tell, although he does in other places often. What the Doctor can pick out of
the Dutch I know not: but if that do not justify him, as I think it does not,
he has wronged Iunius, and grossly imposed upon his Readers.

But to clear up this controversy further, I cannot be persuaded the Doctor
ever looked upon Iunius, for if he had, I am confident according to his wonted
accurateness, he would have cited Pollux's onomasticon into the bargain, for
Iunius refers to him, and I shall set down his words, that so the reader may
see what Ascoliasmus was, and all the Doctors Authors say Ludus Empusae and
Ascoliasmus were one and the same thing. Iul Pollux lib. 9. c. 7. (...) (old
editions read it as does Iunius, (...). So that Ascoliasmus, and consequently
their Ludus Empusae, was a certain sport which consisted in hopping, whether it
were by striving who could hop furthest, or whether only one did pursue the
rest hopping, and they fled before him on both legs, which game he was to
continue till he had caught one of his fellows; or whether it did consist in
the boys striving who could hop longest; or lastly whether it did consist in
hopping upon a certain bladder, which being blown up and well oyled over, was
placed upon the ground for them to hop upon, that so the unctuous bladder might
slip from under them, and give them a fall. And this is all that Pollux holds
forth. Now of all these ways there is none that has any thing of resemblance
with our Fex to thy hole; but the second: and yet in its description of his
issuing out of a certain kennel, nor of his having a glove tied at the end of a
string wherewith to reach the play fellows, nor of their being accommodated
with the like habiliments, etc. wherein the play consists as well as in
hopping. Any of them notwithstanding might be called Ludus Empusae, but not in
any sort fox to thy hole. So that the Doctor and his Authors are out; imposing
that upon Iunius, (and Pollux) which he never said. And thus much may suffice
as to this point: I shall only add out of M^urfius's Ludi Graeci, that Ascolia
were (not Ludus Empusae, but) Bacchi Sacra, and he quotes Aristophanes's
Scholiasts in Pluto. (...). As also Hesychius; (...).

But I could have told the Doctor where he might have read of Empusa as being
the name of a certain sport or game, and that is, in Turnebus adv. lib. 27. c.
33. There he speaks of several games mentioned by Iastinian in his Code, at the
latter end of the third book; one of which he takes to be named Empusa. Adding
withal, that the other are games it is indisputable: only Empusa in lite et
caus^ erit, quod nemo nobis facil^ assensurus sit Ludum esse, cum constet
spectrum quoddam fuisse formas vary mutans. Sed quid vetat eo nomine Ludum
fuisse? Ce^te ad vestigia vitiatae scripturae quam proxime accedit. Yet he only
is satisfied in this conjecture, till some body else shall produce a better.
And now what shall I say? Was not Turnebus as good a Critic and of as great
reading as Doctor Wallis? Who had read over Pollux, and yet is afraid that no
body will believe Empusa to have been a game; and all he alleges for it is
Quid vetat? Truly all I shall say, and to conclude this business, is, that he
had read over an infinity of books, yet had not had the happiness which our
Doctor had, to consult with Iunius's Nomenclator, Thomasius and Rider's
dictionary, Authors sufficient in such a case.

Thus I have put my self to the pains of transcribing the whole text of the
letter, that so the question as stated by me, and impugned by him, might be
more fully represented to the readers eye. I have altered some things in it,
besides the digressive addition, which my haste caused me either to quit, or
express otherwise then I should have done upon meditation: they are such
passages to which the Doctor has excepted nothing; I come now to examine what
he has said against my discourse. It is confessed on both sides that there
were more Empusa's then one: that the name (...) applied by several men to any
kind of frightful phantasme; every man (according as they had been severally
educated imposing this name upon his own apprehensions. That the word Hobgoblin
is of the like use and extent, I do not know; I have not read in the Chronicles
of King Oberon, no the annals of Fairy Knights, that ever our Hob-goblins did
hop on one leg, or had the one foot of an Ass, the other of brass. And
therefore my assertion must he contradictory to the Doctors (who having made up
some general concessions of mine, in^ers) And therefore by ALL signs and
tokens, Empusa was an Hob-goblin. I say not by All signs, for ought that I
know, or the Doctor informs us. As for the Clinch it is not for me to determine
what was in the Doctors intentions: he that considers the Doctors humor, and
way of writing, will think it probable he intended one: you heard how he
defended it by the example of Erasmus: take the whole passage as it is in the
Elenchus, and judge as you please of it.

Erat Empusa -- pedibus altero aeneo, altero asinino, sed utut (uti videtur)
duos pede^ habuerit, non tamen nisi uno incedebat, ut aliunde si opus sit
discas (unde LIQVET ex eorum lemurum numero fuisse quas nos Anglice dicimus
Hob-goblins) nempe ab (...) et (...) factum est nomen illud: unde et puerorum
ludus ille, Empusae ludus dictus (Anglice Fox, fox, come out of your hole,
hoc est, heus vulpes de fovea prodi) (...) sortitur, (...) paer ille qui vulpes
audit, altero suspenso pede, altero sulsult^^^ iu^^dit, (quod est Auglic^ to
hop) a reliquis flagellandus s^ ut^oqu^ terram tetigerit.

Mr. Hobs in his lessons could not but take notice of this passage, and reflect
upon it to this purpose. When a stranger shall read this, and hoping to find
therein some witty conceit, shall with much ado have gotten it interpreted and
explained to him, what will he think of our Doctors of Divinity at Oxford, that
will take so much pains, as to go out of the language they set forth in, for so
ridiculous a purpose? You will say it is a pretty Paronom^sia. How you call it
there I know not, but it is commonly called here a Clinch; and such a one, as
is to insipid for a boy of twelve years old, and very unfit for the sanctity of
a Minister, and the gravity of a Doctor of Divinity.

Because I have to do with a Divine, I shall branch out the Doctors text into
these following propositions: First, then Empusa had two feet. Secondly, though
she had two (...) nisi uno incedebat, that is, she bepped upon one: for he
wonders in his last reply how the Epistoler can understand it otherwise then of
hopping: and that it comes from (...) and (...). Thirdly, Inde liquet, it is
therefore ( viz. because she hopped) clear that El^^sa was such a spectre as we
in English call an Hob-goblin. Fifthly, that by Analogy to this hopping El^^,
the boys play of fox to thy hole has its name of Ludus Empusa. His last reply
furnishes me with some other additional observations. As that, of any affinity
betwixt Hob-goblin and Mr. Hobs, he spoke not a word: and therefore is not
responsible for any jest, or clinch. Very good! Does any man that makes
clinches, write in the margin, this is a clinch: I allude to this, or that?
Does he not suppose his reader so intelligent as to know the other name, (viz.
Hobs) upon which arises a jingle? If it be not certain, it is very suspicious
that he intended that way; for otherwise I do not see how pertinent that
discourse is to the matter, if it be not a reflection of the person against whom
he writ. Another thing is, that he does nor say that Hobs, or Hob goblin came
from Hop.) This is such another equiv^cation as the former. He does not say it!
But it seems to be employed. Yet who said he did? Who charged him with being out
in his English deduction? Not Mr. Hobs! Not the Epistoler! They quarrelled with
him for making Empusa to come from (...) and (...), not for deriving Hob-goblin
from hop. But this would give occasion for a digression that might seem
extraordinary to the vulgar; and instruct the Richardsons, Dicksons, etc. with
a new answer to that old (...), Who gave you that name? The whole is a pretty
impertinency: I am not so far his adversary as to deny him commendations where
he does well. This has something of ordinary reading in it, (if he had penned
nothing but this and his English Grammar, I should have reserved a civil esteem
for him, as to the study of our native language, how mean thoughts soever I
might have had of his Latin and Greek) It is an account of what Minshew told us
long ago, with an inconsiderable addition out of Vers^egan. He (Minshew) told
us, that Hob-goblin was quasi Rob-goblin, etc. and that Goblin in English was
G. Gobelin: which our linguist explained (to show how good he is at dec^phering
characters, especially having the key in Minshew, that G. stood for Gallice)
Gobelin is a French word, used in the same sense (I suppose: for Minshew does
not speak clear!) with them, that Hob-goblin is with us, for any frightful
phantasme. His illustrations are obvious; and the case had been more clear, if
he had only said that Rob has been used for Robert, and likewise Ob and Hob
(the which are now used in the North) wherein the change is no greater then is
that of H^dge for Roger. I mean as to sound. So in the Latin tongue he who is
called by Tully Rab^^ius, is by Priscian called Habonius, where he cites the
same passage out of the Verrin^, as Gra^er observes. He might have said, much
more for the instruction of h^s edversary in his right name: and that namesake
of his Hob-goblin. He might have showed how Gob has been used for God, and
then the diminutive Goblin or Gobling, had been as easily found out as Goslin,
or Gosling, etc. He might have showed that it has been used to affright
children therewith, as if it would devour them, to goble and to eat hastily,
being all one. Or he might have made it Greek as well as French, and deduced it
from (...), that wanton Devil, for such sometimes is the merry Hob; or from
Ops, or (...), the goddess of the woods, Diana. Thomasius (his all-sufficient
Author!) thinks it came from the Guibellines. But it may be it had become the
late Scribe to the Sanbedrin, to have resolved the case by the Assemblies
annotations; and derived the English from the Hebrew (...) Ob, which with them
was the name of a Python, or Damon that spoke with a shril voice out of
sepulchers and subterraneous Cavernes. So Saal says, 1 Samuel 28. 7. seek out a
woman that has an (...) Ob. And there was a woman at Endor that had an (...)
Ob, or familiar spirit. So isa. 19. 3. They shall seek to them that have
familiar spirits, (...), that is, (...), the Obs; and a Kings 21. 6. Manasseb
restored (...) the Obs, and wizzards. The Greek, as Seldom and others cite it,
has (...). That is, he did neglect the true God, and would not attribute
effects to him, that is, glorify him in his actings, but ascribed them to Obs,
and found out such persons as did not only attest from hearsay, but pretend a
knowledge and familiarity with those Obs: this may be intimated in the Greek
(...), though perhaps the Hebrew be not so significant. Yea, the Doctor might
have argued out of Scripture, that it was not lawful to converse with Mr. Hobs,
since Obs were prohibited of old: such reasonings are found in his thesis.
There may also have been some allusion to that incessus deorum of which I spoke
before: and our Countrymen may have attributed to their Gods one gate, and to
their Goblins another made up of going and hopping, which is to Hoble along,
and thence might have come Hob-goblins, i. e. Hoble-goblins.

In the second place, the Doctor observes that though Empusa had many shapes,
yes Mr. Hobs ( viz. in that excellent Epistle to the Earl of Devon-shire
prefixed to his natural philosophy) confines himself to one, which had indeed
two legs, the one of brass, the other of an Ass, (as not only Mr. Hobs but
Aristophanes informs us) Mr. Hobs had no reason to mention any more at the
present, and I do not see why he should have been impertinent, to instruct the
Doctor the better.

But the Doctor says, Empusa went but upon one leg, as appears by the places
(though I should have cited more:) from whence, as most agree, it took the name.

It is very considerable that the Doctor is never so far exhausted, but that
there are more allegations (equally pertinent!) which he could have cited. So
he told us in tanquam; so in adduco: though the same motives that made him blot
his copy, so much as he did before it was printed, might have induced him to
omit a number of passages which he suffered to remain. Again I would fain know,
what those places are, from whence most agree, it took the name. I told him in
the letter, that all depended upon that one place of Aristophanes. I would he
had been so willing, as I presume he is able (for he knew of more) to inform
me: for all the Authors he named refer to this one; but as I must condole the
loss Philology received when the Doctor silenced his pen as to those additional
quotations, ( viz. out of Doctor Davis, Thomas, Iunius and Holyoke, from
whence, that is, from the passages in whom Empusa took her name) so I fear the
reader will question my candor, that will not trust the Doctor in those places
which he had particularly consulted, and sound them to express or imply the
same derivation. The first place he here insists on is at large set down in the
letter: but that the Doctor may learn how it is not enough to consult a place,
unless he understand it, I shall put my self and the reader to the trouble of a
review -- (...) (...). I do not find that the Doctor sees more in the text
then I do; but his notes infer more. What? That she went upon one leg only,
though she had two. I have wiped my eyes, and yet I cannot discover so much in
the words: and what appears to him, appears not to me, (...). Who could
construe this, she went upon one leg? She did but seem (so that the Doctors
appear, must be favorably expounded,) (...), to stradle with the ene leg: it
is such an expression, that if I were to character a person that went upon a
wooden leg, I should not deliver my self in other words whereby to express his
ga^e: for it is not possible, that he who has ^o use of his joints so, as to
bend his knee, should go otherwise then (...), and the walking of one on
stilts, is (...) here to me imports intervallum. But this exposition of the
verb (...) being new, and it may be no example of it (not only in this sense,
but v^i^e) I account it a veni^l slip of the Doctors, whose videtur quod sic,
is easily put off with a videtur quod non, and that not only (...), the
description of Empusa in Aristophaces, but according to Eustathius: of his
reading of whom I a little a doubt; for that hand which blamed me for misciting
Columella, which was but a slip of the transcriber at London, (for I had
compared the place) could not have pardoned the misallegation of the verse in
Dio^ysius. But I had furnished the Doctor cut of Stephen with a different
reading, (...) for (...), which though it be but a conjectural reading of
Stephens, and not the text (nor received into the text) of Eustathius, whose
mind is controverted, yet I shall give him leave to help himself therewith if
he can. (...), to t^ead firm and sure with one foot: which she must do with her
asse's foot, that other of brass being no more capable of sure footing, then a
treen or wooden leg is; and any body will grant me that it is easier to throw
such cripples down, then those that have (...). I cannot raise up Stephen to
ask his meaning, but the whole text suits excellently well with what I have
said. Empusa did seem to tread firmly upon the one leg, (but limped, or halied,
downright on the other) whence she had the name of Empusa, as if we should say
^ne-leg, that is, having the one leg of an animal, the other being of brass,
nempe (...).Thus the Doctors words and mine do not differ, but our meanings
vary, when they come to be explained in English; I do not think that Eustathius
intended to say Empusa, id est, one-leg, was so called because she had two: I
do not think that she laid her brass-leg over the left shoulder when she
walked. I do take that to be the reason why she did (...), because she was
(...), and if the Geometry professor will not grant me this, I believe the
natural philosopher will. The next place is that of the Scholiast of
Aristophanes, (...). I would the Doctor had Englished this passage, I profess I
do not find the Doctors assertion couched in these words: It had been but
fairly done, if after my excepting against this Scholiastical inference in the
letter, he had informed me in his rejoinder, of somewhat more then I had
expressed therein, (...), what is the English of that? Some say, but what is
that to the Scholiast of Aristophanes? Does he say it? Does he allow of it? He
neither approvers, nor disallows, but relates it. If then his allegation amount
to any proof of what the Doctor says, he must lay down this maxim,
whatsoever any man reports as from another man, (without the least
interposition of his own judgment) that he allows of, and asserts. But so does
this Scholiast in the derivation of Empusa: Ergo. Doctor Wallis was scribe to
the Assembly. But further I am of the mind that the Sholiast does disallow it:
for he does not say that it is so, but that some say so, which is tantamount to
a disallowa^ce thereof, at least to a doubting of the veritableness thereof.
(...) and derive it quasi (...), one leg, because it did once, whilome, so
appear, as to have the one leg of an asle, and the other of brass, which is to
have the use of one leg; as he whose nerve is cut, may have lost the use of an
arm, yet not so totally, as not to be able to lean on it, or upon some
occasions to benefit himself thereby. Thus (...), do not infer the total disuse
of any servant, and H^ratius is said to have been troubled (...), which was but
a debility in them, yet such as rendered him unserviceable in war, or active
employments in peace. I could almost divine, that he (the Scholiast) seems to
expose the Etymologists for their whimsies in derivations, that should offer to
deduce Empusa from (...), because she went once upon one leg, (...) whereas
there are as many inducements for my Etymology, as there are shapes she
appeared in, (which is fair odds against the Doctor) and one more which is the
analogy with the ancient statues of the Gods, and the solving of the Authors
sense, which cannot be justified if the Doctors mind hold; for to what use
should that other leg seem? It is further dubitable, whether that same brazen
leg were continuous with the body of Empusa, or no? If not, then she had but
one leg, and so was (when in that shape) (...), yet went upon two, viz. the
additional one of brass also. Now that it was, or could be continuous, is a
question to be disputed in another place: there being natural philosophers that
assert, that when a bough withers upon the tree, it cease to be a part, and
to be continuous therewith. But take it either way, it is but aequivoce
membrum, and thefore t^ough I should grant that she were called Empusa from
(...), yet it would not follow that she went upon one only, or hopped. As for
his additional of what he could have cited, I shall tell him of better; that is
of Favorinus, who transcribed the Scholiast, and Hesychius: (besides Suides and
Etymologus, whom I advised him of in the letter) Hesychius says, (...), etc.
(...), which makes as much for him as does the Scholiast of Aristophanes, who
bringing neither reason to confirm the others saying, nor avouching it himself,
ought not to be any way entitled to the owning of it.

Then follows a digression about Riders dictionary: it was a matter of no great
moment at first, but now I shall consider what our Divine says about it. I
might have added another book, which I do not know how to call; should I call
it Rider's dictionary? you would tell me Holyoke made part of it; should I call
it Holyoke's, others would say Doctor Gray, if I mistake not, and some others
with him, have added almost as much to Holyoke, as he had done to Rider, and
digested the whole anew, and the book so digested is that I mean: whether what
I cited out of it were in Holyoke's edition or not, I do not know, otherwise
then that I am now told, it is in an appendix of obsolete words; the book that
I intended to cite, has it in the body of the dictionarium Etymologicum: yet I
was loath to call it Dr. Grays dictionary, for fear it should not be understood
what book I meant. I cited it then by the name of Rider, because the first
title page intitles the book to him, and the rest as an appendix.

He knows not how to call it! Why does not he? Is not the name prefixed
HOLYOKES dictionary? Will he not allow it the benefit that other books have, to
be called by the names they bear? Did any, at least did ever the vogue of the
people ascribe that piece to Dr. Gray? Was it ever printed under his, or any
other name? Because I censured you for calling it by a wrong name, should I
therefore have quarrelled with you if you had named it aright? I did not charge
you for citing Scapule, where the work was Stephens? I did not. I let Calepine
pass, though his be all stolen, and has received now as great an accessional,
as ever Holyokes did. Doletus ex Marii Nizolii, Bartholomei Riccii, Roberti
Stephani lucubrationibus, tam pulchros Latinae linguae commentarios, pane
Ambrosio Calepino par, insulsissime compilavit. Yet if he had cited the one, as
he did the other, I should not have found fault with him. And so in the citing
of any book I allow it what title the frontispice gives it: for then I know and
so may others, know where to look, and not blunder as I did betwixt Rider and
Holyoke: and at last I met with a different edition from what the Doctor used.
Mine had the obsolete words by themselves, his had received them all into the
body of the book, but with an Asterisme or obeliske, thus. ^ Empusa Ludus Iun.
vide Ascoliasmus; and there it is Ascoliasmus Iun. Grec. Empusae ludus, fox to
thy hole. What the meaning of that obeliske is I desire to show out of Holyokes
advice to the reader. Cuncta vocabula quo in probatis authoribus neutiquam sunt
reperta, et a flexione Latina aliena, obelo in front notavi. Itidemque ea
barbara quibus ob purorum defectum, necessitate coacti, utimur, eadem noa
insignivi. You see what the Doctor has gotten by pleading variety of editions;
as also, how I let Thomas and Holyoke (though it to be confessed, that where
they both agree, the latter did but transcribe the former) pass for two,
without a censure, so that the Doctor needed not have been so fearful; but that
he was sensible of his being out, yet would seem to say something. In the last
edition: Rider is but an appendix to Holyoks, so says the title page of A.
Greeks edition: but the binders do often transpose the books, which gave
occasion and opportunity to the Doctor to say the greater was added to the
lesser, and that Holyoke should perfect Rider, and so make his own work an
accessional only, whereas he assumed the other merely to complete his own.

Of his many Authorities he instances in on more, though he might have
transcribed them out of my letter: only talks idly.

But all these Authorities are nothing worth with this epistoler. Calepine is
but modern, and therefore he sees not why Calepines authority should outweigh
his own.

I am very sorry to hear the Doctor relinquish reason for bare Authority; I
confess I do not know the validity of man above man further then he must derive
from his reason: does the Doctor think there is Magic in names, so as the most
letters or syllables should prevail against the fewer? Or does he balance men
in the scales, and so take them not for intrinsique value, but weight? If so, I
believe he that shall weigh Dr. Wallis by the stone, will not give him that
respect which his own opinitivity will assume. I know not why Authority should
sway more in Philology, then Divinity: I cannot believe the whole Assembly of
Divines, nay all the Divines in Europe can outsway by their authority my single
exposition of Ephesians. 4. 10. etc. or Mat. 28. 19. etc. I said only this of
Galepine. that I did not set why his Authority should out weigh mine, if his
Authors reasons did not. The Doctor had something of the Devil in him, when he
quoted my text by halfes; and then takes occasion to charge me with
self-conceit^dness: whereas I say no more of my self, then I would of Doctor
Wallis, or the meerest idiot in the world, viz. that I know no differerence
betwixt the fool and the wise, but only reason. Yet that I may acquit my self
of Calepine, I shall add to what I already have brought against Galepine in
the case of Doletus, a further testimony of Franciscus Floridus concerning him:
Videmus post Nicolaum Perottum, omnium interpretum munus subire voluisse
Ambrosium Calepinum, illius laborum ac vigiliarum furem manifestissim^^: in
omnibus tamen maxim absurdum, cum insulso suo dictionario, in quo ne gry
quidem ^ se protulit, nist siquos ab infirmis Scriptoribus sordes collegit, qui
non minus fidei Apuleio, aut Martiano Capellae, in verborum proprietate, quam
M. Ciceroni, aut Cas^ri tribuit, etc. -- Itaque Perotti nomen auxit (...)
mediocriter, euimulta ab eruditis in reddenda verborum ratione deforuntur,
(...) Calepino vix credant, quod veterum testimoniis confirmet: et hunc
LUDIBRII, illum honoris caus^ nominare solent. And thus I free my self from
Calepine, who is a School book; and indeed of no authority further then those
precincts extend; but I forgive the Doctor for using him here whose education
had not permitted him the trial, or begot in him judgment to discover his
imperfections. As for Erasmus, Stephanus, Rhodiginus, I did not any way lessen
their esteem, because they did truly allege their authors, and so shifted off
the quarrel from themselves, as you may see at large in the letter: they did
not at all clash with me, as the reader may see, unless whatever any man
reports as from another, he may justly be impleaded as the author thereof. But
that the Doctor may see what weight Antiquity has with me, had all his Authors
without any reason or ground more then that of Aristophanes, asserted what he
would have them, I should have preferred my conjectural something, as it is now
stated, before their positive nothing: my (...), before their (...), the one
being an impertinent compound, the other a jumble.

A jumble! Does the Doctor take this for an exception? What is (...)? (...)?
(...)? Auchialus in Martial? Are not there a thousand words jumbled together in
as ill a manner as Empusa, from (...) and (...)? It is observed by Mr. Seldom
de diis Syri^prol. c. 2. that the names of Gods in their Etymologies are not
subjected to Grammar rules: Caterum tempestive meminerts Deorum nominum
deductiones ubique Grammaticis analogiae apicibus omnino olim solutas esse.
Which is evident not only from what the Pedees of Orbilius have taught us, but
also from what Plato in his Cratylus has recorded: it has been thus in all
nations, (if we may believe those who have conversed in languages:) and
questionless the strangeness and uncouthness of the word or name, was thought
to contribute much to the procuring a reverence and upholding the majesty of
the deity. I do but therefore applaud my own sentiments, when I commend that
observation of that eminent Antiquary, Fato comparatum est, ut a Grammaticorum
imperio dii sint liberi. Which single remark were a sufficient confutation of
all the Doctor has brought against me in this case: against whose derivation I
should not have brought Grammatical objections, had he produced such grounds as
I have for mine. I objected (having refuted his authors, or nullified them) It
is strange that (...) should not alter only its aspiration, but change its
(...) into (...), which I can hardly believe admittable in Greek, lest there
should be no difference betwixt its derivatives and those of (...). If the
Doctor had read this confiderately, he could not but have observed how
timorously I spoke: and had I not sufficiently evinced my own deduction, and
showed the invalidity of his grounds, I should never have cast this into the
balance; which I would have looked upon as over-weight, and not as put into
the Scales to counterpoise ought of moment on the other side. I said it was
strange: I said I could hardly believe it admittable: neither the one, nor the
other saying implied a positive denial. I have been always of that opinion,
which afterward I found to be confirmed by Seldom, and the judgment of others
not inferior to him in philology. The Doctor replies, The former of the two
(which he slighteth in comparison of the other) I confess has some appearance
of weight; yet not so much as to carry the cause: for the Etymologicus, you
see, who takes notice of it, can yet pass it over, (...), and the rest could
not be ignorant of it, yet none of them do upon that account reject it: and you
know well that the Greek does in some derivations, compositions, and otherwise
change the spirit: as in (...), etc.

I see it is not possible for the Doctor and me to agree, I confess I did
slight that objection of the change of the aspiration, not upon those trifling
cases alleged by our Pseudo-Caninius, which have nothing of parallel, and the
last whereof I do not understand; it is very likely his printer can mistake
too, and that may be in the book, which was not in the copy. I knew that even
(...) it self had altered its spirit in composition; I when a School boy did so
construe that allegation out of Menander in Suidas, (...). I will be here
before you can tell one, two, three. Which is confermable to what Stephen
renders it, viz. celeriter, and Suidas (...): though neither give the
Etymology. This I knew besides many other v^riations in compounds, which it
would be tedious to reckon up. But another thing which was most urgent with me,
was, that I knew those aspirations were of late addition, and of a much newer
standing then the common dialect, being the invention of Grammarians (I mean as
to the writing of them) upon the declining of the Grecian learning: as for the
pronunciation, it was different in several territories, that which aspirated in
one place was tenuated in another: et vice versa, so that the exception against
the non-aspiration could be of no validity, unless it could be proved that
(...) was always aspirated, and (which is more) that (...) was ^ramed in place
where that aspiration was so used: which that it was not, nor could be
universal in Greece, both natural reasons, and records make impossible, the
common dialect was an extract out of all those scattered dialects of Greece,
and had so much of Greek in it as to be (for the most part) understood every
where: as our ordinary English phrase is apprehended all over England, though
the same be differently pronounced not only as to the aspiration and
levigation, but sound of letters, and more differently written: and he that
goes to make a certain English Grammar, however he may pretend to universality,
regulates it by his own ear, use, and custom of such as he approves of, (which
is not to approve of them, but himself) and has been conversant with. Thus I
have given an account of the causes why I put no greater stress upon that
objection, which the Doctor thought to be of some importance. I come now to his
examen of what I secondly objected not as impossible, but dubious and
suspicious, and hardly (when joined with the other change of spirit) to be
believed.

Dr. W. repl. But the other upon which he puts the greatest stress, (not only
but also) is ridiculous. Could any man believe that the change of (...) into
(...) is hardly admittable in Greek? Nay, is it possible to be otherwise, when
(...) is to come immediately before (...)? Did this Paracritick ever see (...)
to come together in any Greek word whatever? Is (...) perpetually so changed
when ever any such case shall happen, because the analogy of the Greek tongue
will bear it? A very little skill in Greek would have been able to rectify
such a gross mistake. And he can never with any face pretend to be a Critic,
who does not know it. Me thinks that either Mr. Hobs or that third person
thorough whose hands this paper it seems came, might have had so much as not to
suffer such a childish business as this to pass both their hands uncorrected.
And what he adds, lest there should be no difference betwixt its derivatives
and those of (...), helps it very little, for such a conclusion is much more
allowable in Greek, then that (...) should come next together: nor would this
help it at all (if it were allowable) save only where the next letter is a
labial: for else there would be no occasion of changing (...) into (...) in
either of them. It Is well therefore if that be true that we are told, that he
has better ornaments then to be willing to go clad abroad in the habit of a
Grammarian: for if he have no better ornaments then these, he may be one of the
ragged Regiment for ought I see.

I have set down the Doctors words at large, that so you might see how (upon
slender grounds) apt he is to presume upon his puerile thoughts, and how little
he has improved his School-dictates. I have already told you how studious an
imitatour he was of that Hortensian way of examining things. I said I could
hardly believe it admi^table in Greek, that the derivatives of (...) and (...)
should have no characteristical sign or mark, whereby to distinguish those of
the one kind from the other. And I had observed the little force of the
aspiration, which had been changed not only in (...) descendants of (...), etc.
but even in (...). There remained then that (...) should be retained in the
one, and varied in the other. The Doctor after an Oraison to Laverna. -- --
Sancta Laverne,
Da mihi fallere, da sanct^mque pi^mque videri,
Noctem peccatis, et fraudibus objice nubem.
brings me in as if I had said simply, the change of (...) into (...) is hardly
admittable in Greek. And then asks, is it possible to be otherwise when (...)
and (...) come together? To this foolish intergatory. I answer that neither He,
nor I can determine of what is impossible; there being a multitude of
circumstances, the knowledge whereof at present is no less impossible for us,
then important, for such a decision, viz. the knowledge of the true sound of
(...) not only in one part but all the Contons of Greece; and that not for one
but all those ages that have passed since the rise of that language, to the
declining of that Empire, the ruin whereof brought in the knowledge of the
Greek ^ongue into Europe: yea this is not all, we are to know the (...) of such
men as were of repute, for their mistakes or phansics were authenticated by
their followers, and so spread up and down, men endeavoring to fashion their
mouths to the pronunciation, as well as pens to the writing of what they had
so great an example for. Yea the several (...) (of which you may read at large
in Maussacus's dissectatio Critica joined with his notes upon Harpocration's
dictionary) ought to be known thoroughly if you mean to determine of what was
possible, and what not, in the Greek tongue. I imagine the common dialect in
Greece (wherein the books we have are generally written, and which we call
Greek) to have been like our ordinary English in the Souther (...) parts: the
A^tick dialect to have been answerable to our London or rather Courtphrase: and
the other as well dialects, as (...), to have corresponded with the several
dialects in the North and West of England, and Idioms of other countries. The
ordinary Southern language is a mixture of the several dialects used in England
(with the remains of those which are otherwise extinct) besides an accessional
of Italian, French, Spanish, W^l^h, etc. according as the inhabitants have
conversed one with another, and with foreigners: and even this ordinary
language suffers a daily innovation and insensible change, as is evident to the
observer, thorough the variation of the ambient, novel manner of education,
customs, national and personal alliances, Du-Gardismes in Printing, and the
affectation of writers, which new-model us; nor will the Doctors English
Grammar be able to stay this imminent alteration. In like manner as the Latin
tongue was in continual change, and elegance is nothing but opinion. (I take
Latin in a large sense) There was the ordinary Latin received in Rome, Italy,
and the Roman colonies: then there was the Roman or more elegant phrase: and
besides these two there were other scattered dialects, mixtures of the Tuscan
and Oscan, the Greek, etc. there were the Patavinities, Tarentismes,
Siculismes, Africanismes, Hispanismes, and as many variations, as regions, (or
thus in a more general division, Quadruplex dicendi figura veteribus servata
Grammaticis, Prisca, Latina, Romana, miscella.) Hence Tully in his Divinatio
contra Verrem, tells Caecilius that he learned Latin not at Rome but in Sicily.
And as for the common Latin language, it did suffer daily change: in so much
that Polybius informs us, there was so great an alteration in the Latin tongue
from what it had been, that the League betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians
upon the close of the first Punick war, (which was made in the first year after
the ejectment of Kings, Iunius Brutus and Valerius Poplicola being co^suls)
could hardly in his time be interpreted or understood by the best Antiquaries:
which saying how true it was, may be collected by what Foliota produces
concerning the column erected to Duillius upon his naval victories: wherein you
have no C. but G. as Leciones, Macis^ratos: very seldom V. as pri^^^ captom:
then Exfociont for essugiunt. Ceset for gessit: the Ablatives singular end in
D. as praded, altod, marid: lastly, (besides other archaismes of less note)
Triompo for. Triumpbo, which kind of pronunciation I observed to have continued
even in Tully's time. The same Author has a Gen^a table of a less ancient
date, yet of a different style from what was used in the days of Cicero. These
things considered (if we had no testimony of the difference betwixt the old and
the common Greek,) we may conclude the variableness of it, which with the
consideration of the change it has undergone since the fall of those
Commonwealths makes it certain: (though the multitude of antiquated, and new
words, the different pronunciations, changes of the ambient, inroads and
conquests of other nations, which might be discoursed on at large,) and
consequently no man can determine of what was possible, or impossible in that
tongue, but who can give a thorough account of those things, I have named: from
which attempt I doubt not but the Doctor is as far from effecting it, though he
brave it in Critics, as I am from professing it. The Doctors question
therefore was ridiculous, (this is now not only said, but proved!) Is it
possible to be otherwise, when (...) is to come immediately before (...) Which
question implies a Negation; viz. that it is not possible for (...) to come
together, and yet (...) remain unexchanged for (...). Which proposition I have
already demonstrated to be rasb, and I shall now prove it defacto false: and
refer my self to the Ancient inscriptions in Gruterus, wherein (...) p. 1010.
p. 1037. p. 313. p. 314. p. 315. p. 316. and in several other places, where
because they are inscriptions of lesser note, and of more obscure persons, the
more ignorant Artisans might have been suspected to have erred, but that these
of greater Authority do justify their writing. Does not (...) go before (...)
in (...)? Yet you have p. 810. (...) Bioroto vitae inculpata: Scaliger upon
Eusebius. Chron. writes (...): and so does Hermannus de liter. so that you see a
very little skill in Greek would have been able to prevent this gross
Intergatory: and the persons thorough whose bands the papers came, are not to
be censured, because the Doctors School-learning made him think it a childish
business. But I did not say I thought the change of (...) into (...) hardly
admittable in Greek. The Doctor no more quotes my words, then the Devil quoted
Scripture to our Savior; by this way of citation, the whole word of God may
become the word of the Devil: like as the Censura Symboli Apostolici ad instar
censurae Parifiensi^ (which^^ to be found in Alphonsus de Vargas strateg.
Jesuit. and Raynandus de confir. libror.) shows each proposition in that Creed
to be either Heretical, Dangerous, or Scandalous. My not only but als^, is
this. It is strange, 'that (...) should not alter only its aspiration, but
change its (...) into (...), which [viz. change of both aspiration, and letter:
for the change of either in a single consideration, is admittable. I bear with
the Doctor for not understand ^g Greek, you see he is at a loss in plain
English.] I can hardly believe admittable in Greek, lest there should be no
'difference betwixt its derivatives and those of (...). And this conjecture of
mine (concerning the Grammatical Greek, from whom we received our punctation
and reading) is not very contemptible, if we mind their practice in avoiding
confusion. Dr. Waltis upon this consideration, says it helps very little. He
dust not say, nothing at all. Though I suppose he will give his words that
gloss, which others do to the text in the Gospel, He shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, He shall never come there. But since the
Doctor has so examined those reasons, upon which I placed no great stretch:
since he has charged me with being wholly unacquainted with the rudiments of
the Greek tongue, (for that I am not able to give a rational account of it, I
profess without blushing: Incerta haec si tu postules ratione certa facere.
nihilo plus agas, quam si des operam ut cum ratione insani^^,) that my skill is
but to turn over Index's and Dictionaries, (at which work the Doctor was taken
tardy; and the latter are good Authors!) I shall (...) his reasonings, in which
work if I at any time mistake his meaning, he must blame himself for speaking
so obscurely. As I understand not that query, is (...) perpetually so changed,
when ever any such case should happen, because the Analogy of the Greek tongue
will bear it? So it is possible I may misunderstand his next assertion, and yet
be far from forgery or falification. His reason why (...) and (...) cannot come
together without a change, is this. Because the next letter is a LABIAL: for
else there would be no occasion of changing (...) into (...) in either of them.
(viz. (...) and (...)) Would any man talk thus, but who had sat three years in
the Synod? Can he that decyphers characters, thus puzzle his reader in plain
English? 1. Propos. When a Labial follows (...), there is OCCASION for to
change it into (...). 2. Propos. Otherwise there is no OCCASION.


Would any man of common sense (but I have to do with a Professor!) talk thus,
where the Question is, Whether the Greek Pedants would take or omit the
OCCASION? Did I deny there was Occasion? Did not I only think, they would
neglect the Occasion, and dispense with a facility of pronunciation, (if it
were so) where different senses might more trouble the readers brain. then the
word would his tongue.

Otherwise there is no Occasion! what then? Did they always take the benefit
of proffered Occasions? Did they never vary when there was none? Try your
Hearsel Doctor (for I know you make your own fancy, and that pronunciation to
which you have been accustomed, the rule of Euphony and Cacophony) and see
whether (...), do not sound as ill as (...); I think they sound worse: I know
very well that as people have been differently educated, so they vary in their
sentiments. Aldus Manutius differs from me about what is Euphonous, and what
Cacophonous: he says Quidquid. I think quicquid sounds best, etc. Diverse men
have diverse opinions concerning a style; Bembus and Barclay, Milton (that
glory of our English nation!) and Salmasius make use of a different sort of
writing: yet who doubts but each did acquiesce in his own way as best? When the
Doctor speaks Greek (and in writing (...) or (...), may as well stand as (...)
the word is only Greek, the sound is English: and so for Latin. That the way of
writing is not to be regarded, nor upon that any great argument to be built, I
think I may well conclude, and that because that the letters may be the same in
several nations, yet the sounds different; and the impossibility of one
following another lies upon the tongue of the speaker, not the hand of the
writer. I shall illustrate this, from what Giphanius lays down in his preface
to Lucretius, upon another occasion. Qui contra libros veteres multis locis
nihil et nihilum in nil et nilum, ratione, ut ipsi putant, versuum ac
numerorum, commutant: nae illi in veterum Scriptis versantur, nec attendunt
Synaeresin veteres in metiendo duntaxat multis locis observasse, in scribendo
rarissime. Hinc multae in Plauto, Terentio, aliisque antiquis mutationes malae.
The same I say concerning writing, and speaking; but even in writing betwixt
(...) and (...) both according to the old capital, and later small letter, there
was a great affinity in configuration, (which may topically infer an affinity
in sound) as any man knows that has seen an old print in Greek, or ancient
Marble. And if I did not speak of Labials and Palatines; it was because I had
not to do with Hebrew or Welsh, etc. but Greek. And how does he know what
modulations they had of their voice, and what sound they gave to their letters?
It is clear that they had a different sound for their vowels, then we have:
Cheek and Smith were more able to disprove their old pronunciation, then
confirm that which they introduced, not as genuine, but convenient. I shall not
speak of all the letters of the Greek Alphabet, because it would be a long and
perhaps tedious work: I shall only now show that though N and M do differ very
much in the English tone, yet they did not so hereto fore neither in the Latin,
nor Greek: and that though it might be written, N, yet it was as variously
pronounced as now when we substitute another letter, according as the letter
following (of whose sound we have no certainty) did require. The present Greeks
do write (...) non (...), etc. In Hesychius I find (...) Amongst Gruter's
inscriptions. that in the temple of Aes ul^pius has (...) and elsewhere (...)
p. 313, 314. (...) p. 315, 316. in a public decree of the Ag^igentines, (...).
So (...), so (...) in a Dorick inscription: (...) for (...) in an inscription
for Menander: and (...), and an hundred the like examples might be alleged
thence, if any one would range all the words that are found in the several
inscriptions: and of these I have alleged some are written at other times
otherwise, according as we now write them. In the Marmora Arundeliana I find
(...) over and over, etc. In the decree of the Delians Mr. Seldom furnishes us
with (...) (though elsewhere it be (...)) and in another (...) In Latin Conlega
Conjux Cojux, Conjunxs, and the like, an infinity whereof might be fetched out
of Dansqui^s, Manutiu^, Gruterus and Lucretius, etc. This may suffice to show
that the ancients did not constantly follow one Orthography. Suetonius expressly
tells us of Augustus, c. 88. Orthographiam, id est formulam rationemque
scribendi and Grammaticis institutem non ad^o custodiit. In which words you
have an account of the Authors of our way of writing, and the esteem they had
in that age. In prosecution (possibly) of this humor of Augustus, it was that
in the pillar set up for a memorial of his acts, and transcribed by Gruter we
have rotiens, quadragien, centun millia, as annum alterun et quadragesimum.
Yea, cumlega for collega: and I cannot think but if the Romans had in the same
manner pronounced those adverbs to^iens, quotiens, centiens, etc. that they did
triens, bidens, etc. as they would not have reduced them to toties, quoties,
etc. as they would not have reduced agceps, aggelus, aggustum, agcilla, to
anceps, angustum, angelus, ancilla, if they had not there pronounced G.
somewhat like N. but that the controversy may receive a further light^ I shall
give an account of what variation our N. meets with in the Arundel ma^bles (and
occasionally speak of some other letters.) They are all in Capitals, the
letters not distinguished into words, nor any stop or break made but (...). The
prepositive particle coming before other words beginning with (...) changed as
following, (...). Before (...) it is changed, as (...) etc. (...) before (...)
is written (...), as (...) (so (...) is written (...) often, as (...)) (...)
Before a word beginning with (...) it is written (...) as (...) so (...) I
find also (...). This is the general way of writing in those inscriptions; yet
I find once (...), etc. (...), and (...) once; and though those other
Syncategorema^ical particles (as it were running into one word) suffer such a
change, yet we read (...), etc. I find once (...) and (...) In the
inscriptions of the Delians, the writing is more uncertain: you have (...) and
(...). The like change of N in Latin is observed by Giphanius in a letter of
his to Murc^us, where out of an old copy of Tully, he cites im memoriam, etc.
for in memoriam, etc. from all which I think I may infer that though the Greeks
had 16, or 24. letters (that matters not at present) they had more sounds, then
letters: and [in Smyrna and Delos] in particular, that (...) had a different
sound according as the letter following (whether in the same, or another word,
so it were contained within the same clause, and to be pronounced in the same
breath) was different.

Secondly, that where the words were not pronounced in the same breath, but
interrupted by an imaginary comma, or the like, (for real stops and pauses they
had none) that then the sound and letter were not varied, as appears every
where in the marmora Arundeliana, and especially in the two last examples
rehearsed, where you have (...), etc. and (...), etc. And in the latter after
(...) follows, (...), and if that change be not always observed, I suppose it
may have happened, because that since neither (...) or (...) did express the
sound, it might indifferently be written either way as participating of the
found of both, but rather (...) then (...).

Thirdly, I infer, that the reason did not concern only composition, but
extended to simples: and the reason why (...) was not written before (...) etc.
In composition, was, because it could not be written or pronounced before (...)
etc in the simple; for (...) in the same clause coming before (...) did not
sound full, as it did before (...) or (...), but had a middle sound betwixt
(...) and (...); and therefore if the Doctor meant that it was impossible for
(...) to come before (...) and retain its full English sound, I do grant it:
but so it could not come before (...) as well as (...), so that he should have
said (...) no less then (...).

Fourthly I infer, that (...) might be written before (...) either in simple or
compound (there being the same reason, if they were within the same clause)
though not altogether so well as (...) (because the sound was more like that of
(...) then (...)) since that the Greeks had no Character whereby to express
those mixed sounds upon the concurrence of consonants. In which point also the
Latins were to seek: as you may read in Vossius de art Grammatica l. 1. c. 20.
Where he cites a passage out of Marius Victorinus (whom he thus characters,
Scriptor accuratus et antiquus; ut quem cum Donato, Hieronymi Magistro, vixisse
vel ex Eusebio constare possit.) The beginning whereof does confirm, and is
confirmed by what I have said. Clari in studiis viri, qui aliquid de
Orthographia scripsere, OMNES fereaiunt, inter M, et N, literas, MEDIAM VOCEM,
quae non abhorret ab utr^que litera, sed neu^ram PROPRIE exprimat, tam nobis
[Latinis] deesse, quam Graecis: cum illi Sambyx [ forte (...)] scribant, nec M
exprimere, nec N. Sed haec ambiguitas in his fortasse vocabulis, siout in
Ampelo Lycambe; (and why not in (...)?) in nostris non est, etc.

Although I think I have said enough to refute the Doctors assertion, yet I
shall further consider what the Doctor has said by way of reason: That (...)
before a Labial has occasion to be changed into (...). In his
Grammatico-physical discourse he tells us these are Labials. P. F. B. V. W. M.
I would fain know whether he mean that when ever N. comes before any of these
in any language it be impossible but that it be changed into M. I gave some
account of the ancient orthography out of Hesychiu^, who affords a multitude of
the like stamp, amongst which there are exceptions against this reason as
(...). It is the same Author that has (...), for (...) and (...), (...).
Gruter in his marbles has (...) p. 787. and p. 791. and which is more (...)
for (...) several times, but amongst the inscriptions of mean persons. A Cretan
marble has (...) for (...) p. 505. Another inscription of note has (...) for
(...). The other Labials need no instances; and what is said for N before B
will make a probability as to P. since there has been of old so great an
affinity betwixt those two letters in sound, that the one is often put for the
other, and when the one is written the other is sounded. Hence in the Latin,
opses, apsens, etc. for obses, absens. Quintilian l. 1. c. 7. Quarisolet in
scribendo praepositiones, sonum, quem juncta efficiant, an quem separate,
observare conveniat: ut cum dico obstinuit. Secundam enim B literam ratio
proscit: aures magis audiunt P. So Vossius (to whom I ow that citation) says,
Arabs, trabs, urbs, quia sic inter doctssimos obtinuit, per B scribo: sed sor
us exigit urps, traps, Araps. This concurrence of consonants gave occasion to
mix sounds, and thereupon men came to write promiscuously some that juxta sonum
vocis separatae, and others juxta sonum quem juncta efficiebat. But I have made
trial in English of N before B, and unless the Doctors whistle differ from my
windpipe, I can pronounce Henbane: I say pronounce it, for I can spell it
Henbane: nor do I find any physical impossibility in the sounding of Henp^sa,
or Emp^sa, However, the Doctor should not have reminded us of the Labi^l (...).
But being to give his reason, why (...) before (...) is changed into (...), he
should only have said, because it comes before (...). But how (...) might have
come before (...) I have shown: and he must be a great stranger to the rise of
languages, that thinks it not only impossible, but improbable that the case was
otherwise, but since N and P are by the Doctor allowed the same sound with
(...) and (...), that which renders the case of one impossible, must have the
like influence upon the other. Yet I find that the ancients wrote Iuponito, in
an old inscription at Naples, the same Authority there is for Quod, ici,
inprobarint, inprobum esto, and elsewhere inpeditus. So Faernus upon Terence
helps me with Ir^une, Inprudens, Inperiosus was wrote upon the Roman arch
triumphal: and inperi^m in Sigonius's brass table. In the Pandects at Florence,
there are, Inpubes, Inpressum, Inperfectum, Inpossibile. Prudentius has this
verse. Inmitis, atrox, asper, inplaca^ilis. And an infinity of the like might
be cited out of Dansquius about the old Latin tongue, and others. But left
these should be the writings of agreste Latium only, when men wanted our
Geometrical phonescues; the Italians have either retained or resumed that
pronunciation. Florio furnishes me with store of examples, Inportare, Inpresa,
Inpendere, Inpertinente, etc. which are not to be confuted in this case by
della Crusca. I have now taken away that physical impossibility of the
concurrence of (...) and (...), N and P: of which what are we that we should
determine? Who neither know the sound of the letters, nor the several
conformations of parts which regulate that air (which also is different here
and there) the phantasme of the motion whereof continued to our car is Sound! I
now aver that not Euphony but use was regarded in the generation of language:
time begets that alteration, which if we call polishing or perfecting, we must
build upon the opinions of men: what is Euphonous to one is Cacophonous to
another: and what pronunciation is difficult or impossible to one, is not so to
another. We see when different nations speak Latin, they give it the sound of
their own countries, and retain nothing of the old Roman but the letters and
words when written. Thus Aldus thinks one thing Euphonous, and I another; he
being an Italian diversely educated, and I an Englishman. There was a time when
Tonsrix, Cursrix, Fesrix, sounded well; Charisius the Grammatian (as I am
informed) says they ought to be written so. Sollempius, Sompnus, Hiei^ps, were
once very taking. The like may he said of the Greek, of which the Latin is a
descendant; I told you before of (...), etc. there was a time when they were
not only usually so pronounced, but it was reputed elegant. Phrynichus in his
Ecloga diction Atticar. (...) (...). He says you must leave out (...).
Nunnesius in his notes reads it (...). Etymologic. (...). But I think I have
detained you too long with this discourse, which a little knowledge in the rise
and declination of languages, and the Grammatico-physical part thereof, might
have prevented. The same letters have different sounds in diverse nations, and
the Euphony of one nation does not give laws to another. Terentianus Ma^^us
tells us that C^. does not sound well: but C there must sound like G. yet in
Greek (...), etc. beget no disorder: non quod dissimilis res, sed quod is qui
dicit. Let an English man try to sound (...) in the beginning of a word (as
the Latins cared not for Mn. which is frequent in Greek) he will hardly
pronounce it; viz. (...): but when he shall have accommodated those letters to
the modern Turco-greek sound, he will as easily pronounce (...) or (...) as
Bajazet. The like for (...), as (...) for Doria the famous Genovtse. Be pleased
once more to read over the discourse of our Critical Bravo, and judge what
ground he had to cast that scorn and contempt not upon me only, but on the
Gentleman thorough whose hands my letter passed to Mr. Hobs. The most
charitable opinion I can have of the Doctor, and if such charity may extend to
a Divine! is, that he engaged into this rant merely to save his reputation,
which being lost as to all persons of learning, he determined to sit down with
the applause of Schoolboyes, or such as deserve no better esteem.

But the Doctor upon second thoughts, will assist me with arguments against his
Etymology: I shall consider his reasons, and give you an account of them; they
must sure be good, for his charge against mine, obliges him to nothing trivial.

Dr. W. But if he have a mind to dispute against the Etymology, I could
furnish him with better arguments by much, then that of changing (...) into
(...). For (besides the change of the spirit, which I allow to be considerable,
though he put less weight upon it) the termination of (...) does not regularly
descend from (...), all its derivatives retaining either the termination (...),
or, so soon as they depart from it, assume the form of the oblique cases (...).
(as (...), etc.) And further the first part of the Composition, if it were
(...) could not regularly, according to the analogy of other compounds, end in
a Consonant but in a Vowel; not as (...), not (...) nor (...), but (...). And
moreover, the word (...) does not usually begin a Composition at all. Nor do I
at present remember any one word in the whole Greek tongue, where (...) is the
first part of the composition: but instead of (...), they use (...) [not (...)
but (...) unoculus.] And so it should not have been (...) (...) nor (...), nor
(...), nor yet (...), to express that notion, but rather (...), in the same
form with (...); or (...), in the same form with (...), which is Empusa's
Epithet. And those arguments would prove indeed that (...) is no regular
grammatical composition, (nor do any that mention it, take it to be so;) but
that it may not pass amongst the catalogue of remotiora composita vel derivata
[of which we find in Etymologists a competent number] or may not pass for as
good a jumble as (...), I see no reason: nor, why that of so long standing, and
allowed by so good Authors, should give place to this upstart.

What value is to be put upon the change of spirit I have already declared; as
also what stress may be laid upon the variation of (...) into (...). in this
case: and though I have invalidated those arguments in a single consideration,
yet the change of both in the same word seems to me still a little improbable.
But he tells me further that the termination (...) does not regularly descend
from (...). I would he had determined what he meant by regularly: for those
rules of Grammar we have (I do no not mean Camden's Grammar) are of a later
date then is (...) and therefore it cannot be counted irregular ex post facto.
Nor, if all the other compounds or derivatives have a different termination,
will any wise man thereupon infer that there cannot be a Singularity in this?
As for that which he further objects: if the first part of the composition were
(...), it could not regularly according to the Analogy of other compounds, end
in a consonant, but in a vowel: I would he had cleared up his thoughts, and
told us in what country it was so irregular, and what Analogy of compounds he
would oppose us with. I for my part find in the Etymologicum magnum, that the
Atticks in the compounds and descendants from numerals did retain their last
letter; that is, they did assume nothing after it; (...) not (...) not (...):
these men then (and they a considerable part of Greece, and from whom
especially did descend that common dialect of ours) would have said (...), and
(...), not (...). The assertion is to be found in the said book in (...). And
for the compounds of (...), the Doctor could not think to over^rule us with
their Analogy whereas he knew of none, for (...) is no Greek word, no more then
(...), of which it is said (...) quasi (...). That which he further suggests,
(...) (...) does not usually begin a composition at all, is very weak arguing,
and I shall not make use of it until the Doctor legitimate that other argument,
that because most men ^^unlearned, therefore none are learned. The compounds of
(...) do not usually assume (...). may not we therefore say (...)? A very
little skill in Greek would have been able to rectify such an argument: as
also to inform his memory better, then to forget that in the whole Greek tongue
(and that is a thing of large extent) there should not be one word, where (...)
is the first part of the composition: what not (...)? Have you so soon forgot
your numbers? (...) anniculus, (...), navis uniremis, ((...)) (...), (...), and
(...) qua una hora digna sunt, besides (...) univira five univiria, which where
I have read I do not remember, but I think it is in Heraldus upon Arnobius. You
see Doctor how a man's memory may fail him; but you seem to decay in your
judgment also, when you infer, that Because you remember no compound beginning
with (...), therefore it should not have been (...), nor (...), nor yet (...),
but (...), or (...): as I have evinced unto you. It remains now only to
consider your conclusion, wherein you say, that your derivation is allowed (as
in another place you say it is a received Etymology) by so good Authors: the
contrary whereof I have made appear in the letter as it is now augmented: where
I have showed you reason why your old groundless deduction should give way to
this upstart. Upstart! does the Doctor think this an objection? Does he reject
things because new, and not because false? I wonder a Theologue should argue
thus. I might as well condemn his writings because he is a lesser man then I.
However the Doctor should consider that second thoughts are best, and that a
child upon a Giants shoulder (it is a saying of the reformed Divines; and the
Doctor called me Saw^y boy, though I do not think I stand upon a Giants
shoulders when I everlook him) may see further then the Giant. I do not know
whether the Doctor think that I intended to jumble (...) into one word: if he
did, he mistakes me as much as he did them he said did deduce (...) from (...):
for though they said to, they gave you the derivation in sense only, and not in
words. All that I insist upon is that it come from (...): concerning the
termination, perhaps the Greeks may have had a way in old times of adding
(...), as we in English do A. as Green-(...). perhaps it is only (...)
Feminine: It may come from (...), the (...) being only retained: not is that
deduction by such an apocope, wo^se then (...) from (...) and (...), (...). I
am not the first that observe in Etymologies the retaining of one letter is
sufficient: as Neptunus a nando* which is laughed at by Tully. Yet I can
further show of later date then those antiquated times when Empusa had its
original, such an Apocope, as is more then literae vel syllabae ablatio. In the
Greek Epigrams l. 6. (...).
(...).
Here is for (...); for (...); for (...); and which is an exception to your
Grammar, they do not vary their gender and become neuters. If this Etymology
displease, deduce it from (...) and (...) for (...), Laconice, as (...) for
(...), etc. I have read such use of (...), but I remember not where. (...) (so
Hesych. but (...) Favorine) signifies al^o (...), safe: so that the person
a^righted at the light of a spectre, might cry to his companions, (...); here
is an (...), is all well? Or from (...) and (...), which is dolentis
interjectio: or from (...) and (...), which is an interjection of admiration.

The next passage of the Doctors is a very considerable one; whether what we
have disputed of he only a (...), whether Mr. Hobs did well to English the
Doctors uno pede incedere by hopping? I think he, or any one else that reads
the passage which I have cited at large before, will think the Doctor intended
it so: for though he said that the boy in the play did uno pede incedere, which
is not denied: yet he also said, that that play was called Empusa (or Ludus
Empusae) because that that Empusa did uno pede incedere: which reason will be
well, if the terms uno pede incedere be equivocal. Mr. Hobs then did him no
wrong in Englishing it so; no more then I, who cannot understand that (...) in
the context of Aristophanes scholiast should signify ^o hop: or (...) as the
words lie in Eustathius, (...), is not his quotation, nor uno pede ingrediens
in Iunius:) what the meaning of those places may be, I have already told: and
the Doctor does not bring any thing to the contrary. Rhediginus does but refer
to Eustathius, and if he has ill translated him, am I accountable for his
errors? but the mistake was on the Doctors side, for Rhodiginus used a term
that might be attributed to the gate of the Gods, as well as the footing of
men. Et vera incessu patuit dea. Superum incedo regina: but the Doctor
restrained it to hopping as I have showed.

Dr. W. But how I should wrong Iunius, in taking these words of his, altero
pede in aere librato, unt^o subsiliunt pede, to be understood of hopping, I do
not understand, nor am likely to do till he can find out a possible meaning of
those words. And when he has so done, I will see what I can pick out of the
Dutch. For though I do not profess my self a Dutch man, yet so much Dutch I
have as to understand that Hincken in High Dutch, and Op cen been springen, in
Low Dutch signify the same as to hop in English.

Thus the Doctor changes the controversy: I said he had grossly wronged
Iunius, and imposed upon his readers, if he did not find in the Dutch (for the
Latin has no such thing) that Ludus Empusae was the boys play of fox to thy
hole. I gave an account of Iunius's words, which I desire may be read over
again: that both the Latin and Dutch did signify to hop I know; but whether
they signified the play of fox to thy hole, that I knew not, and desired a
better expositour then the German I asked. That which Iunius says will agree
to Ascoliasmus, or any play that consists in hopping: and consequently what
Iunius said does no more make for fox to thy hole, then Scotch^ hop. I would
say more to this paragraph, but that I do not understand well what it is the
Doctor requires of me, when he expects that I find out a possible meaning for
those words of Iunius. Either he or the printer are in a fault here; or did not
the printer print it thus, because he had so written it?

His Parenthesis ought not here to be left out: He does not know well how a man
can go upon one leg without hopping. The question is concerning the gate of the
Demons, and he talks how men go: just as if I should argue, (as I do not, but
the Doctor) I do not know well how men can see without eyes, Ergo God sees with
eyes. I do not know how Pythagoras went, and yet he is reported to have had
(...). I understand not what kind of motion the Israelitish pillar, or that of
Thrasybulus had, (of which I cited Clemens Ale^^an) the motion of that will
suit with that of one leg, yet I do not think it hopped. In fables and
phantasmes I do not use to exact scrutiny, lest I should find them as
ridiculous that excellent piece of raylery and merriment the Extravagant
shepherd does represent them. I do not understand how Talus the iron-man (not
only in the fayry Queen, but Apollonius Rhodius and Plato) did move his limbs:
yet I shall not say he went as we do, because I do not know well how a man can
go otherwise then by setting one foot before the other. Apollon. Argon. l. 4.
-- (...) --
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
It may be the manner of his motion is employed in (...), but if the Doctor
should deny it, I could not prove it to him. Many of the like instances might
be given: and if I had not been taught, I should as little have known how the
Gods did move: which is excellently described by Ronsard in his poem upon Q.
Margaret.

Thus he describes Pasithea one of Venus's Graces coming from Heaven. The young
and all Divine Pasithea
The Skies abandoned her command to obey,
The air gave place unto her, and the wind
Thorough the vast regions blowed her up behind.
She stooped descending in a sudden flight,
Cleaving the clouds, as in the silent night
Far off there in a shining track is spied
A falling star betwixt two airs to glide.
And afterward he describes the Queens dancing at the Ballet Royal. Locking
his hand in here is the King did lead
The dance, and her who did not seem to tread,
But as she had no feet, she in her pace
Swimm'd as she moved with a celestial grace.
Man heavy treads, and by his gate does show
The dull alliance he to earth does owe:
But Gods do fly, and unconsin'd to pace
Prove their eternal and spiritual race.
When the Lavolto was of Provence danced,
The King with this his sister Grace advanced
In a grave sweetness, nimbly following She
With ayrie motion 'bout the Hall did flee.
What remains of this discourse is taken up in a mistake of mine, which being
neither voluntary, nor greatly material, I am the less concerned in
acknowledging that I did him wrong imposing upon him that he should say Empusa
came to be attributed to the boys play. He said comes to be attributed, etc.
As I have represented it now in the text, which my have did not then permit me
to consider so thoroughly. I acknowledged that the boye's play might be so
called, but that it was so called I desired proof. I excepted against Holyoke
and Thomas (for Iunius has no such thing: and the two dictionaries aforesaid
deceived the Doctor, for they said Ascoliasmus Ludus Empusa Iun. fox to thy
hole: and he presently thought Iunius had said Ludus Empusa was the same game
with fox to thy hole.) I excepted against them as no Authors, but vocabularies.
I confess they may in some sense be called Authors, as the Doctor may be called
the Author of that Phrase adducis mall^um, which term will not make for his
advantage, when any man shall bestow it upon him: I took it in that sense which
Lancilotus Pasius (to whom I had then regard) did take it in, when he disputes
whether Isidorus, Priscian, etc. be to be acknowledged Authors? Lib. 2. c. 34.
Authors voc^ et vocandos censeo, quorum dicta sequamur ad instituendam
eruditionem; and afterward, Authors proprie Scriptores, ut Homerus,
accipiendi; qui fuerunt ante observationem artis Grammaticae, quorum dicta
observave^e posteriores aliqui ad artem sermonis, et hoc pertinet ad
Grammaticos: aliqui aemulati sunt, ut poetae, atque alii, unde and ipsi
authorum nomine gaudent. Ergo cum dicunt aliqui Authorem Priscianum, (ne alios
hoc genus recenseam) animadvertant, an ab eo sit Authoritas quem sequatur
eruditorum consensus, qui in its^ Grammatied nititur aliorum exemplis: qua
causae est, quod ubi caret exemplo iterum at qu^ iterium exploditur; Praecipue
a Valla taxatur Nonius, non dicam de Servio and Do ^ato quos constat
authoritate muniri poetarum, oratorum, historicorum. Quid? quod Plinius in
Grammatice, Charisius, Probus, Diomedes, and majoris existimationis Gellius,
citant Scriptores: nulla alia profecto de causa, nisi ut dignoscantur ministri
a dominis; ii sunt Grammatici, hi vero authors. Which words since they are
highly rational, I see no cause why I should recede from my former thoughts:
does any man take the single Authority of Thomas, or Holyoke, for a sufficient
proof in Latin. It seems the Doctor does; I advise him therefore betimes to
sue out a writ of Privilege, and remove his case from Westminster School to
the University, for there it is so far from being valued, that it is a whipping
matter for any in the upper forms to allege them. You see what a difference
there is betwixt Classique and Classical Authors. He asks me what is the
difference betwixt (...) and Vocabularium? This is not so perplexing a Query,
as the Doctor took it to be. There is no difference in the name; but there is a
great difference in our manner of citing them: I cite Pollux as a Vocabulary,
he refers to Thomas and Holyoke as Authors. He would not cite Pollux, because
he did not think him to be a prophet: yet I favorably think the Doctor did
prophetically bring against Mr. Hobs that argumentum ad hominem. Whether the
Authors I have cited all along be to the purpose, I refer to the discreet
readers judgment: I doubt not but he will concur with me in this, that the
Doctor has felt the force of them to the purpose: and particularly as to
Ascoliasmus I could not but speak of it, for without doing so I could neither
have found Ludus Empusae in Iunius, nor fox to thy hole in Rider or Thomos.

Sect. 7.
^. I Now come to the Doctors last and greatest ^riumph, at which I cannot but
stand (...) admiration, when I consider he has not got the victory. Had the
Doctor been pleased to have conversed with some of the Fifth Form in
Westminster School (for he needed not to have troubled the Learned Master) he
might have been better informed then to have exposed himself thus.

Mr. Hobbes had said, A Ma^k, or of some put instead of it, (...), which is a
mark with an hot Iron, is visible; if visible, then it has quantity; and
consequently may be divided into parts innumerable. After that the Doctor had
reflected upon the wit of the argument (whereas he ought to have replied to the
Antecedent: the reason being valid, It is visible, therefore its divisible) He
is pleased to play the Drol thus upon that saying, (...) is a mark without an
hot Iron. ^Prethee tell me good Tho. before we leave this point (O the wit of a
Divinity Doctor!) who it was told thee that (...) was a mark with an hot Iron?
Dr. V^
for it is a notion I never heard till now, (and do not believe it yet) Never
believe him that told thee that lie; for as sure as can be, he did it to abuse
thee. (...) signifies a distinctive point in writing made with a Pen or Quill,
not a mark made with an hot Iron, such as they brand Rogues withal; and
accordingly (...), (...), distinguo, interstinguo, are often so used. It is
also used of a Mathematical point, or somewhat else that is very small, (...),
a moment, or the like. What should come in your Cap, to make you think that
(...) signifies a mark or brand with an hot iron? I perceive where the
business lies; 'twas (...) ran in your mind when ^you talked of (...), and
because the words are somewhat alike, you jumbled them both together, according
to your usual care and accuratenesse, as if they had been the same.

When I read this, I cannot but be astonished at the Doctors confidence, and
appla^d him who said, (...). That the Doctor should never hear that (...)
signifies a mark with an hot iron, is a manifest argument of his ignorance: But
that he should advise Mr. Hobbes not to believe his own readings, or any man's
else that should tell him it did signify any such thing, is a piece of
notorious impudence. That (...) signifies a distinctive point in writing made
with a Pen or Quill, (is a Pen one thing, and a Quill another to write with?)
no body denies. But it must be withal acknowledged that it Signifyes many
things else. I know the Doctor is a good Historian (else he should not presume
to object the want of History to another) let him tell us how long ^goe it is,
since men have made use of Pens or Quils in writing; for if that invention be
of no long standing, this signification must also be such; and so it could not
be that from any allusion thereunto the Mathematicians used it for a point.
Another thing I would ^ain know of this great Historian; how long ago (...) and
(...) began to signify interpugno? for if the Mathematics were studied before
the mystery of Pointing was found our (as shall be proved, when ever it shall
please the Doctor out of his no-reading to maintain the contrary.) Then the
Mathematical use thereof should have been named before the Grammatical. And if
this word be translatitio^s, and that Sciences were the effect of long
contemplation, the names used herein ar^ borrowed from commons talk; Mr. Hobbes
did well to say that (...) precedaneous^y* to that indivisible signification,
which it afterward had, did signify a visible mark, made by an hot Iron, or
the like. And in this procedure, he did no more then any man would have done,
who considers that all our knowledge proceeds from our (...); as also that
words do primarily signify things obvious to sense and only second^rily, such
as men call (...).

This occasion leads me to a further consideration of the word. Hesychi^s (of
whom It is said, Legendus est non t^nquam (...), sed tanquam jus^us Author)
Interprets (...), which is a point or prick of a greater of lesser size, made
with any thing. So (...) signifies to prick or mark with any thing in any
manner, and has no impropriated signification in it self, but according to the
writer that uses it. Thus in a Gr^^mmarian (...) signifies to distinguish by
pointing often, sometimes, even in them, it is the same with (...): sometimes
it signifies to ^et a mark, that something is wanting in that place, which
marks were called (...). In matters of policy (...) signifies to disallow,
because they used to put a (...) (not (...))* before his name who was either
disapproved, or to be mulcted. In punishments it signifies to mark or brand,
whereof that of an hot Iron in most usual in Authors, because most practiced by
the Ancients. And the mark which the T^rks and others do imprint without
burning may be said (...); at likewise in Herodian that term is given to the
ancient Britains, of whom he says (...). Thus Horses that were branded with
(...) and ((...)) were said (...): was a term of Law; when any man's land was
morgaged the Creditor did erect a Pillar ((...)) as (...) token of the mo^ga^e,
so the field became (...), as the contrary (...). So Pollux. (...) seems to
have been taken for (...), or (...), hence (...) in Eustathius, Pollux, yea,
Hesychi^s, as I have elsewhere cited him. The Sea also is said (...) in
Eustahitus upon (...). (...) (...). As to the Grammatical use (supposing
punctation not to have been in use in Aristotle's time,) (...) in his Rhetoric
torick signifies no more then to point as children do with a Fescu^, where no
impression remains. It does also signify the making of a real point in
wri^ing, hence (...), or marked with points on every side, was used in the
books of Plate (...), as L^erti^s in his life tells us; it stood for (...),
(whence your (...), or collections of sentences) as L. N. in Latin stood for
Laudabilis nota. But farther Epiphanius in his book De ponderibus and mensuris,
makes use I conceive of (...) for the several punct^^ions in writing, as the
notes of Aspiration and Leviga^^^^, Apostrophus, Hyphen, etc. with which he
says (...) Nazia^zen in his Letter ad notarium giving him directions how to
write, bids him (...).

Thus in its Origin (...) does signify a visible mark or brand, with an hot
iron, or the like; And that that must be the proper signification to (...),
which is proper to (...), none but such as D^ Wallis can doubt. And in it is
descendants it is no less evident; for from (...) comes Stig^^sus, which
signifies branded, or marked: Vit^lli^^^ cicatrice stig^^sus, not stigmatosus:
so Pliny in his Epistles, as Robert Stephen cites it. And (...) (the derivative
of (...), which signifies any mark, as well as a brand, even such remain after
stripes, being black and blue) was a Nickname imposed upon the Grammarian
Nicanor, (...). And though we had not any examples of (...) being used in this
sense, yet from thence for any men to argue against it (but he who will know no
more then Stephen tells him) is madness, unless he will deny that any word has
lost its right signification, and is used only (by the Authors we have, though
neither the Doctor nor I have read all them) in its A^^logicall signification.

I have always been of opinion, that (...) signified a single p^i^t, big or
little, i^ (...) the letter not, had signified a single point, had such been
used. And from the common use of it for a point made any way, (upon several
occasions severally, but a point it became (...) used, by Philosophers,
Mathematicians, and Grammarians. I could give grounds for this conjecture, and
not be so impertinent as the Docter in his Sermon, where he told us that (...)
was not in Ho^^r; that from (...) came ^^brius; that Subrietas was not bad
Latin; that Sabrius was once (as I remember) in Tully. Is this to speak
Suitably to the oracles of God, or rather to lash out into idle words? Has
the Doctor any ground to think these are not impertinencyes? Or are we, poor
mortals, accountable for such idle words as fall from us in private
discourses; whilst these Ambassadors of heaven droll in the pulpit without
any danger of an after-reckoning?

But I procced to a further survey of the Doctors intolerable ignorance. Nis
charge in the end of [his] Schoole-Master's rant, is, that he should remember
(...) and (...) are not all one. I complained before that he had not cited
Robert Stephen ^right: now I must tell him that he has been negligent in the
reading of Henry Shephen; for in him he might have found that (...) was
sometimes all one with (...), though there be no example to him wherein (...)
is used for (...). Has (...) (...) (as Stephen rightly cireth it) in his
Scutum Herculis (...)
(...)
(...). So Scholi^stes, Ioannes (...) upon the place, a man, who (it I may use
the Doctors phrase) was as good a critic, as the Geometry professors?

Thus much for the Doctor: to the understanding Reader, I say that (...), used,
for burning with an hot, iron; a Mac^cab. 9. 11. where speaking of Antiochus's
lamen^^ble death, his body p^trifying and breeding worms, he is said (...),
being pained as if he had been pricked with hot irons. And that this is the
meaning of that elegant writer, shall be made good against the Doctor, when he
shall please to defend the vulgar interpretation. P^^sanias, in Baeo^icis,
speaking of Epaminondas, who had taken a (...) belonging to the Sicyonians
called Phae^^^, wherein were many B^^otisn fugitives, who ought by law to have
been put to death, says, he dismissed them under other names, giving them
only a brand or mark. (...). It is true (...) is here put adverbially. but
that does not alter the case. Another example of (...) used in this sense is in
the collections our of Diodorus Siculus lib. 34. As they are to be found at the
end of his works, and as Photius has transcribed them into his Biliothaca. He
says that the Romans did buy multitudes of servants and employ them in Sicily;
(...). These are the words but of (...) Author, but ought to pas^e for the
Judgment of two, seeing Photius, by inserting them, has made them his own.
Again Zoneras in the third ^ome of his History, in the life of the Emperor
Theophi^^s, says, that when Theophanes and another Monk had reproved the said
Emperor for demolishing images, he took and Stigmatized each of them with
twelve lambickes, in their faces, (...). A place so evident, that I know not
what the Doctor can reply; it being (...) with what the (...) Author says in
the life of Irene, (...). If the Doctor object that he is a Modern Author, he
will never be able to render him so inconsiderable as Adriqnus (...)
Nomenclator, Thomos^^ and Ride^. If any will deny that he writes good Greek,
Hieronymus We^^^s will tell them, his only fault is (...), redundancy in
words, and not the use of bad ones.

Besides, it is the judgment of a great Master of the Greek tongue, that
Stigmata, non tam puncta ^psa, quam (...) veriet^^ superfici^m Graci
vocaveru^^. I need not I suppose name him, so great a Critic as the Doctor
cannot be ignorant of him.

Against this all that the Doctor says is either false or grounded upon such
mistakes, as that ungenerous resolution of his never to acknowledge, makes me
suspect for voluntary. What Mr. Hobbes's argument was you have seen in the
Letter, where he cannot except against the state of the question, it being
taken out of himself (...) correct. P. 28. All that Mr. Hobbes said, was that
for (...) some do substitute (...), which is a mark with an (...). I did so
understand this saying of his as if he had annexed those words with an hot
iron, to explain, not to determine and restrain the signification of (...).
Which favor I allow the Doctor when he says (...) (not (...)) is a mark with
an hot iron. For (...) is not only any sort of mark, as upon the Dragons in
H^^ied afore-cited, and (...), Eus^ath. histor. Ismen. l. 2. So (...) Cantic.
1. 10. And in the collections of Theodotus at the end Clem. Alexandr. (...).
And Grog^r. (...) (citane Budaeo) So Arria^s de rebus Iudic. (...) (I^dis)
(...). And Aristotl^ Histor. Animal. l. 7. 976. calls the (...), those marks
that are born with and hereditary to some Families, (...). But also the numeral
(...), which remark the Doctor did omit in his Arithmatick, because it was not
^ound to be in Stephen, of those All^ sufficient Authors which he deals in. And
thus that Pseudo-Master of Westminster School might as well have showed the
Doctor how (...) might be made without an hot iron, as well as (...). I give
the same allowance to that saying of his, that it is a brand with (...) hot
iron, when they mark a Slave or Rascal. Dispunct. p. 43. For else branding is
not always dishonorable. Giphanius observe. Ling. Lat. no^^s that (...) calls
the worst of Servants extrema not a serv^s, whence he collects that they had
different marks, and that there were others melioris not^. Nay in its original,
whether we deduce it from the Thracians, (as the common opinion does) or from
the Egyptians from whence it was propagated to the Assyrian Priests of Astacte,
(whence I would bring it) it was hon^urable, Herodotus l. 3. says, that
amongst the Thracian Dames (...). So amongst the Britains (...) was a piece of
Gallantry. Of this opinion was Dion Chrysost^^ in his first Oration de ser^^^t;
Wherein he asserts that one (...), might be (...). Which when one thought
absurd, he asked him if he had ever been in Thrace: he answered, yes. Then he
demands again, (...), As for the Egyptians it was a part of their Priests
Initiation: Of this (I conceive Prudentius (...). (...) may have spoken* (...)
Ac^^ minut^s ing^runt (...),
His membra pergant utere; (...) igniverint,
Quamcunque partem corporis servens nota
Stigmirit, hane fic consecratam praedicant.
Unto this (I likewise conceive,) was it all^ded in the Old Law Levis. 19. 28.
(...). They should not stigmatize themselves, or make any such marks upon their
bodies, as the Egyptians and Assyrians did. And in the Primitive times there
wanted not those who would expound that of John, that Christ should baptize
(...), of this way of (...): and thereupon in baptism (...). Hereunto alludeth
Apuleins (or rather expresses this custom of initiation) in Metam. l. 11. The
Goddess told him that one Mithi^s was divino quodam stellarum consortio ipsi
conjunctus: now this was the Priest who was to initiate him and carry him
through the confines of ^eath, and quatour elementa. Martial in another case
says Et (...) linunt stella^am splen^a fr^^tem. Thence Pythagoras had it,
thence Epimenides of whom Hesychius Milestus tells us that (...). Whence came
the proverb (...), as Me^^sius excellantly observes upon the place. So the
Priests of Astacte Lucian (de dea Syrid) says, (...). This was my apprehension
of Mr. Hobs his words at first, which since he has owned in his last reply (p.
15.) it is no longer^ to be doubted. And though his words as they lay in the
text at first had been suspicious? (though who could ever suspect a person of
such parts and abilities, who had given such a proof of his abilities in Greek
by translating Thucydides, and illustrating him with Maps, that neither will
the Doctor be able to equal him in the like performance, or bring the Author
thereof into dis-repute through his cavils?) yet now there is not any can
impose upon him such an intendment without being guilty of for^ery. Which leads
me (...) to a just censure of what Dr. Wallis (that tender-fronted Theo^^gue!)
says both concerning Mr. Hobs and me.

Dr. W. I said, among other things, that you mistook (...) for (...): it was
this, not that, signified a marks with an hot iron. Your reply confesses that
(...) does so signify; but undertakes to prove that (...) and (...): are all
one: and your journey-man comes in to help you.

What Mr. Hobs said at first I have already declared: It is true, Dr. Wallis
did tell him (and that in (...)) how he mistook (...) for (...); but Mr. Hobs
did never acknowledge any such thing: for though (...) signify a mark with an
hot iron, yet it does not follow that they are one and the same thing; because
that signification i^ general, and they have, besides that general import, a
particular distinctive signification, as have (...). So that (besides the
Doctors ignorance) there was no reason to charge him with that mistak^ and
jumble, or with want of accuratenesse, whereas he was more subtle and
understanding then our Professor. Well! but the Doctor says Mr. Hobs, in his
reply confesses that (...) does so signify. Yes! hear his own words! (P. 15.)
(...) does no more signify a brand with an hot iron, then (...) made also with
an hot iron. They have both one common theme (...), which does not signify
(...) nor interpungo, nor inur^ (for all your Lexicon) but notam impri^^ere, or
pungendo not are, WITHOUT any restriction to burning or punching. I hope you
are now satisfied what a Conf^sion Mr. Hobs has made in his last reply: you
shall next see what he intanded to prove, but that my Letter did casually
intervene, and so saved him that labor. Our Doctor says he under^^es to prove
that (...) and (...) (...) all one. Which is as true, as that I come in to
(...) W^^^ I saw that in Italick, (...) are all one. I supposed it had been the
assertion of Mr. Hobs and my self, and that he had therefore put a different
character, because the sentence was not his. After a strict enquiry into what
Mr. Hobs had delivered, I could not find any such thing: that (...) does
simply signify a mark, he confesses, that (...) signifies a point visible
(which is a kind of) mark, he does likewise grant. He does further say, that
it is No less proper to say that (...) is ^ mark (a certain mark is a mark;
and indefinitum aequivales particulari) with a^ hot iron, then to say the same
of (...), (which is also a certain mark.) These are the things he says, and if
he said any more, or what might contradict these, I am confident I never came
in to his help; and the Doctor has acquitted me in the next page (though he
would not in this) p. 44. If I understand him, he was always of opinion that
(...) and (...) were not all one.

I have further examined my own Letter, to see what grounds he could have there
to ^^rge upon me such a proposition; as he had (...) reasons from my own
positive assertion, to pronounce, that I was always of another judgment. The
only places that might give him occasion to say so, are these two: The first,
where I say, that (...) is sometimes all one with (...), which he might have
found in Stephen, although he could not find in him any example whereby to
prove the use of (...). This I did there show out of Hesiod: which place I
would have so far considered, as that we forge^ not how the Scholiast
expounding (...) by (...) can hardly be understood to construe or explain
obscurum per obscurius, the (...) acception of (...) by taking (...) in a more
unco^^h and improper sense: It seems therefore highly probable that in the
Scholiast's time the use of (...) for a visible point, was allowable (such as
are the Spo^s upon Dragons, in which sense (...) and (...) are frequently used
not only by Oppian, but also Aeschy^^s, as your picti Aga^hyr^^, picti Geloni,
virgati Da^ae in Latin) and the use of (...) in that sense, for (...) is
demonstrated. And consequently as the Master bade the boy remember the
difference between (...) and (...); so I may justly desire the Doctor to find
out the difference in that place of Hesiod's. But all this does not give him
cause to say that (...) and (...) are all one. The next place is where I say
(not to the Doctor but reader) that (...) is used for a burning with an hot
iron. But from hence he could not infer that I said (...) and (...) were all
one; for, I have already showed how both might be used to signify a burn with
an hot iron, and yet they might retain their specificall significations still,
and so continue differenced. And secondly had I taken there (...) for (...)
((...) I did) (...) a brand with an hot iron, yet it could not from such an use
of the word be inferred, that they were simply all one: but that in the places
cited they were so: which is but (...), not (...). Now all that I told the
reader (to show there was no such vast irreconcilable difference betwixt the
two words) was That (...) is used for a burning with an hot iron. By this time
you see not only what Mr. Hobs, and what I said, but also what credit is to be
given to the Do^^r. Now I come to examine what the Doctor has brought by way
of exception against the proof Mr. Hobs, and I brought for such acceptance of
the word.

My argument was this, that (...) was descended from (...), which signified to
marks with an hot iron, or the like: therefore such originally must be the
signification of (...): (this does not (...) to a confounding it with (...))
and though we had no examples of such use of the word, yet the reason was not
thereupon to be denied, but by him who could think that no word has lost it is
right signification, and is used only (by the Authors we have, although
neither the Doctor nor I have read all them) in it is Analogicall signification.
This I shall not now doubt to call (as Sal^^us does the like upon every
occasion) (...). This is the same argument which Mr. Hobs does imply in his
defense, when he brings an example out of Aristophan: in Ravis. Act, 5. (...).
5. (...), etc. The old commentator upon the word (...) says thus, (...), that
is (...) for (...), for the (Adimantus) was not a Citizen. I hope the
Commentator does not here mock Aristophanes for jumbling (...) and (...)
together for want of understanding Greek. No, (...) and (...) signifies the
same, save that, for branding I seldom read (...), but (...), As for my part I
never read it, but in Scholiasts, or the like Grammarians.

The Doctor replies nothing to the argument, only the instance (for proof of
what I could have cited sorty Authors more, and did therefore suppose it as
granted:) he says that when he read those words, he took them to prove the
contrary. If (...) and (...) were all one, where was the mistake? What need the
Apology, that he (Adimantus, who did not speak pure Greek, but said (...) for
(...)) was a forreigner?

Justly did Mr. Hobs complain that you presumed too much upon your first
cogitations, that you wanted reading in Greek Authors, and did too much trust
to your dictionaries! He that reads this passage (I have related all the
Doctor says, and in his own words) would think; That the Doctor had READ the
place, That ADIMANTUS spoke. That he MISTOOK (...) for (...), that use of the
word not being pure Greek. And lastly, That the Scholiast makes an APOLOGY for
that mistake of his in these words, (...), for he was a forreigner. But I who
know that neither did Adimantus speak; neither was there any mistake committed;
nor any Apology made by the Scholiast, do think I may conclude the Doctor never
READ the place: or else I do not know what to think.

Pluto being to let Aeschy^us return to Athe^s with Becchus, he tells him what
he must do when he comes thither; that he should give good advice to the
Citizens; and carry that [Rope, or the like] to Cleph^n Myrmex, Nicomachus, and
Arche^^^^^, and bid them come quickly to him, without stay, adding (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).


If they do not come forthwith, he will brand them, and put them in bonds
together with Adimantus, and so send them to Mell. Now this punishment of
branding being novel at Athens and not inflicted upon any Citizen, but upon the
(...) after their second revolt, (whence ca^^e the Proverb in Athens (...)) and
possibly upon some others that were not Natives of Attica. Plato seems to hold
forth this in his Book de legib. l. 8. (wherein he does so give laws, that he
has an eye still upon those of his own country.) he supposes no Citizen will
commit Sacrilege, and for other (...): the (...) lest any should wonder how
Cleoph^n and Adimantus and the rest who were in great power at Athens should be
stigmatized, he tells us expressly of Adimantus, (...). Now that Cleoph^n was so
too, the same Scholiast does expressly say in his comment upon the following
Chorni, and I think the poet does in^end that not only he, but the rest were
so, when he praye^ that the Athenians may have peace, and let Cleoph^n and the
rest of these (whom? but them he had spoken of before) (...).

(...),
(...).
(...)

(...) (...) did not signify a visible point. (...) give him one blow with his
wooden Dagger) that what he adds about Trab^, is no more to the purpose then
the Post^ And if he understood what he had already said, I wonder how he could
find no better way to illustrate his thoughts.

What he says, Fifthly: is but an acquitrance of me (as I already observed)
that (...) and (...) did differ as (...) and (...). (...) in his book de A^.
calls D^^^critus's (...), of which he thought the soul to consist, (...): but
those are not visible. Theophrast. de plant. l. 3. c. 15. says of the bark of
the tree, Corylus, that (...). Here it is a visible sp^t. So Aristot. Hist. An.
l. 6. c. 7. distinguishing the Birds (...) and (...), saith^ (...) ^ Which
distinction he is so far from having understood, that it has cast him into
further absurdities. What ^e in conclusion after t^, that it is now contended
for, that (...) and (...) be all one; it is false, as I have showed.

I have already given an account of his Sixthly: He had well read and
considered the place in Stephen: yet Stephen says not what the Doctor says;
he does not say that (...) is sometimes put for (...). He says (...)
signifies in Hesiod Puncta five macules quibus aliquid variatum est atque
distinctum qu^st panctis. But that it is put for (...), sometimes, or often, he
says not a word. But St! the Doctor observes! what? that he does not say (...)
is sometimes used for (...), (but I have proved it) or is the same with (...).
Which latter, if it be taken absolutely, no body asserted: but take it secundum
quid, and he that quoted (...) for (...) in the text of Hesiod, quoted (...)
for (...) in the Scholiast: that is, he expounded (...) in the place, by (...);
which is to say, that as Hesiod used (...) ^or (...), so the Scholiast die use
(...) for (...), but not for a mark with an hot iron.

In the place out of 2 Macat. 9. 11. he says it is possible that (...) may
imply somewhat of pricking, but not burning, nor with an hot iron. But I would
not have him confound (...) with (...): the latter imports only action of
pricking (as when we we mark somewhat) but the latter does imply the mark it
self. And the sense of the Author requires it (in my judgment) to be expounded
by burning (rather then any other way) since Antiochus dyed of an er^^tion of
Worms: and I am sure they who (...) troubled with the Worm (which in the North
often breeds in their knees under the Pan^tella) complain that their torments
are as if they were burnt with hot irons. That of Pans^ni^s does not mention an
hot iron; no more does any place he shall bring for (...): yet the general
consent of men has rendered (...) by nota i^^^ta: and however (...) in there
put for (...), and the use of any other way of stigmatizing them by hot irons,
I do not remember to have read, in these days. Appi^n. b^l. civil. says, that
the servant of Restio was (...), and call the mark (...): Martial says, he was
fro^^ notarus, which are generally understood of his being burnt; and the
Authors thought they had by that word expressed as much as Velarius Meximms
who says l. 6. c. 8. that he was Inexpiabili liter^^^^ ^old per (...) oris
cont^^sliam inustus. Or Austi^^ (whom I cite, though no Grocian) is reported to
say, Pri^s sub Restione (...) Dion Ca^^^es and his Epitomiser Xiphilin say of
the same, (...).

To Diodorus (...) he replies that it is not said to have been done with an hot
iron: which is true, and would have been, if it had been (...). That servile
was brake out when (...) was engaged at the (...) of (...): and I do not know
that men were any other way marked at that time, but by hot irons: And men did
therefore speak more negligently, because that another way was not then in use;
nor a long time after the decay of the Roman Empire: they did matricula^^
Soldiers, and brand them first with Iron, and after infuse with a Stylus or
the like, a thick gross sort of Ink: which was thereupon called (...) Cedren:
not that the brand was performed by pricking, but because it was afterward so
pointed with Ink, because that they had learned a way of taking them out
otherwise.

Stigmata nec vas^^ delebis Cian^^^s ar^e. He adds further, that (...) (in the
plural) are used as equipollent to one (...) (in the singular.) But this
conjecture must not overthrow my opinion, since there were more (...) then one
imprinted: yea more stigmata,, as upon the Hand, Back, Shoulders, etc. And this
was not only the practice of the Assyrian (and Egyptian) Priests, and
Thracians, (where it was honorable) but Grecians and Romans: (as every one
knows) and even in that place (...) renders it Certe per inustionem corporum
notae inprimebantur. But could not the Doctor have found a more easy and
obvious interpretation, that they had all but one (...), or mark to show whose
servants they were; but they had several (...), upon their bodies. But it is
further observable that Isidorus Orig. l. 20. c. 16. speaking de instrumentis
equorum, where it was most requisite for him to fix the terms of art upon their
right significations, faith (...), Character, est ferrum (...), quo nota
pecudibus inuruntur. The mark it self is called by Anacreon (...), Hesychius
calls them (...).

Now follows Zonaras, whose two texts compared together do sufficiently evince,
that what he meant by (...), he intended by (...). In both places he speaks of
more then one, and therefore (...) is not necessarily restrained to signify
the pricks; and in the same text he seemed to me, (nor to me only, but also to
Lips^us) to render (...) by (...). There is no mark with an hot iron: it is
right, but that is presumed, as in Rbodigimus, when he explains stigmatias by
notis inustus. But the Doctor can construe Greek! (...) [ he made points or
pricks in their faces] (...) ( and put (...), upon these pricks] (...) (the
(...), or characters which consisted of those (...), made so many letters)
(...) (which Letters made up these lambicks) After this exposition (you see the
Doctor can not only gloss upon 1 Time 2. 15. he can make a Nose of Wax of
other Books too) the Doctor asks, What serves all this to prove? I answer, that
it still proves that (...) might be made without an hot iron (if these marks
were so imprinted.) But why does he render (...) by the pricked them in the
face? Is that the signification of the word? can he show an example of that use
of it? Is there any other term in Greek for to signify to brand, then (...),
that is more usual? is not taken for a Synonyma with (...)? Is it not still
expounded by the Latins inuro, inscribe ^tis compungo? I know not what might
occasion him so to render it, unless because I had taught him the difference
betwize (...) and (...), was like that of (...) and (...); he like a bad
Scholar imagines the stigmata to have been made up of actual points: (yes!
Comma's, and Colons!) just as a Letter (in ordinary speech, for I do not now
intend to dispute Philosiphically) is supposed to be made up of actual lines!
which is not true of many, and whele it is, that is not the thing begets the
appellation, but the conceit we have thereof. Either it must have been so; or
that Latin phrase notis (...) has deceived him! for that expression may be
verified of your Sheep or (...). I find also stigmate p^^^cti in Petr^^ius:
from whence I may conclude, In the Doctors way, that stigma was but a point.
There remains nothing but that the Author of that interpretation urge that
confodio is to run through with a Spade: and (...) to prick with a Needle, or
the like in Appian, and Zosi^^s, and (...) several times in the Septuagint.
(...)! The Doctor was not content to give us a new Gloss; he varies the old
Text. His (...) (forsooth,) tells him (...) is a Verb contract, and therefore
it ought to be contractedly read (...) not (...). Surely he read this place
too! But the Author is not bound up by those novel rules, but writes with that
latitude, which frequent precedents do) justify unto him, notwithstanding our
Critic. But letting the Text stand as it does, why may we not think he did
(...), as well as (...). Seeing Cedrenus says he did (...) ( notis berbaricis,
id est, Thr^iciis, so Austin.) (...), if any will construe (...), yet will
(...) have a relation to that (...), with which the same Author says the
Armenians were stigmarized: of which I spoke before. Moreover, (...) will hear
as large a signification as (...), for so I read in Epictetus c. 61. (...). If
in your shoes, you look for more then the securing of your feet from external
inconveniences, then you become ob^^xious to fashions, the gilded, the purple,
and the party-colored shoe. So (...) for (...) Eustath. in Homer. And in
another place Theodora that Empress tells one of those same Stigmatical Monks,
when she looked upon (...), etc. which (...) signifies to engrave as it were
with a Chissel. And Step^onus says out of Ph^^arch; that the Lacedaemonians
(...), but (...) (...). I confess that if the Doctor had showed that ever the
Ancients did so brand people as to make the up letters of actual points placed
in such a series as to make up Letters, he had weakened the authority of the
place: or if he had showed how that after Constantine (upon a good reason^
because he would not have the image of God defaced in man,) prohibited the
stigmatizing of any in the face, that upon the renewing of the punishment they
altered the manner, it had been something, but since they were (...), that is,
notis barbaricis inscripta, or (...), inci^a, (which to interpret as done by
pricks, were strange.) Since there is nothing alleged for the abosishing of
the old (...), and introducing a new way by pricks (for the performance of it
by a Pencil or Pen knife is novel, and of it there is not any mention in the
Ancients, that I remember, till after men grew more ^ender^ spirited) let me
enjoy the s^anding meaning: and let (...) refer to the two persons stigmatized.
I shall not stand to profess that the way of branding is difficult to explain,
because that words are capable of different interpretations; and in this c^le
it is impossible to make out the manner thereof beyond exception. That it w^^
performed by burning of old there is no doubt: Vritur ardenti propter duo
lintea ferro. Iuvenal.
Signare oportet frontem cali^^ forcipa. So No^ius.


And in Greek, Plato calls the (...) in his T^^^us: Lacian in his Piscator
brings in Truth bidding Parre^iades to shave the Pseudo Philosophers beards
close, (...). I do here conceive that (...) and, (...) signify one and the
same thing under several words: and that it was performed with a brand, (...),
and I do not see why we should think that mark of an Ape or Fox to have been
made up of several points: yet so the Doctor must construe all the places
wherem (...) occ^rres; and after all that (...) will be a mark with an hot
iron, though not the same with (...), which we did never say; nor were we
c^ncerned in the (...) of Rog^^es, since all that Mr. Hobs said (and ^o the
Doctor cites him Dr. Cor. p. 18) was, that (...) was a mark with an hot iron,
let it be inflicted upon whom, or what cause you will. How Rogues were (...), I
cannot explain one of any Greek Author further then that place of Lucian, and
that other of Zonaras (which has its like in Petronius) do help me: other
places they have (...), or (...), or (...), that they were (...), (...) which
passages tendered by Latin Authors inscripti, inusti, (...), literati, notis
compuncti, catid^ forcipe signati. Aris^ophanes in Avibus. (...),
(...).
Here it is evident that no mention is made of burning, but it is still
supplied by the (...), and no mention is brought in those times of that other
way which I mentioned out of Elias Vinetus performed by the incision of a Pen
kni^e, in the days concerning which I brought the proof of (...). And as for
the other marks honorary the Egyptians seem to have imprinted by fire irons
only (...), single points: so Prudentius says it was ^^formed acubus minutis
stigmendo, not stigmatisando Not do I ever remember that I read of any form
those (...) marks had: that Stellarum (...) in (...), and those Sphragitides
may be solved well enough, if, we suppose the management to have been thus; yet
Epimenides was (...). As to the number of them, Prudentius and that example of
Epimenidet do make it clear they did imp^int many marks* yet I do not hear that
Pythagoras had more then one, and that on his thi^^ which is the conjecture of
an ingenio^s but modern writer. The Assyrians (...); Iamblich. in vit. Pythag.)
did (...) not (...) and were branded but (...). Yet even there they may have
had a multitude of mark^* or ^f they had not, yet what is (...) when considered
simply as a point, may be called (...) when considered as figured: And this I
say not receding from, but keeping to that distinction which I said was betwixt
(...) and (...), as betwixt (...) and (...). Yea, the case was so upon other
occasions, so as that (...) and (...) were one and the same thing (under a
different notion) as appears from the use of (...) in Theophrastus, etc. and
that of (...) in Hesiod, Aristotle, etc. I do not think that the pictures of
animals which were imprinted on the old Britains ((...)) will be understood of
pointing, or pricking: and if the Doctor should go to any person and bid him
write, engrave, carve, cut, etc. his name; I do not think they would so
understand the Doctor, as he understands (...). Of* the Thracians I can say no
more then that they were (...), so Dion Chrysoft. (...), so Eustath* upon Homer
(the Dabe were Virgati, will any expound that of pricks too?) and though the
brand were never so great, and shaped, yet it might be said compungi, to be
punched, as I observed before. And now I have said not only more then any
before me, but what may satisfy one not resolutely contumacious: I have
sufficiently evinced that the Doctor was out, (...) being a mark with an hot
iron: And for what follows, let any man believe that the judgment of
Marcellus, Stigmata non ta^^ (...), qu^m punctis ^ariatam super^iciem Graci
^^caverunt: which I find seconded by the attestarion of several Authors (de
(...) vene^icarum;) let any man believe that that same is against me, that can.

And now I have run through this tedious plece of pedantry: I have not omitted
any thing unanswered, that I know: not have I ever imposed upon him any thing,
wittingly, which might not be his meaning. I have so examined things, as who
should seek truth, and not victory: I have not heaped upon him impertinent
contumeli^s; and for telling him what he is (which is no abuse) I think he
ought rather to thank me then he angry: I hope he will not hereafter look upon
himself in the ^al^e glass of Enco^^^tick Letters, but take his length from my
measure; and not trouble the world, nor pester his books with curiosities in
Philology, nor intermeddle with Divinity but confine himself to Symbols,
wherein he may do well it is hoped in time, and he will have that happiness to
meet with as few Readers as he does Auditors. I would advise him to call Mr.
Hobs his book, Stigma Hobbianum* rather then (...) since all the several points
therein discussed and examined amount but to one Stigma: which I here
represent. K. I. K. I. And so dismiss him as one of the LITERATI, though not
as a Virtuoso.

Thus Sir you see I have vindicated my self, and you, or rather my self to you:
I have dealt so with your enemy, that I dare take up the saying of Petronius,
Implevi frontem ingentibus literis, and notum epigr amma per totam faciem
liberali manu duxi. I hope you will prove hereafter more cautious, then to
publish any thing in Philology, since Mar^anus Capella has left his Mistress
double-beneficed to the Assembly of Divines: and no one is to pretend to
Criticisme or any thing of learning but such as are of that Class: if any man
shall presume to call another so, or have any esteem for them, or make
honorable mention of them, there shall be aspersions cast upon him, and an
Index expurg^torius, whereby shall be blotted out all those honorable mentions
of any dissenter: In like manner as their Predecessor, the Pope (the power is
the same whether divided, or united) expunged the titles of doctus, and
eruditus out of the Catholic writers where they were bestowed upon the
Protestants. I shall now conclude with the diver^i^ement of some Poetry, the
Authors whereof I am not bound to declare; and desire you would find out some
other way hereafter, whereby I may show you how much I am and desire to be

Oxon. Iun. 12. 1657. Sir, your most humble and most affectionate Servant, H.
Stubbe.

Ad Honoratissimum virum, Marchionem Dorcestrensem Super scriptis nuperis
Wallisianis.
Hendecasyllabon.
H^ros maxim, maxim^que litis
Major arbiter, Oxon^ vetustas
Obsoles^^re ne Scholas pu^^^^^,
Aut loc^ Genium, aut Styli d^^orem
Mutatum crepero sonore voc^m
P^^onomas^is, ineptiisque.
Scriptores alios dabit Oxonia.
Calenum
Dignes auribus, Hunc too cachi^^^
Propi^^t Criticum, Geometramque:
Quem ^emo legit, aut requir^^ usqu^m,
Quem vix quat^uor audiunt leg^^^em:
Quin loquar been nota, saepe in (...)
Solus friget Oront^^ cathedr^,
Hospes, externs, advena, Scotist^,
Ple^^s ^^ris and in^^cetiarum.
Quovis judicio refige, damna
Improbam Crisin, hand pro^am Mathesin;
From Huic STIGMATE, nostra non notatur.
Ad D. Wallisium Epigramma.
^ingeris, ^ to^^ spargis convitia plebe,
De^ensor nostrae quo videare Sto^.
^rr^^! responsum, si sort Academia (...) est,
(...) ^ale concinnas (...).
FINIS.

