The Famous History of the Valiant London Prentice.



Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of London Bridge, 1693.

THE Famous History OF The VALIANT London-Prentice, SHOWING His Noble EXPLOITS
at Home and Abroad: His LOVE and great SUCCESS.

Very Pleasant and Delightful.

Written for Encouragement of Youth.

By J. S.

This may be Printed, R. P.

Printed for I. Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of London Bridge, 1693.

The HISTORY of the London-'Prentice, etc.
CHAP. I. An Account of his Birth, Education and early Valor, etc.
IN times past, there was Born in the Famous County of Chester, a young Man of
excellent Beauty, promising very great things, even in his Infancy; to promote
which, his Parents being wealthy, spaxed not to educate or bring him up in the
best manner the Country would afford, nor did he as he grew up fail in any
thing their expectation. In Learning he was well seen, and in many other
matters, but nothing so enflamed his mind as the desire of exercising himself
in feats of Arms, and was the more incited thereto by Reading the Famous
Adventures of Knight-Errants, how successful they were in overcoming Giants and
Monsters, and rescuing beauteous Ladies from death and misery; and as these
Heroic thoughts increased, so he found his strength abound. Nature not sparing
to give him many Limbs and an able Body, so that in his Childish Encounters
those that far surpassed him in years, were not able to resist his force, nor
come near him in Wrestling, Iumping, Running, cutting the Bar, Stone or Dart;
which made not his Parents but a little proud of such a blessing, whom they had
named Aurelius, as one that promised great things.

CHAP. II. An Account of his first Adventures and Enterprises, where he won the
Virgins Hearts, etc.
WHen Aurelius was at the Age of fourteen, he went to a Wake or Merry-meeing,
to recreate himself with other Youths of the Country; where he so well behaved
himself, that his courage, activity, strength and beauty, gained great
applause, and took so mainly with the Virgins, that some of them began to feel
a Fever in their Minds, which Cupid, who at such Merry-meetings is seldom
wanting in promoting the Business of Love, failed not to increase: but he as
yet not capable of feeling the Flame of Passion that way, regarded not their
amorous glances, nor understood the silent Language of enflamed Hearts, though
it notwithstanding, created him those Enemies that were causelessly jealous of
him, as a most dangerous Rival, and who gathered their Reason for it, from the
many praises their Mistresses bestowed on him in his absence.

CHAP. III. How the fair Lucinda fell in Love with him; how those she despised
for his sake, conspired against him.
Our Youth increasing his Strength and Beauty with his years, and continuing,
as occasion offered, to appear in public amongst those admiring Virgins, that
in a manner doated on him, and often wished to be Mistress of his Affections;
Lucinda the fair Daughter of a Wealthy Shepherd was the chief, who sought by
many ways to oblige him, and to let him understand her Passion; but Modesty
sealing her Lips, he did not, nor would not Interpret her Dumb Signs, but kept
on his Merriment, without any regard of her Passion; which made her sigh and
grow melancholy, refusing to entertain the Address of those that adored her,
and doated on her Beauties, more than she did on those that adorned our Heroic
Youth. This sudden alteration made them restless till they knew the Cause of
it, which was not long ever they did from her Virgin Companions, to whom she
had dropped some words of her Passion, as likewise by a Letter she had written
in order to send to him, by a trusty hand, but had accidentally dropped it, in
which were these words:

Dear Aurelius,
seeing you do not understand the language of a Lovesick Virgins Eyes, pardon
my boldness if with Blushes I have taken the liberty to let you know Lucinda
doats on you, and begs you would requite her Love with Love, who for your sake
renounces the rest of mankind: then have compassion, or Lucinda must be
miserable.

Subscribed Lucinda.


This giving the Amorists a full knowledge, upon whose account they found such
cold entertainment from their beloved Mistress, whom every one of them feared
to lose, they bent their study how to remove that Screen that stood between
them and their much desired happiness: some were of Opinion, that nothing but
the death of Aurelius could effect it; but others of a milder disposition,
declared, That it would not only be too much Cruelty, but bring their own Lives
in question; therefore considering Womankind was generally more taken with the
Beauty of the Body, than with that of the Soul, they thought it fit to Deform
him with Poison; but where to get it they knew not, and so came to a result,
that to disfigure his Face with Wounds might work the same effect, and put an
end to the passion of their Dear Lucinda, which they knew not any other ways to
extinguish.

CHAP. IV. How they attempted to destroy Aurelius, but were overcome and left
naked in the Wood.
THe Plot thus laid against our Valiant Youth many ways were sought for an
opportunity to put it in practice, till at last they understood he was gone to
pay a visit to an Aunt of his, who lived at a Village about two Miles from his
Father's House, and that he must return by a Wood: This lucky opportunity, as
they imagined it, made them all leap for Joy, there being four in number, they
armed them with mischievous Weapons, and in disguise, placed themselves in
Ambush under a Thicket of Trees, in the way he must pass, each Swearing to the
other to keep the thing secret; though they kept not their Oaths, as you will
hear. Long they had not stayed, but as they wished, our valiant Youth not
dreaming of such Treachery came on; but hearing the Bushes russle he made a
halt to see what it meant, when out leaped the (...) and incompassing him,
after they had uttered many his words, and reviled him at an unseemly rate,
they made in to grapple with him; who ignorant of their intent, and scorning to
stoop to fear, took the two foremost in either hand, and by main force brought
their Heads together, that they rung like a Barber's Basin: so that stunned
with the valiant knocks, after staggering some paces down they fell; and
having, by this time wrested a Weapon from one of them, he set upon the other
two with such fury, that giving them several Wounds, they, when they found the
blood run about their Ears, fell on their Knees, and cried for mercy, as did
the other, who by this time were recovered from their Trance; yet could not
they obtain their Wish till he had Thrashed them into a Confession of the whole
matter, and thereby became sensible of the Love Lucinda bore him; and that she
might come to the knowledge of what had happened on this occasion, and that
their treachery might be rewarded with disgrace, he caused them to unstrip, and
with such tackling as their Garments afforded, he bound them to four several
Trees stark naked, where these hot-brained Lovers took a fit of Tooling till
the morning, which discovering the whole Intriegue, their rash Valor became
for some time after the mirth of the Country; but most of all, it pleased the
fair Lucinda, whose favor they lost thereby.

CHAP. V. How his Father put him an Apprentice to a Merchant, and the leave he
took of Lucinda.
THe Father of Young Aurelius having received an exact account of all that had
happened, and fearing these Lovers might study a further Revenge to repair
their Disgrace, as also to prevent any amors that might happen between him and
Lucinda, to whom he was not willing he should be married; he took an
opportunity to discourse him about putting himself in a way that might vender
him capable of living in Credit in the World: When finding him pliable and
ready to submit to what he should propose, he told him it was his pleasure he
should go to London, and there be put an Apprentice to some Honorable Calling
that he might be a comfort to him in his old days; and that it should be in his
power to choose him a Master of any profession. He had not long considered e're
he replied, That seeing it was his pleasure, he was contented; and for the
desire he had to travel and see strange Countries he could fancy none better
than a Merchant: To this the old Man agrees, and shortly after he was sent up
to London, and placed to a Turkey-Merchant upon London Bridge, and upon his
departure directed these Lines to Lucinda.

Pardon me Beauteous Maid, if Love as yet
No power a Conquest over me has to get;
That you deserve what ever Love can bestow,
I must confess, but I alas! must go
And wander over the world e're I can love,
Then be contented and for me never grieve.
Subscribed Aurelius.


This flat denial made the fair Lucinda shed many tears, and bewail her hard
fortune, in loving where she was not repayed with an equal passion; but soon
after a Rich Farmers Son offering Service to her, she having with much
struggling overcome her former affections, she changed her Passion, and
sacrificed her Virginity to the pleasure of this newcome Lover, where Revelling
in excess of joy, we will leave them, and follow Aurelius to his new preferment.

CHAP. VI. How he gained the Love of his Master, and became enamoured of
Dorinda his sair Daughter.
OUr Youth upon his Trial, proved so diligent and respectful, that it was not
long e're he was Bound, according to the custom of the City, and then doubling
his Diligence, he won the love of the whole Family, not doubting any thing that
might please or be for his Master's Interest, and what time he had to spare, he
employed in Manly Exercise of recreating himself in the Fencing-School, and in
Martial Exploits, gaining every where the name of a bold and and hardy Youth,
and one that promised great things. In this happy State he lived near three
years; when Fortune (who is as unconstant as the wind) conspired to give him
some di^^^^bance, for Dorinda his Master's daughter a beautiful Virgin, of
about 14 Years of Age, returning from the School where she had been brought up
at Board, her Modesty, winning Behavior, and Charming Graces, by his often
gazing on her, prompted him to admire her, and by degrees, to conceive such a
Passion for that excellent Creature, that he was no longer Master of his Heart,
which his Eyes had given away: A while he smothered the Flame, but in the end
it broke out the fiercer, and then he knew experimentally what Lucinda had
suffered often; he attempted to discover his Passion, and as often feared to
offend, stayed the words at his Tongues end, and all he could do, was to sigh
and stand confounded in her presence; whilst the Innocent Lady would frequently
ask the Reason, but had no answer, but what his Eyes delivered in burning
glances. Thus he continued for a Month or more; at the end of which, he
resolved one way or other to make his Passion known, and soon found an
opportunity to drop a Letter in the way of the lovely Dorinda, containing these
words:

Beauteous Dorinda,
after many sighs and eager looks, I have presumed to let you know, if this
come to your fair Hand, that I love you dearer than my own life, and to be
requited with your love, there is not any thing so hazardous that I would not
undertake for your sake; the inequality I must confess, is great, yet Love is a
Power obedient to no law but his own: pity me then as a Lover, that love you
above all Earthly things, and look not on me as your Father's Servant, but as
your Devoted Slave, by whose Smiles I live, and without which, my life must
needs be miserable.

Subscribed Aurelius.


This did not a little surprise the beauteous Maid, who considered, that although
he being as then a Servant, she might for all that have cause to love him, yet
highly vispleasing to her Parents, if she should countenance his affections;
wherefore preferring her Duty and Obedience before her Fancy, or the Passion of
Aurelius, the next time she met him, her words were, That she could not but
wonder, he should presume to make Love to her, who was his Master's Daughter,
e're half his time was expired, and wished him not to make mention of it any
more by Letter or word, least her Father were made acquainted with it, to his
prejudice; and so with a kind of a scornful frown, left him as one in a maze of
Grief.

CHAP. VII. How he got leave to go for Turkey, and what ensued.
Aurelius being thus repulsed in his first Love, found himself altogether
restless, and that as often as he beheld his beautiful Mistress, his Flame
increased, and his Torture was more and more augmented; and though he tried
many ways to give way to his laboring mind, he found them in vain, and
therefore concluded, unless he were removed from the lovely Object, he must be
always miserable; and perceiving her looks and carriage every day more and more
scornful toward him, he resolved to request his Master that he might go for
Turkey as his Factor in the next Fleet: which Request of his, was granted
whthout much difficulty, and in a gallant Equipage took leave; though not
without some tears of his scornful Mistress, who by this time, began somewhat
to relent, that she had so unkindly repulsed his Address, but being young and
beautiful, and considering, that to those advantages her indulgent Father would
add in large Portion, her thoughts of a higher advancement, hushed that care
and so they parted; the valiant Aurelius to the Ship, and he Lady to her
Chamber; where we must leave her (who shortly after Married a Rich Merchant)
and follow him into Turkey.

CHAP. VIII. How he arrived in Turkey, and of his Reception: How he overthrew
the Turks and killed a Turkish Prince.
THe gallant Aurelius having passed the danger of the Seas, and a while
contended with the Storms of Winds and Love, Landed at Constantinople, where he
was received with much respect, by the English Merchants and Factors residing
there, and behaved himself so well, in the management of his Affairs, that he
gained a general Esteem; and in all this he forget not to exercise his Valor,
as occasion required; and being by this tim^ grown to his full strength, he
found notable to encounter him, though he was too modest to boast of his own
Abilities: Now it so fell out, that upon the Marriage of one of the Turk's
Daughters, great Sports and Shows were prepared, and all the valiant Knights
summoned to exercise at Tilt and Turnament, in honor of the Ladies and their
Countries. This News pleased Aurelius so well that he resolved to make one
amongst them, and show his Prowess for the Honor of the English Nation,
against the proud Infidels, and thereupon provided Armor, a Horse, Sword and
Lance, bearing in his Shield a Golden Phoenix, to signify he was in Subject
to a Virgin Queen; and under it Neptune Brideling the Ocean; showing, that the
Seas Sovereignty depended on her Will: ^s for his Armor it was White,
signifi^ng Innocence.

Thus bravely Acc^^red, he hasted to ^he List, to await the Trumpets sound,
where all the Nobles and Ladies were ^eated in their Degrees, clad in Gold and
Gems, when on a sudden, three Turks ^ell mounted, and richly armed, advan^ed
with their Mooned Shields, and with loud voice, did Defiance as the
Bridegroom's Champions, to all the Knights of Christendom; which made Aurelius
mad to let them know what English Valor was; but perceiving the Champions of
other Nations preparing for the Encounter, he forbear till he might be a
witness, of their Fortune, and that his Honor might be the greater, in
overcoming their overcomers: nor did he miss, for the Turks being of a
Monstrous size, and well managed to such Fears of Arms, at the first encounter
cast them from their Saddles, and so passed on, and did the like to three
others, which made the bold Aurelius believe it was time for him to advance,
and thereupon, setting Spurs to his Horse, he met the foremost with a full
stroke on his Breast, that he tumbled him with his Heels upward, quite over the
Crup, and passing on, struck the second on the Crest, with such forre that he
broke it, and the Lance entering his Brain, he fell breathless to the ground,
which the third perceiving, who was of a Giant like Statuce, came upon him with
his Sword, and with a full blow, cut through his Shield and much bruised him,
but he charging furiously upon the Infidel, soon made him give ground, and
after diverse Wounds obliged him to kiss the Earth, and beg quarter for his Life.

To revenge this disgrace of his Champions, the Turkish Prince, with the leave
of his Father in-Law, entered the List in great rage, and defied the bold
Aurelius, Swearing by Mahomet, he would Chastise the great Affront, and with
many reproachful words, bid him to come on, upon which they set Spurs to their
Horses, and met with such fury, that their Lances hurst, and shivered in the
Air, when the Turkish Prince drew his Sword: but Aurelius neglecting to do the
like, made at him with the Truncheon of his Spear, with which he gave him such
a weighty blow on the top of his Helmet, that broke his Neck in sunder, and
down he fell in a mortal Trance, after which the Turks strained Complement, and
none durst undertake the valiant English Champion.

CHAP. IX. How he destroyed two Lions prepared to devour him, and had the
King's Daughter in Marriage.
THe Great Turk upon notice that Prince Grodam his Son-in-law, whom he thought
had only been stunned, was dead, vowed that Aurelius, whom he called English
Boy, should dye the cruellest Death that ever Man dyed, and thereupon sent a
strong Guard to sieze him, and convey him to Prison, till he consulted what
manner of Teach to put him to; which in the end was concluded, that he should
be cast alive to two Lions, who (to be the greedier in devouring) were kept
fasting many days.

The day of his death, as by appointment being come, and the King his Nobles,
and all his Ladies, seated to behold the Execution, the brave Aurelius was
brought forth in a Shirt of Cambrick, and Drawers of white Satin, Imbroidered
with Gold and a Crimson Cap on his Head, but had scarce time to vow
respectfully to the Ladies, who greatly praised his manly Beauty, and began
highly to pity his misfortune, e're the Lions were let loose, who at the sight
of their Prey, casting their Eyes upon him, began to rore horridly, insomuch
that the Spectators trembled; and behold Aurelius, whom Death could not daunt
laying aside all fear as they came fiercely to him with open Mouth, charged his
Hands into their Throats, and e're they had power to get from his strong Arms,
forced out their Hearts, and laid them dead at his feet, demanding of the King
what other dangerous Enterprises they had to put him on, and he would gladly do
it for the Honor of his Queen and Countries sake; when immediately the Emperor
descending from his Throne, tenderly Embracing him, swearing he was some Angel;
withal Pardoning him, and gave him Beauteous Teoraza his Daughter in Marriage,
with great Riches, who for his sake, became a Christian: and after spending
some time in that place, they both returned to England with great joy, where
they lived many Years very Loving and Happy.

FINIS:
BOOKS Printed for j. Back, at the Black-Boy on the middle of London Bridge;
Where any Chapman may be furnished with all sorts of Books and Ballads at
reasonable Rates.
1. THe Protestant Guide in Prayer, etc. 2. School of Piety. 3. Life and Death
of Thomas Savage. 4. Righteous Man's reward. 5. Saints everlasting Rest, by R.
B. 6. England 's delightful new Songs. 7. Simple Simon. 8. Gentlewomans delight
in Cookery. 9. Crown Garland. 10. Twice Lovers Garland. 11. (...) of Courtship.
12. (...) Jests. 13. History of the London 'Prentice. 14. Canterbury Tales. 15.
A Discourse between a Mother and a Daughter, concerning Marriage. 16. A Book of
merry Riddles. 17. The true Egyptian Fortune Tellers.
Broad-sheets.
The Romish Massacre: Or, An Account of the Irish Rebellion.

A Prospect of the Seven reigning Sins.

A Tribute of tears, or the house of mourning.


