Fleet Mayor.
Martis decimo die Octobr. 1693. Annoque Reg. Regis and Regin' Willielmi and
Mariae, Angliae, etc. Quinto.
THis Court does desire Mr Strengfellow to Print his Sermon Preached before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Livery-men of this City, at the Parish Church of St.
Lawrence-Jewry, before the Election of the Lord Mayor, on Michaelmas day last.

Goodfellow.

Imprimatur.

Ra. Barker.
Lambeth Oct. 17. 1693.
A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Livery-men OF THE CITY of LONDON, IN THE Parish Church of St. Lawrence-Jewry,
ON THE Feast of St. Michael 1693. At the Election of the Lord Mayor for the
Year ensuing.

By WILLIAM STRENGFELLOW, M. A. Lecturer of St. Dunstan's East.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and Samuel Eddowes under the Piazza, at the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1693.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir JOHN FLEET, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON, And
to the COURT of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
IT IS an Observation I have made for now a dozen Years at least (wherein I
should yet be very glad to find my self mistaken) that there is no one thing of
more pernicious consequence, to the Peace and Tranquillity of this Renowned
City, than its disorderly Popular Elections, whether of Magistrates to Rule, or
of Ministers to Teach. The latter of these Evils, I dare say, the most
considerable Part of the Clergy here do both highly disapprove, and very
heartily bewail: the which, I hope, will at length meet with a Rebuke as
public as the Scandal it gives, from some or other Superior of that Order,
whose Gravity and Abilities are most likely to be effectually successful in the
reclaiming of it. And 'twas chiefly because I knew my self to be no fit Match
for the former, that I did not without some Reluctance engage in the Service
Your Lordship was pleased to enjoin me upon this peculiar Occasion, which I
easily foresaw would most naturally induce an Encounter with it. For of all the
Parts of a Preacher's Duty, that of Public Reproof should be discharged with
both Strength and Courage, Skill and Authority; and is (I think) generally the
least becoming, but however the most unrelishable from any of us of the Junior
Sort.

My Lord, It Is our great Disadvantage in occasional Sermons (and especially
upon so copious a Subject as fell to my share here) that we have seldom time to
press home any single Argument, without defrauding of all others: and so are
forced rather to pick, than collect Materials; to say nothing at all upon some
Heads, and perhaps not enough upon any. And (among others) that is one
considerable Defect of the Instructive Pages of the ensuing Discourse: which is
scarce any thing more than a Cursory Touch upon many such Particulars, as do
well deserve a more solid Treatment. And though in the few Elenchtical Periods
of it, 'twas my real Design to act the Plain-Dealer; yet I Am sure I have no
where wilfully broke in upon that becoming Deference, which I know to be the
rightful Due of those Worthy Sages, who were chiefly in Nomination in the late
Election. I have therefore given them the Title of Candidates, because I know
not by what more proper Term either to express my meaning, or to distinguish
them from the rest of their Brethren. And though I sometimes call them
Competitors also, yet the indifferent Reader will easily discern I have taken
care to charge the blameable Indecencies of the Competition, not upon them, but
upon the undisciplined and tumultuary Populace.

My Lord, There is no one more sensible, than my self, of the numerous
Imperfections of the whole: And if I have any good Opinion of it, it is purely
owing to the kind Acceptance it unexpectedly found from both Your Lordship and
the Honorable Court. And because I know not what should probably invite so
public an Approbation as you have since been pleased to grace it with, unless
its Plainness and unaffected Simplicity: I have therefore taken care to make
You a Tender of it from the Press, in the very same homely Dress You had it
from the Pulpit; save only that I have added a single Passage or two, to
prevent the misunderstanding of my meaning in several others.

In fine, (My Lord) Whatever may be the Effect of this mean Performance, I Am
sufficiently conscious 'twas sincerely intended for a charitable Effort
(without all manner of Reflection upon either Person or Party) toward the so
much to be desired Composure of our unhappy Differences. And though the farther
Publication of it is an Instance of my Obedience to Your Lordship's Commands,
wherein I had much rather have been excused; yet if the Reader will peruse it
with the like Candor it met with from that Venerable Audience wherein 'twas
uttered; it can, I hope, do no harm, and may (by the Blessing of God) do some
good.

My Lord, I have nothing more to add, but my most grateful Acknowledgment of
Your Lordship's many and signal Favors, both before and since Your Advancement
to the Chair of Eminence. And if 'twere not to prove what I believe no one
doubts, I could my self supply as convincing a Testimony of Your surpassing
Private Munificence, as the Year of Your Mayoralty has many of Your Public.
But I Am sensible they no more need the Encomiums of either Tongue or Pen, than
Your Honor does the Support of the Praetorial Robe. You may now with
Satisfaction put off the latter, but the former will be the indelible Ornament
of Your Name and Memory. And 'twere Injustice in this great City, to grudge You
a little Ease in one kind, since She has taken care to burden You in another:
or to repine at Your Absence at Guild Hall, while You solicit Her Interest in
St. Stephen's Chapel.

May You long enjoy the fragrant Odours of Your diffusive Beneficence, in this
World; and at length reap the complete Reward of it, in that which is to come.
And may God Almighty bless this Famous Corporation with a lasting Succession of
such Governors, is the hearty Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Highly obliged, and most devoted humble Servant, W. S.

A SERMON Preached at the ELECTION OF THE Lord Mayor.
Matthew. xx. 22. former part. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye
ask.
THE Disciples of our Lord being big with expectation of their mighty
Promotions, upon his approaching Investment with the Regal Power; they had
frequent Jealousies, and warm Debates, which among them should be the Greatest
under him. One probably thought, his Master's peculiar Matthew. 16.18, 19.
Promise was sufficient to give him the best right to that topping Dignity.
Others that they stood fairest for it, upon the score of their John 13.23.
Bosom-intimacy, their Gal. 1. 19.
proximity of blond, their surpassing Mark 3.17.
endowments, and such like instances of their personal merit. But amongst 'em
all, James and John the Sons of Zebedee (imagining perhaps that their own
united Claims, and their Matthew. 27.56.
zealous Mother's importunity could hardly both miscarry) took the boldness to
address him in none of the most (...), Mark 1^.35.
submissive terms, that they might have the privilege to sit, the one on his
right hand, the other on his, left. His Kingdom they fansy'd was not only to be
a temporal one, but was moreover to be established by the Jewish Model: And
having lately heard him Matthew. 19.28
declare, that even all the twelve should be his (...).
Viceroys, or Deputy-Magistrates in each his respective Province; 'twas the
high-flown aim of these two Brethren, to insure to themselves the two most
eminent of those honorable Posts, which they supposed would (like those of
Joseph and Judah of old) entitle them to the Precedence of all the rest.

Now to this their ambitious request, my Text (which immediately follows) is a
short, but effectual both check and reply. Jesus answered and said Ye know not
what ye ask.

Where observe, that these words [Ye know not] may fairly denote to us either
1. A downright ignorance: You understand not the nature of those illustrious
Offices you sue for under my intended Government. Or 2. A stupid Act 23.5.
inconsideration: If ye do understand them, ye little think of the weight and
burden of them, or of the accomplishments necessary to their due discharge.

In the former sense, they are most properly applicable to the two Apostles to
whom they were spoke: But in this latter, they may well serve for a cautionary
admonition to all Candidates for the Magistracy, in any, whether greater or
lesser Communities. And as such I shall briefly treat of them, under these
ensuing general Heads.

I. I shall enquire a little into the real object of those men's Suit, who are
at any time Candidates for the Office of a Magistrate; or shall show, what it
is they must be supposed to ask. II. From the nature of the office so
described, I shall infer the several Qualifications requisite to fit them for
it. III. Those Qualifications being supposed, I shall next enquire, Whether or
no, and how far it is allowable to ask, or sue for any such office, or post of
eminence. IV. I shall cursorily remark upon some such unbecoming ways of
asking, as I fear our own Age is too justly chargeable withal. And, V. Lastly,
Shall conclude all with a summary Exhortation, adapted to the occasion of our
present Solemnity. I begin with the first thing now proposed. And that is,
I. To enquire a little into the most substantial object of those men's suit,
who are at any time Candidates for the Office of a Magistrate; or to show what
it is they must be supposed to ask. Now I conceive the honorable Office, to
which 'twill be here expected my following Discourse should bear somewhat of
immediate respect, does always afford these three things most especially
considerable: Abundance of business, a multitude of Snares, and a very solemn
and severe charge. Other appendages it is possible it may have, but these it
must have its inseparable Companions. And though even these sit heavier or
lighter, in proportion to the circumstances of times and seasons; yet they
seldom or never become so insensible, as not to deserve the esteem of a real
burden. First I say,

1. One sure entail on the Magistrate's Office, is that of abundance of
business. And indeed, 'twas this was the main occasion of the first institution
of the subordinate Magistracy. For we read ( Exodus 18.) that Jethro, observing
the Government of Israel was too great a task for any one Man, first admonished
Moses ( ver. 18.) Thou will surely wear away (says he) both thou, and this
people that is with thee; for this thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not
able to perform it thy self alone: And then advised him ( ver. 21.) to provide
out of all the people a certain number of able men, men of truth, such as
feared God, and hated Covetousness, and to place such over them, to be rulers
of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
And as (in imitation of this same early pattern) it has been long since found
necessary in our own Nation, to divide the burden to make it tolerable; so
there are some shares still so very weighty (as particularly that of this great
and populous City) that I had almost said, those Magistrates had need really be
(what they arc honorably styled) no less than Gods, who adventure on 'em.

For on all such it is highly incumbent (like that Almighty Sovereign they
represent) to have a watchful Eye upon all the Dangers, the Ails, the
Exigences, and Interests of the Public.

As heroic Souls, of a more than ordinary divine Extract, to inform and
actuate every Member of the Body-politick.

As main Springs, by their own steady motions to maintain a regularity among
all their dependants.

As common Parents, to divide their Care and Affection with a Prudence, and
Impartiality, sufficient (if possible) to preserve a happy Concord among their
numerous Progeny.

As the general Proveditors of their respective Territories, to be the sure
Refuge of Widows and Orphans, the ignorant and the impotent, the hungry and the
naked, the sick, the imprisoned, and calamitous Strangers.

As universal Benefactors, to employ an authoritative concern for all necessary
charitable Contributions, to conferr vacant Offices upon such as most need and
best deserve them, to keep up such an innocent Hospitality as is fairly
becoming the Dignity of their Stations, to provide Work and Employment for the
Honest and Industrious, and Stripes for all Vagrants, Night-walkers, and lusty
Beggars.

As the trusty Stewards of all established Munificence, to visir Hospitals, and
all endowed Foundations; to assert their Rights, enforce their Discipline, and
(by a good improvement of their present Revenues) to invite others to be
Benefactors.

As public Mediators, to bring all Differences they can to an amicable period.

As the Conservators of our Municipal Laws, to make them both sacred in their
Authority, Vere dici potest, Magistratum esse Legem loqu^ntem, Legen autem
mutum Magistratum. Cic. de Leg. Lib. 3.
and effectual in their End; a Security to every one's just Rights, a Curb to
Vice, and a Protection (not a Snare) to Virtue.

Above all, it behooves (...) be the zealous Patrons of true Isa. 49.23.
Religion, to be eminent Numb. 27.17.
Patterns of it themselves, strict Josh. 24.15.
Upholders of it in their Families, 2. Chro. 30.22.
powerful Abettors of its industrious Planters, and Romans 13.3, 4.
resolute Avengers of all such as shall dare to affront either it, or Deuteronomy.
17.12.
them in the vindication of it. For (alas!) what can our Pulpit-Admonitions, or
pathetical Harangues be supposed to signify, if they be not backed with the
Magistrate's Authority; if the Rods and Axes don't both sedulously pursue, and
effectually overtake that prosess'd Atheism, that monstrous Profaneness, and
triumphant Wickedness, which (for the most part) are out of the reach of, but
however, are always sure Proof against all such our incoereive Attacks?

These are some, and (I appeal to those of experience amongst you) they are but
some parts of that huge Variety of both Care and Business, that is indispensably
annexed to the chief Magistracy of this spacious Corporation. And as it
requires an extraordinary supply of Divine Aid, to bear the Burden thus
imperfectly described; so he must be more than a mere man, who can walk upright
and steadily under it, without either stumbling or stepping awry. For, 2ly,

2. Proportionable to his business will his Snares be also, and he must expect
to meet with frequent intermixtures of the one with the other.

It Is odds but his Honor will tempt him to either* an over-weaning Opinion of
his own Merits, or an undervaluing one of those of others. The Head that is
steady enough upon even ground, may unexpectedly turn giddy upon the Pinnacle
of Eminence: And that must be a great Soul indeed, who while he wears the
Dignity and Title of a Psalm. 82.6.
God, does not bewray the Vanity and Infirmity of a Man.

Moreover, his Authority affords Snares, as well as his Honor; and he will be
strongly solicited (both from within and from without) to employ the power he is
entrusted with for the Public Good, to either his own or other men's private.

It Is great hap, if his Parental Affection does not run too strong one
particular way: And if he be not duly careful to diffuse it equally, he will
descend from a common to a private Father; and while he pampers the Darling,
will, starve the Disaffected.

He will undoubtedly be tampered withal as a public Benefactor, for both, the
bestowing of his Favors, and the use of his Interest; and if he be not
strongly fortified with an unbiased Integrity, he will soon learn at once both
to connive at the Demerit of the best befriended, and to overlook die Worth of
the lonely Supplicant.

His Justice may degenerate into either Tyranny or Partiality; and if either a
despicable Poverty, a private Grudge, a revengeful Inclination (on the one
hand) or an overgrown Estate, a sour Aspect, a secret Respect, or a paltry
Bribe on the other, be put in competition with the Merit of the Cause; he will be
sure to want neither Skill nor Evidence; to decide the Controversy.

If his Mind ben't exalted above the catching Transports of either Vanity,
Impatience, or an undecent Rashness, he may be in danger from that Quarter
also: For, it is no new thing in his public post, to meet with both Flattery,
Obloquy, and designed Provocation.

His Hospitality may be sometimes ensnaring to both himself and others: To
himself, by its engrossing too great a proportion of either his Time or his
Fortune: To others with himself, by their perverting it into the occasion of a
sinful excess. It Is hard to please some, by keeping within the Bounds of an
orderly Discipline, and a Christian Temperance; but impossible to maintain both
the exemplary Innocence, and the due Veneration of a public Magistrate,
consistently with the breach or transgression of either.

And finally, well it is for him, if amidst this crowd of other business, he can
find either leisure or inclination for Religion, which is beyond all compare
the most important. For we are all ready to fancy an urgent occasion is
abundantly sufficient to excuse the Homage we owe to Piety, at least till we
have better opportunity and time for it: And by consequence, he that has (at
most) but little to spare, will be tempted to employ it upon somewhat else. But
when greatness and multiplicity of Business meet together, those amount almost
to an Authoritative License: And where the Magistrate relies on that, for an
excuse of his Profaneness; as his Office cannot fail of being a private Snare
to himself, so his unhallowed discharge of it must inevitably prove a public
Scandal to all others.

And if to his hurry of Business, and his train of Snares, we subjoyn in the
last place,

3. The weight and severity of the Magistrate's Charge, they will together (I
think) very fairly amount to the sum total of his great Acquest.

His Charge is as extensive as his whole Province; and of no less moment than
the common Felicity of all its parts. Of no less, said I? Nay, oftentimes of
infinitely greater. For there are some peculiar authoritative Posts, which
(though of limited power) are of universal influence: And if I apply the
Assertion particularly to that of the Chief Magistrate of this Great City, I
shall not need to seek far, for either Records or Vouchers to confirm the truth
on it. The Metropolis of a Nation is its Universal Academy: And if either Vice
or Error, Atheism or Profaneness, Faction or Disorder, prevails in the one, the
Tincture will of course inevitably spread, and the other must quickly learn the
Fashion.

Now, the more eminent the Station, the greater the Trust: And the greater the
Trust, the more fatal the Miscarriage. And as the Welfare or Ruin of all the
Members so immediately depends upon that of the Head, so he had need be well
assured of his own ability, who either sues for, or accepts the regimen of it.

Especially if he considers withal (together with the Object) the Author of his
Charge: For howsoever he may owe the Right of his Office to the Peoples Choice,
he derives the Authority of it from God Almighty. And as his investiture with
it is ordinarily accompanied with the solemnity of an Oath; so every wilful
Miscarriage in the succeeding discharge of it, is Perfidiousness to those who
entrust him with the one, and an Affront to that Potentate he represents in the
other.

So that in truth a Magistrate cannot sin at so cheap a rate as another man.
For, besides that, as a private person, he incurrs the guilt of a Criminal by
every violation of the Divine Law* he must moreover be responsible for his
daring Profanation of that Sacred Name he bears as a public, and for his
vicious Example unto those he governs. Nay, which is yet more, he is not only
chargable with his own Faults, but with those of others too: And whatsoever
Broils or Commotions, open Debaucheries or clandestine Villainies, advances of
Vice or declensions of Virtue, occurr within his respective Territory; in a
word, whatsoever either Good thing miscarries which he ought to have promoted,
or Evil is committed which he could have prevented, will be sure to be brought
upon his account at the great and dreadful day of the Lord. For how much soever
the Offices of an Ecclesiastic and a Secular Governor may differ in nature,
their Charges (I think) run pretty parallel, in this one Case at least. They
are both Shepherds; they are both Watchmen. And whereas God Almighty threatens
the enormous Sinner, that he shall surely dye; if they be not duly careful, the
one to warn, the other to restrain him from the evil of his ways, the wicked
man shall dye in his iniquity: Ezekiel. 33.7, 8.
but his blood shall be required at their hands.

And thus I have given you a brief account of what I conceive is most
considerable in the venerable Office of a Public Magistrate; and what every
one (in consequence) must be supposed to sue for, who is a Competitor for it.
Jesus answered, and said, Ye know not what ye ask.

II. The second thing proposed to be undertaken, I shall neither have time, nor
indeed occasion to insist much upon. For, I cannot but think, it is an casie
matter for any one of the meanest capacity, (and much more for those
immediately concerned) from the nature of the Office thus described, to infer
the several Qualifications requisite to fit a man for it.

His Business (you see) is like to be great, his Snares numerous, and his
Charge exceedingly strict and severe. And, it is hard to imagine any one should
ever acquit himself well, in all these three respect; who is not a man of
universal Piety, of an inviolable Integrity, a competent Ability, a generous
Magnanimity, an indefatigable Industry, and a hearty Well-wisher to the
established Religion and Government.

He must be a man of universal Piety; for it is certain he can be but a listless
Abetter of Goodness amongst others, who has little or no concern for it in
himself. And how formally or magisterially soever he may sometimes declare
against Intemperance, Injustice, Profaneness, and all manner of Vice and
Immorality; if lie does not effectually recommend the contrary Virtues by an
Example as remarkable as his Place is Quo qis in Rep. majorem dignitatis gradum
adeptues est, eo submissius Deum colat. Agapet.
eminent, his Life will be sure to put his Zeal to the blush, and his Precepts
will quickly commence as insignificant in the Esteem of others, as those of his
Sovereign Lord and Master God Almighty do already appear to be in his.

He must be a man of Conscience and Integrity also; for, it is nothing less can
render his Conduct uniform, and all of a piece, and keep him tight and hearty
to the whole of his Office. He will otherwise be in continual danger, to adhere
to the pleasing, and to overlook the unrelishable parts of his incumbent Duty;
to be made the obsequious Bondslave of every specious Temptation; and upon
every base Overture, to snap all the Bands of his Sacred Charge (if they were a
Thousand times stronger) with as much Ease, and as little Regret, as Sampson of
old did his Withs and new Ropes.

He must moreover be a man of good Abilities, well stocked with the natural and
acquired Endowments of the Mind, and (as Grotius with good reason interprets
the (...) Deuteronomy. 18.21.
word) with those of Fortune too: For otherwise (be he never so honest and
virtuous) for want of the one, he will be frequently at a loss in the reconciling
of Differences, the due administrations of Justice, etc. and by the scantiness
of the other, be put upon such mean arts, and sordid shifts, as will
exceedingly abase the dignity of his Station.

And for the same reason, he should be a man of a generous Magnanimity, of an
enlarged Soul, and an undaunted Courage: For, it is this must make him the
unbiased Devoto of the public Interest, the resolute Friend of his Cari
parents, Liberi etc. sed omnes omnium caritates Patria una complexa est.
Country and Community; that must inspire him with a noble disdain of either a
selfish Loyalty or a disgustful Treachery, and set him above all the little
Engines of either Hope or Fear, Threats or Promises, the Frowns of Potentates,
or the Corruption of Louis d' Ors.

I add farther, He must be a man of indefatigable Vigilance and Industry, of an
active Spirit, and a lasting Patience: for, he will otherwise be frequently
trepanned into unwary Mistakes, will grow weary of well-doing, will crouch
under his Burden, and faint and move heavily toward the end of his course;
and so consequently ^lubber over his business, to the baneful slackning of the
Reins of Government, the oppression of his Successor, and the no small (nay,
perhaps irremediable) detriment of the Weal-publick.

And finally, under our present circumstances especially, he had need to be a
most hearty Well-wisher to our National Religion and Government. To the former,
because it is closely interwoven with the fundamental Laws of the Monarchy, and
his separate Interest will be otherwise continually prompting him to foment
those Mutinies amongst Christ's Members, which (God knows) are hot enough
already, and to turn his peculiar Territory into a Nursery of Schisms and
Diffentions. To the latter, for else he must of course be an Abetter of Faction
and Sedition, and be always endeavoring to set up a little Commonwealth in
opposition to the great one. And to both together, both because 'twill be no
easy matter for us to change either for a better, and because he is like enough
to be strongly solicited (by one sort of Temptation or another) to join issue
with their professed Adversaries. And when once the established Religion and
Government do cease to be the Darling Twins of their common Patrons; I dare
say, 'twill deserve to pass for a fatal Omen of the Ruin of both.

So much shall suffice for the several Qualifications of a good Magistrate.
With respect to all which, I may well put our Savior's pathetical Question (in
the words immediately after my Text) to all Candidates for that honorable
Office; Are ye able to drink of the cup, etc?

But, admit a Man be duly accomplished for it, in all the foregoing respects;
it then remains to be next inquired (which is the 3d general I at first
proposed)

III. Whether or no, and how far it is allowable for him, to ask, or sue for any
such Post of Eminence: For it is very observable, that though the two Disciples
forthwith replied to our Lord's Demand, without any manner of doubt or
hesitation, We are able; they yet succeeded never the better afterward. A
certain indication, that he was not a little displeased with either the matter
or circumstances of this their Suit.

As to the matter or substance of the Honorable Office under our present
consideration, I shall not here assert, That it is utterly unlawful to desire
it; for I conceive the Apostle's words (in a parallel instance) do not
obscurely imply the contrary: 1 Timothy.3.1
If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. And if the
Office of a Bishop may be in some sort innocently desired, I see no reason why
that of a Magistrate may not be as well so too. But then mark the emphasis of
the Expression (which will equally hold in the Case before us) He desires a
good work, says he; Hieron.
Opus, non dignitatem; laborem non delicias. A Work indeed (as you have already
heard) so manifold and laborious, so dangerous and ensnaring, and enjoined with
so strict and severe a charge, that I cannot imagine how it is any ways
reconcilable with either that lively apprehension we ought always to carry
about us of both our numerous Infirmities, and our approaching account, or with
humane Prudence and a rectified Reason, to be at all eager of adventuring upon
it.

For, how can a Man be thought considerately to court a hurry of Business, to
run designedly upon a multitude of Snares, or industriously to draw upon
himself such a Charge, as he must one day give a strict account of; so long as
he may fairly decline them all? Methinks it were enough (in all ordinary Cases
at least) for a Good man not Locus superior sine quo Populus regi non potest,
etsi it a administretur at dccet, tamen indecenter appetitur. Aug. de Cie* Dei.
obstinately to refuse them, when they are put upon him. And there is but one
reason I can think of, that can so much as plausibly be alleged in vindication
of an actual desire; I mean that of the public good. And even this too, where
it is most noisily pretended, is ordinarily least sincerely meant; and is (I
fear) too frequently perverted into a Stale for somewhat else. And whenever
you see a man transported beyond the bounds of a strictly modest, or decent
inclination; you may reasonably look upon it as a shrewd sign, that either he is
possessed (like the two Apostles in the Text) with an overfond Opinion of his
own Abilities, or has some sinister end to serve by it.

Indeed, 'twas (I conceive) the motive, not the matter of their Suit, which our
Blessed Savior mainly designed to reprehend in his bold Supplicants. And from
the purport of the sacred Narrative, (as we have it recorded in both St. Chapter
20.20, etc.
Matthew and St. Chapter 10.35, etc.
Mark) it seems not only probable but plain and obvious, that the chief
incentive whereby they were prompted to it, was either Covetousness or
Ambition, or perhaps both of them together.

As for Covetousness; how prevalent soever that might be in the Apostles Case,
it cannot be reasonably supposed to sway at all, with respect to the venerable
Office in question: For to those who successively bear it, we are not a little
beholden (among other their public Benefactions) for maintaining its dignity
by the generous expense of so very considerable a part of their own private
Fortunes, as can never render it eligible upon a score of Interest.

But then you will say perhaps, that though the business, and the snares, and the
charges of the Magistracy stracy are no very desirable things, yet the honor
and grandeur of it are: and albeit it is no great point of Prudence to solicit
the former, it is surely very allowable to wish for, or endeavor after the
latter.

I Answer, There is indeed a peculiar honor annexed to the Magistrate's
Office, and I know no reason we have to grudge it him: for if he duly performs
the work, I dare say he will both dearly earn, and well deserve the wages. But
then that which is ordinarily esteemed honor, is nothing more than the outward
Appendage or Ornamental dress of the Office; designed partly to alleviate the
burden to him who bears it, and Culrus magnificus addit hominibus authoritatem.
Quintil. lust.
partly to insure to him a profounder veneration amongst those he governs. And
there is no possessing of this honor, without the burden together with it. And
if there were, it is so thin, so fleeting, and imaginary a something, as can
never be reasonably made the object of a solid desire. And whereas even true
honor is but the shadow of Virtue, this counterfeit honor can be no more than
the shadow of the true: Now the shadow of a shadow, if it be not altogether, is
I Am sure next to nothing at all.

So that indeed, the only Honor that either deserves the name, or is worth
the having, is the pleasing reflection, the grateful odor that flows from a
conscientious discharge of the Office. And whosoever he be that desires this,
must have a special care he do n't pursue it too eagerly: For it is undoubtedly
true, that that which cannot be the proper object of a Man's Covetousness, may
yet be that of his Ambition or Ostentation. And true Honor is a tender Flower,
that quickly loses both its Beauty, and its Fragrancy, by too course a
handling; a critical Plant, that will flourish in none but a truly virtuous
Soil; a shy Spouse, that is most successfully courted at a distance, and will
not endure an urgent importunity; a Divine Treasure, that can neither be gotten
nor kept, but by the most fair, the most decent, the most innocent, and
unexceptionable means. And therefore those men are extremely mistaken in their
aim, who attempt to possess it by any other. Which is a proper Introduction to
my fourth General; under which head (you may remember) I at first proposed,

IV. To remark a little upon some such unbecoming waves of asking, or suing for
Honor and Posts of Eminence, as I fear our own Age is too justly chargeable
withal.

Among the numerous advantages this famous City is so signally blessed with; I
presume we shall all agree, its most excellently constituted Civil Government
is none of the least considerable. And if we have any grievance to complain of
under it, I Am persuaded it is mainly one of our own Creating, I mean the
undecent, and even scandalous annual Canvasings for the chief Administration of
it. An evil, that is grown of late so very pernicious, and so universally
influential; that I dare almost adventure to assert, there has been more ill
blood raised, and more mischief done, by the disorderly Elections of one single
year, than by all the Misgovernments that have occurred in twenty. A certain
Indication this, that we have not so great a scarcity of men fit for such a
Promotion, as of Charity, and good Nature, to agree about them amongst our
selves.

I have not now time (indeed 'twould require a set Discourse) to represent to
you the odious nature, and the fatal effects of those tumultuary hurries, and
shameful Outrages, which are too too customary upon these Occasions: The
public toleration whereof I know not how it is possible to excuse, unless by
pleading that even Government it self suffers a kind of Dissolution (at least a
convulsive interruption) during the heat and continuance of them. What
indefatigable Industry is ordinarily used, to draw out the whole representative
Body of the City, as it were in two great opposite Bands; to Skirmish as
furiously with each other, as it is possible, without the loss of either Life or
Limbs? How do the bigoted Agents of perhaps both sides, labor, and struggle,
by might and main, by Tricks and Collusions, by Clubs and Cabals, by Smiles and
Frowns, Promises and Threats, and a hundred other methods too mysterious for me
to pry into, to make each their own Party the most numerous? With what
monstrous rudeness and scurrility do they not only treat each other, but even
the sage Candidates for the Magistracy themselves? Insomuch, that to put any
one in nomination on one side, is in effect nothing less, than to expose him
openly to all the opprobrious taunts, and sarcastick Invectives, the direful
Slanders, and infamous Libels, that either Wit or Malice can invent, on the
other. And all this for the sake of a momentous Victory forsooth, the gaining
of one the preference out of four or five, who (at the same time) are probably
all unexceptionable Men, and very worthy to fill the Chair.

These, and such other unseemly, unchristian, and even inhumane methods of
competition, I cannot but think are those accursed things, that mainly serve
exceedingly to Eclipse the common felicity of this Renowned Corporation. The
ferment of dissension is often raised so high upon one of these days, that it
cannot be quite allayed the whole year round. And thus the Body-Politick being
never thoroughly cleared, its distemper returns (and perhaps with a double
violence) like a lurking Ague at its wonted Season.

You Will say perhaps, these are baneful and Epidemical Evils indeed; but what
course can be taken, that is likely to remedy them?

That Is a Question too hard for me to Answer: And therefore I choose rather to
leave (nay most earnestly to recommend) it to the mature deliberation of those
amongst you, whose Authority and Influence makes 'em most capable of doing it,
to resolve upon some such Expedients, as may most effectually prevent 'em for
the time to come.

However, that I may not quite dismiss this Argument, without some testimony of
my hearty good will to so desirable an end; accept the offer of my poor Mite
toward it, in the Fifth and last place,

V. In a few words of Advice or Exhortation, 1. To the Competitors for, 2. To
the Electors to, And 3. To him who shall be instated in the chief Seat of
Magistracy, for the Year ensuing.

To those of you who shall be put in Competition for this Post of Eminence,
give me leave most affectionately to recommend an unfeigned Love, a fraternal
Kindness, and an inoffensive Conduct toward one another. Remember it is one of
the best assurances you can give the Public of your real desert of the Honor
you are in nomination for, to show a generous disdain of all little Tricks,
circumventing Artifices, or unwarrantable means for the attaining of it. Be so
far your selves, from approving of, conniving at, or being active in the
Calumniating, the Libelling, or bespattering of one another Reputation, as to
discountenance it all you possibly can in others. Have a care of betraying any
such over-forward inclination for your own Promotion, as is not fairly
consistent with both the Rules of decency, and the best interest of that whole
Community of which you are Members. And choose rather (with the true 1 King.
3.26.
Mother) to resign the Child to the doubtful nurture of the contentious
Pretender, than to be willingly Accessory to its certain mine, by the dividing
of it.

To those of you who are immediately concerned in the Election, it is my serious
advice; That as you have now begun the solemnity of the day, you will have a
special care to pursue, and end it too, as becomes Christian Brethren. And to
this effect, set each one a strict watch before the door of your own Lips; and
let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking, and Malice, be
put away far from you. Let neither Zeal for a Party, nor a Personal Friendship,
nor a secret Grudge, neither Humor nor Advantage, Threats nor Promises, nor
any other motive but the solid interest of the Government (to the best of your
Understandings) be the Director of your Votes. Consider the inestimable value
of a Good Name; and be not so unreasonably lavish of it at one another charge,
as has been too too customary upon these occasions. And bethink your selves,
what a piece of disgraceful service it is to those you wish well to, to cast
Dirt upon others with no other design, but merely to make them look the
cleaner. For it is a sure indication that his Merit can be of no great Extent,
who has no better a way to come by materials to raise the Fabric of his own
Reputation, but out of the Ruins of that of another Man.

And finally, To him who shall have the Precedence of all the rest, I would
importunately recommend (in the first place) a generous and vindictive
Cognizance of all base and slanderous Indignities that shall appear to have
been cast upon any of his worthy Brethren, during the Competition: And then a
serious and impartial Reflection upon what has been already said, with respect
to the business, the Snares, and the charge of the Illustrious Office he is
himself to bear, together with the Qualifications requisite to fit a Man for it.

Or rather, I would beg leave to refer him to the Universal Conduct of his most
deservedly honorable Predecessor. A noble Pattern, which (if he duly imitates
it) I believe all good Men will readily conclude with me, cannot fail of being
(by the Blessing of God Almighty) very effectually conducive to the credit of
Religion, the Establishment of the Government, the Union and Prosperity of this
great City, and his own Immortal Honor.

Now to God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, the only Potentate, by whom Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice, be all Honor and Glory, World without end.
FINIS.

