MATHESIS ENUCLEATA: OR, THE ELEMENTS OF THE MATHEMATICS.

By J. CHRIST. STURMIUS, Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics in the
University of Altorf.

Made English by J. R. A. M. and R. S. S.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Knaplock at the Angel, and Dan. Midwinter and Tho.
Leigh at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

The AUTHOR's PREFACE TO THE READER, Containing a SYNOPSIS of his Method.
I.
THAT the Reader may the better apprehend our design and aim, we have thought
fit to premise some things concerning the Methods, both general and particular,
we make use of in the following Treatise. For as heretofore a sort of a blind
deference to, and superstitious Veneration of Antiquity, and especially of
Aristotle, has hindered the growth and progress of Natural Philosophy, which of
late has made such considerable advances, since it has ventured to stand upon
its own Bottom, to make new Additions to former Inventions, to essay new and
unknown Objects, to substitute Things instead of Names, Certainties instead of
Doubts, and Experience in the room of dull Credulities; not derogating in the
mean while from the deserved Praises of the Ingenious among the Ancients: So
without doubt Mathematics also, unless our Predecessors had imagined that it
had long ago been brought to its utmost Perfection by Euclid, Archimedes,
Apollonius, and other Ingenious Ancients, would have arrived long since to a
higher pitch, and by this time have surpassed those Limits, which now we admire
its arrival to.

II.
It is confessed by all, that no Human Knowledge whatsoever can lay a more just
claim to an unshaken Evidence and Certainty, or boast an higher necessity of
its Demonstrations, or a greater multitude of undeniable Truths, than the
Mathematics; and that those Propositions we have, found out by Archimedes,
demonstrated by Euclid, Apollonius, and others, are at the same time
unquestionable and altogether wonderful. But we may with Truth affirm, that
most of their Propositions may either be disposed in a better order, or
propounded easier, or demonstrated more evidently and directly, or taught after
a more short and compendious way, now at least after they are already found
out, and with a great deal of Pains demonstrated by their first Inventors; and
of this Opinion are several of the best and most celebrated Mathematicians of
the present Age.

III.
It is certain Euclid has demonstrated several Propositions, (as Prop. 2, 3,
20, 30, lib. 1. 2, 5, 6, 10, 15, 28, 29, lib. 3. etc.) whose Truth to any
attentive Person appears from the very terms, more clearly and certainly than
the truth of Axiom 13. lib. 1. which his Interpreters dare not admit without a
Demonstration. And though those superfluous Demonstrations derogate nothing from
the certitude of the thing, yet by an unnecessary increase of the number of
Propositions, and (which frequently follows thence) an inverting the order of
things, they breed Tediousness and Confusion.

IV.
There are none, unless those who are bigoted to Antiquity, but must own that
the Elements of Euclid are destitute of a just and orderly Disposition of
things. For to omit, that in the first Book there are h^ndled several sorts of
Subjects, and a great variety of Properties demonstrated of them promiscuously
without any respect to similitude or convenience; there is this never to be
excused, that, after he has in the first Book deduced and demonstrated some
particular Affections of Magnitude, he proceeds, in the second, to those things
which are universal and common to any quantity; then in the third and fourth,
he contemplates the Circle and the Properties of Figures inscribed in it, or
circumscribed about it; in the fifth again he treats of the universal Doctrine
of Reasons and Proportions; and yet not so universally, but in the seventh
again he is obliged to demonstrate the same of Numbers particularly, which
might have been done for all Quantities whatsover, by one general Demonstration.

V.
Then as for the method of Demonstrating used by the Ancients; it is true that
it nicely regarded the certainty of its Conclusions, nor would it admit any
thing into its Demonstrations, which was not either a first Principle and so
self evident, (called by them an Axiom) or might not be supposed, beyond all
Contradiction, possible to be effected (and on that account named a Postulate)
or, thirdly, an arbitrary Denomination of the thing proposed which needed no
Demonstration, (and was called a Definition or Explication of a Term;) or,
lastly, which had not been evidently demonstrated before: Yet I believe none
will deny, but that this Method would have been more deservedly esteemed, if
with the certainty of its Conclusions it had joined a greater Easiness,
Brevity, and Evidence, which is wanting in most of the Demonstrations of the
Ancients; who thought it enough, firmly and infallibly to establish the truth
of their Theorems, and extort the Assent of their Readers; little regarding by
what Ambages, by how many circumambulatory Propositions, and almost whole
Volumes, it was done; that thereby they might be forced to acknowledge the
thing to be so, while how it came to be so, or from what intrinsic Cause o^
Condition of the Subject requiring it, such and such an Attribute agreed to it,
remained in the mean while obscure, or altogether unknown.

VI.
Hence they made such frequent use of Apagogical Demonstrations, or deductive
ad absurdum and impossible, which ought not to be done, but where no ostensive
Demonstration can be had, or for illustrating negative Propositions rather than
demostrating them; for the method of Deduction ad impossible, does not so much
demonstrate the Truth it self directly, as the consequent Absurdity of the
opposite Supposition; whence it follows very indirectly, (though most certainly)
that the Proposition is true, while in the mean time the original Reason of its
Truth remains altogether hid and in the dark.

VII.
But that we may not seem unjustly to reject the particular Method of the
Ancients, made use of by Euclid, as in lib. 12. Prop. 2, 10. etc. and by
others, but especially by Archimedes, who peculiarly addicted himself to it,
whence it has been by some called the Archimedean Method, and by Renaldinus the
Method per Explosum excessum atque defectum; besides its Deduction doubly ad
absurdum, whereon it always relies, as e. g. it infers the equality of two
Magnitudes A and B by a far fetch round about way, by showing, that if B be
supposed greater or less than A, from either Position there would follow an
absurdity; and thence as it were begging the Equality by a new Inference, which
though it may pass free from Suspicion, yet it neither ought, nor can be
admitted, without this Limitation: In comparing those things whose Natures are
capable of Equality, if it can be demonstrated that the one is neither greater
nor less than the other, we may thence justly infer their Equality.

VIII.
The Learned are now generally agreed, that, besides that Synthetick Method,
whereby the Ancients either ostensively deduced their Problems and Theorems
from evident and common Principles, or apagogically demonstrated them by
Deductions ad absurdum, they also made use of a certain sort of Analysis,
whereby they found out those Theorems and Problems; and which, to raise the
greater Admiration in their Readers, they afterward studiously concealed and
kept to themselves: Which Method is undoubtedly preferable to the other, as not
only demonstrating the certainty of the Propositions so found, but at the same
time showing the invention of them too; and this is that Method that Vieta,
Harriot, and Des Carts, and their Followers have not only brought to light in
this last Age, but to a great degree of Perfection too, and whereof Carolus
Renaldinus, in that vast Work he has entitled Ars Analytica Mathematum, has
given us a large Treatise.

IX.
There has appeared moreover of late another particular Method Dr. Wallis is of
Opinion this is nothing but an Improvement of the Ancients Method of
Exhaustions.
invented by Bonaventura Cavallerius, which is called the Method of
indivisibles, whereby the most difficult and abstruse Problems of Geometry are
found out and Demonstrated with an incredible ease, which is the
abovementioned Renaldinus's Opinion of it, lib. 1. Resol. and Comp. p. 239.
which, to demonstrate the Equality or Proportions of Figures and Bodies that
may be compared with one another, goes to work after a way which seems to be
more natural than any other, by supposing plane Figures to consist of
innumerable lines, and solids of innumerable Plans (called their indivisible
Parts or Elements, because the Lines are conceived without latitude, and the
Plans without any thickness,) and relying on this self-evident Axiom, That if
all the Indivisibles of one Magnitude collectively taken, be equal or
proportional to all the correspondent Indivisibles of another, or taken
separately each to each, then also those Magnitudes will be equal or
proportional among themselves. Which Inference can be guilty of no Fallacy, nor
liable to any Error, as long as those Elements are taken and conceived in that
sense their Authors design them; which is sufficiently demonstrated by
Renaldinus, lib. 1. Compos. and Resol. p. 245. toward the bottom, and at the
beginning of p. 306. and also by Honoratus Faber, in his Synopsis, p. 24. and
Dr. Barrow in Lect. Geom. p. 24. and the following, against Tacquet and the
other Adversaries of this method.

X.
There is another Method akin to this, which may be properly named Generative,
very much followed by Faber in his Synopsis, and Barrow in his Lect. Geom.
whose Author Renaldinus tells us was Guldinus, lib. Cit. p. 253. showing at
large its Rules and Foundations in the following pages, viz. The rise of Lines
from certain motions of points; of Plane and Curvilinear Surfaces, from the
determinate progress or rotation of a given Line, and of Solids by the various
motions of various Surfaces; the Productions whereof are so represented to the
Imagination, that the intrinsic nature of the magnitudes thence arising may
become known, and their Properties and Affections may, from their Natures thus
known, be easily and briefly deduced.

XI.
Near akin to this Method of Cavellerius is that other of Infinite
Progressions, wherein having found a certain Progression of like Parts
circumscribed about, or inscribed in any given magnitude, which may be
continued by Bisection ad infinitum; and then at length (by virtue of the
Doctrine of Exhaustions, founded on Prop. 1. lib. 10. Eucl.) will terminate in
the magnitude it self, I say, wherein the sum of those infinite Terms,
collected by Rules on purpose for the addition of those Progressions, and
consequently the quantity or proportion of the proposed Magnitude, to any other
given one, may be expressed or defined. But this termination of Figures
infinitely circumscribed or inscribed in a Circle, not pleasing Renaldinus
(although his Dissension seems only to consist in Words,) he exhibits another
Method like it, (which he peculia^ly calls his own) built on twelve fundamental
Theorems, and illustrated by several Examples, lib. 1. de Resol. and Comp. p
277 and seqq.

XII.
Of late also, the most ingenious Mr. Isaac Newton, to demonstrate his
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, lib. 1. sect. 1. premises some
Lemma's of his method of Rations primae and ultimae, or evanescent quantities,
thereby to avoid the tediousness of deducing long and perplexed apagogical
Demonstrations after the way of the Ancients. For finding that his
Demonstrations might be very much contracted by the method of Indivisibles, and
knowing at the same time, that that method was scrupled by some, and thought
not very Geometrical, he rather chose to found his Method on the sums and
proportions of quantities which he calls Evanescent, which performs the same as
the Method of Indivisibles, and may be more safely used, which he inculcates in
these very words, and others such like, in Schol. of Lemma. 11. And also
answers several objections which might seem to make against it.

XIII.
But it would be in vain for us to attempt, in this place, to explain all and
each of those various methods at length; having only proposed to our selves, to
demonstrate the chief and principal Theorems and Inventions of the
Mathematics, and to use sometimes one of them, and sometimes another, (having
first Demonstrated their Foundations) according as we shall judge this or that
of them, fittest to Demonstrate the thing in hand, and so show the reasons, and
use of each of them in the process of this discourse. And although H. Faber in
his Synopsis, p. 8. Insinuates, that Analytick terms ought not to be made use
of in Geometrical Demonstrations, because that Algebraick method seems to be
too difficult for young beginners; yet we are of the quite contrary opinion
(nay we can scarce doubt but that that Ingenious man would also agree with us
herein, if he saw the way we make use of those foundations of Algebra, which is
only of the most simple and general principles of it) especially in this case,
where the said method is by little and little instilled with the Demonstrations
themselves; and the literal Computations taught from their first Principles,
than which nothing is more easy: And this is that which we design to do, and
so use the learner by degrees to this sort of Demonstration, thereby to prepare
him the better for the Analytick Geometry of the Moderns, which is the highest
apex of the Mathematics. But we had rather our Reader should himself find,
than we trouble our selves any further to tell him here, how compendiously we
Demonstrate the Propositions of Geometry, by the help of these Analytick notes,
without the tedious Concatenation of a long Chain of Consequences, which would
be otherwise unavoidable.

XIV.
After this way we design to go through the following Scheme. 1. We shall
deduce several propositions of Euclid, Archimedes, and Apollonius from our
definitions, and the generations of Magnitudes therein proposed; as Corollaries
necessarily flowing from them, and confirmed only by an immediate and simple
consequence. 2. We shall demonstrate their chief Theorems (for the sake of
which they were forced to Demonstrate several others before hand, the knowledge
whereof for their own sake was not so necessary or valuable) without any long
series of antecedent Propositions, or Foreign principles, from a few direct and
intrinsic Principles of their own. Whence 3. It will follow, that after this
Method we shall propose things, and treat of them; in a more natural Order, and
first of all deliver those which are most universal and common to all
quantities, and then descend to those which in a more special manner regard
Magnitude, and distribute and dispose all according to certain general distinct
Classes of the things to be treated of, and their affections. Hence also 4. We
deduce from those universal Theorems, by way of Corollary, the Precepts of
vulgar Arithmetic, and specious Computation, which afterward we make use of
in particular Demonstrations after a very short and compendious way; and, for
this very reason, some Learned men of the present Age are of opinion, that the
Ancients often fell into that tedious and intricate prolixity in their
Demonstrations, because they would not acknowledge the great affinity there was
between Arithmetic and Geometry, taking particular care not to introduce the
Terms and Operations of Arithmetic into Geometry; though at the same time they
never scrupled to transfer the names of Plan, Square, Cube, and such like to
numbers. 5. Lastly, Having first Demonstrated the first and Fundamental
Theorems of Elementary Geometry, we may safely build on them the Praxes of all
kinds of Mathematical Arts, that are most useful and requisite to several
Exigencies of human Life, as, first, Trigonometry both Plain and Spherical, the
Construction and use of the Tables of Sines and Tangents. 2. The Construction
of Logarithms, and a compendious application of them to Trigonometry: And in
the 3. and last place, the fundamental Precepts of Algebra, or the Analytic
Art; by the help whereof the learner may at length arrive to the higher and
more recluse parts of Geometry, and become master thereof: Not to mention
several Geometrical and Arithmetical Problems, which we have all along derived
from several of our Theorems, by way of Corollary, which it may be some other
time, may make an Appendix of this work.

XV.
And thus when we shall have Demonstrated not only the chief Theorems of the
Ancient Mathematicians, omitting the unnecessary crowd of those that are only
Subsidiary, but also have demonstratively deduced the fundamental Precepts of
the most necessary and useful Arts that flow from them, and that are abstracted
from matter, as of Arithmetic, Trigonometry, and Algebra; I hope none will
doubt but that in this little Volum we have exhibited, as it were the Nucleus
or Kernel of the pure and genuine Mathematics (for those other Sciences and
Arts which go by the name of mixed Mathematick, are most of them parts of
natural Philosophy, from the application of Mathematics to the Phenomenon of
nature) and so may justly bear the name of Mathesis Enucleata.

XVI.
Nor are we ignorant, nor shall we conceal what several Learned men have both
proposed and already done, for removing those difficulties and blemishes of the
Ancient Mathematical Methods we have just now mentioned. The late Admonishments
of the anonymous Author of L'Art de Penser, no less ingeniously than modestly
delivered, Part. 4. Chap 9. 10. of the said Treatise, are sufficiently known;
as also the laudable endeavors of A. Tacquet and Honoratus Faber and several
others above mentioned for contracting, new ordering, and more easily and
directly Demonstrating the chief Geometrical Inventions of the Ancients. There
are moreover extant of a certain anonymous Author, Elementa Geometrica novo
ordine ac methodo fere Demonstrata, Printed at London about 26. Years ago.
There are also F. Ignatius Gaston Pardies Elemens de La Geometry, etc.
Translated into Latin after the third Edition, by the Famous Schmidtius
Professor at Geneva: As also of F. Mich. Mourgues's, of the Society of J.
Nouveaux Elemens de Geometry, abreges par des Methodes particulieres en moins
de Cinquante propositions, etc. There are also several other Essays of reducing
the Mathematics into a better Order and Method, the titles whereof we have
only as yet seen; and even while these papers were in the Press, there happened
into our hands a Treatise of F. Lamy's Entitled Les Elemens de Geometry, ou
de la mesure des Corpse, etc. Printed at Paris in 1685; so that we may only seem
to some to do what has been done already, in endeavoring to show our Reader a
new and shorter way to the Mathematics.

XVII.
But as none can blame Jacobus le Maire, because, after the happy discovery of
the Magellanick Passage from the Atlantic into the Pacifick Sea, he would
needs yet endeavor to find another shorter, which he accordingly did; nor can
they be blamed, who now a days consult about finding one from these parts of
the World, by the North to the East India's. Thus also, in an affair of that
moment, that one or a few are not sufficient to bring it to Perfection, if any
one who comes after, not only invited, but also assisted by the ingenious
Endeavors of those who have gone before him, shall undertake to add to their
Inventions, to help on the business by his advices, and show what things are
capable of a further Polish, and the method how to perform it, doubtless such
an one ought not to be blamed, nor accused of arrogance, unless at the same
time he endeavors to depretiate the essays of others, and cry up his own as
the only valuable; Which how far it is from our design, the work it self will
abundantly show. Moreover as the senses of men are differently affected by
different Objects, and their Palates have different Relishes of the same thing,
according to different Preparations of them: So the same truth takes and
insinuates it self more easily with one proposed and demonstrated after this
way, more with another after that way; and we are so much the more likely to
suit the different genii of different Persons, by how many more and different
methods and ways we show them, leading to the same end, of which every one may
take that which he likes best.

XVIII.
We therefore Publish, by the Divine assistance, these our Endeavors also,
after so many other ingenious and elaborate ones in the same kind; nor can we
doubt the approbation of some of our Readers. This at least we can
experimentally affirm: That not a few of those to whom these our thoughts were
partly publicly read in Lectures, and partly privately taught (for they were
only designed for Learners) were not a little taken with the Concise brevity
and facility of the Demonstrations; so that we may reasonably hope to be
acceptable to those, to whom either time, or sufficient force of genius is
wanting, to run over the vast Volumes of the Ancient Mathematicians, and
comprehend their prolix Demonstrations, and long series's of far fetched
Consequences; and as for those who have both leisure and genius to do so, this
may serve for an Encouragement toward it; that after they have gone through
the chief truths and propositions they contain, Demonstrated in a more easy
and shorter way, they may so much the more confidently adventure upon those
celebrated and ingenious Treatises, from the reading whereof they were before
deterred by the length and almost insuperable difficulty of their tedious and
perplexed Demonstrations.

XIX.
Being now about to enter upon the matter it self, we will only further hint
these few things. 1. Since our whole design is for the advantage of young
Students (which ought to be a Professors chief Care and Study) we must not omit
the Explication of the most simple terms; especially since we design to deduce
some Corollaries immediately from them, which heretofore have unnecessarily
increased the number of Propositions and Demonstrations. 2. To encumber our
work as little as we can with words we have made use, especially in our
Analytick Calculus, of some Symbols, as = for Equality, as also of and for
Square and Rectangle, and of the common Radical sign for the square Root, with
the Line on the top for connecting of quantities together, the Root whereof is
jointly taken, 3 for the Cube Root, for the Biquadratick Root.

XX.
That the Reader may at one view see the Contents of the following Treatise, we
have thought fit to present him here with it, by way of Synopsis. It is divided
in two Books.

I.
The first whereof contains the chief and most select Propositions of Euc^id's
Elements, of Archimedes's Treatises of the Sphere and Cylinder, as also of the
dimension of the Circle, etc. Wherein that which these ^uthors have
demonstrated by a long and tedious Series of Consequences, and for the most
part indirectly, we have here endeavored to Demonstrate directly, and so that
the Demonstration of each Proposition depends, either on no other, and so is
evident by its own light, or on a very few of the antecedent ones.

II.
After the same way in the second Book we treat of the Conick Sections, and
Demonstrate the chief properties of the Conoid, Spheroid, Cycloid, Conchoid and
Spiral Lines, which are extant either in Apollonius or Archimedes and others,
and what they have Demonstrated by long and tedious process's we have here
exhibited in a short and easy Compendium. And that,

III.
In such a method, as does not so much require intent and severe thinking, as a
bare and easy inspection, and application of the Principles of specious
Algebra, and method of Indivisibles. which yet,

IV.
We don't barely suppose, and remit our Readers to other Books to learn (which
would be too troublesome) but in the Process of the Work it self, they are
gradually, and as occasion presents, derived frrm their Original Fountain, and
first Principles.

V
By the same way also the most useful and necessary Mathematical Praxes are
laid down under the names of Corallaries and Scholia, the Construction of the
Tables of Sines and Tangents taught, the Original and use of the Logarithms
Demonstrated, and the Precepts both of Plain and Spherical Trigonometry deduced
from their first Principles, etc.

VI.
The Praxis also of pure Arithmetic, and of common Decimal, and (which is
seldom used) of Tetractical, as also the Doctrine of Surds, are derived from
their first Original Whereunto,

VII.
As a Complement of the whole Work, we have added an Introduction to the
Specious Analysis, or new Geometry of the Moderns, particularly according to
the Method of Des Carts, but much facilitated by later Inventions, and
Comprizing the Precepts of the Art in six or seven Pages, but illustrated with
above forty Examples in the different degrees of Equations.

What the Reader's opinion will be of these our Endeavors, designed only for
the use of young Students, time must teach us. The Author himself at least,
amongst his other performances, allows these the first place.

ADVERTISEMENT.
At the Hand and Pen in Barbican are Taught, Viz.
Writing, Arithmetic, Book-keeping, Algebra, Geometry, Measuring, Surveying,
Gauging, Astronomy, Geography, Navigation and Dialing.

By Robt. Arnold.
Persons Taught abroad.



Elementa Arithmeticae Numerosae and Speciosae. In usum Juventutis Oxoniae e
Theatro Sheldoniano. Prostant Venales Londini apud Dan Midwinter and Tho. Leigh
ad Insigne Rosae Coronatae in Caemeterio Divi Pauli.

Mathesis Enucleata: OR, The Elements of the Mathematics. Book I.
Explaining the First Principles of the Mathematics; among which are (in the
first place) Definitions, and some Consectaries that flow from them.
CHAP. I. Containing the Definitions or Explications of the Terms which relate
to the Object of Mathematics.
DEFINITION I.
Mathematics is the Science or Knowledge of Quantity, and of Beings, as far as
they are subject to it, or measurable; and may justly claim the Name of
Universal, while it is employed in Demonstrating those Properties which are
common to all or most Quantities: But when it descends to the different Species
of Quantity, and is busied in contemplating the Affections belonging
particularly to this or that Quantity, it is distinguished by various Names,
and distributed into various Parts, according to the various diversities of the
Objects.

DEFINITION II.
QUantity may be defined in General, whatever is capable of any sort of
Estimate or Mensuration, as immediately the Habitudes and Qualities of Things,
as e. g. the multitude of Stars in the Heaven, or of Soldiers in an Army, the
length of a Rope, or Way, the weight of a Stone, the swiftness or slowness of
Motion, the Price of Commodities, etc. but mediately, the very things
themselves wherein those Estimable Qualities are inherent. Whence with the
ingenious Weigelius we may not incongruously reduce them all to these four
Kinds or Genders, viz. 1. to Quanta Naturalia, Natural Quantities, or such as
Nature has furnished us with, as Matter with its Extension and Parts, the
Powers and Forces of Natural Bodies, as Gravity, Motion, Place, Light, Opacity,
Perspicuity, Heat, Cold, etc. 2. to Moral Quanta or Quantities, depending for
the most part on the Manners of Men, and arbitrarious Determinations of the
Will; as for Example, the Values and Price of Things, the Dignity and Power of
Persons, the Good or Evil of Actions, Merits and Demerits, Rewards and
Punishments, etc. 3. to Quanta Notionalia, arising from the Notions and
Operations of the Understanding, as e. g. the amplitude or narrowness of our
Conceptions, universality or particularity, etc. in Logic; the length or
brevity of Syllables, Accent, Tone, etc. in Grammar: And lastly, to Quanta
Transcendentia, Transcendent Quantities, such as are obvious in Moral,
Notional, and Natural Beings; as Duration, i. e. the Continuation of the
Existence of any Being; which in Physics especially is named Time, and may be
conceived as a Line, etc. To these you may moreover add Unity, Multitude or
Number, Necessity and Contingency.

DEFINITION III.
NVmber (whereon we shall make some special Remarks) if it be taken in the
Concrete, is nothing else than an Aggregate or Multitude of any sort of Beings;
taken abstractedly, it is, as Euclid calls it, (...), a multitude, or (as they
call it) Quotity of Unities, on the one hand Number, i. e. many are opposed to
one; and in that sense Unity is not a Number: On the other hand Unity may be
esteemed a Number, since it is no less (if I may be allowed that term) some
Quotity than two or three. But as we denote or signify particular Things, when
we speak of them Universally, by the Letters of the Alphabet, A, B, C, (a, b,
c,) etc. as universal Signs or Symbols of them; so for distinctly and
compendiously Expressing the innumerable Variety of Numbers, Men have found out
various Notes, the most natural whereof, are Points disposed in particular
extended Orders, as... to denote Three, 9 dots arranged in 3 rows and 3 columns
to denote Nine, etc. But that way which is most commodious for Practice, is by
the common Notation, or Ciphers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. the invention
whereof, as we have it by Vulgar Tradition, is owing to the Arabians. By a very
few of these we express any number tho never so great, by a wonderful, tho now
adays familiar, Artifice; the first Inventor of them having Established this as
an arbitrary Law, that the first of them shall signify unity or one; the 2d
two, etc. as often as they stand alone; but placed in a row with others, or on
the left hand of one or more 0, or noughts, (which of themselves stand for
nothing, but fill up empty places) if in the second, before a naught, they
denote Tens; if in the 3d. Hundreds; in the 4th Thousands; in the 5th Myriads
or Tens of Thousands; in the 7th so many Thousands of Thousands, or Millions;
in the 8th Tens of Millions, etc. and so onwards, increasing always in decuple
Proportion, by Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, etc.

COROLLARY I.
HEnce you have a way of expressing or writing any Sum by these Notes, which
you may hear expressed in Words; as if we were to express in Notes the year of
our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Nine, it is manifest, that
according to the method above described, by placing 9 on the right hand in the
first place, and nine again in the second toward the left, six in the third,
and one or unity in the fourth, the business will be done. Thus it will be
easy to any one with a little attention, to express any Number whatsoever by
these Notes; (as suppose that which Swenterus proposes, in Delic-Physico-Math.
Part. 1. Probl. 75.) Eleven Thousand, Eleven Hundred, and Eleven.

COROLLARY II.
HEnce you have also the Foundation and Reason of the Rule of Numeration in
Arithmetic, or expressing any Numbers or Sum in Words, which you see written
in Ciphers; which for greater ease may be done thus, viz. beginning from the
first Figure toward the right hand, over every fourth Figure note a Point,
(including always that which was last pointed) and at every second Punctation
or Point, draw short strokes thus, one over the 2d, two over the fourth, etc.
the first denoting Millions, the second Millions of Millions, or Bimillions,
the third Trimillions, etc. and the Intercepted Points the Thousands, in their
kinds, etc.

SCHOLION.
HEre I cannot omit, on this occasion, what the forementi ned Weigelius has
hinted about another way of Numeration, and which Dr. Wallis mentions, Oper
Mathemat. Part 1. p. 25. and 66. showing there a way (and illustrating it by
Examples) of Numeration, and of Expressing the Figures; which proceeds thus;
whereas now adays in numbering we ascend from uni y or 1 to ten (the reason
whereof; after which Aristotle makes a prolix Inquiry, Probl. 3. Sect. 15. was
taken without doubt from the denary Number of our Fingers) if from unity we
proceed only to four, (which Aristotle in the same place tells us some of the
Thracians used to do of old,) and thence returning back again to Unity, we
should proceed again after the same way; we might after that way obtain a
vastly more simple and easy Arithmetic, than we have now adays. Which, even
hence we may conclude; because for Multiplication and Division there would need
no other Table (or Pythagorick Abacus) than this easy and short one: 1.1.1
once one is one; 2.2.10 i. e. twice two are four; 2.3.12 twice three are four
and two. 3.3.21 thrice three are twice four and one


Page 5.
Fig. 1.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13



And although it is pity that we cannot hope now adays to substistute this vastly
easier way of Computing, in room of the other now in use, because the other is
universally received, and most sorts of Measures and other Quantities are
fitted and accommodated to the decuple Proportion; yet it ought not to be
altogether neglected in Mathematics, which might receive very great advantage
hereby, especially in Trigonometry, if the ingenious Invention of the
Logarithms had not already supplied its use therein. The whole Foundation of
this Tetractys or Quaternary Arithmetic, is placed only in these three Notes,
1, 2, 3; ^o that any one of them alone, or in the first place, should denote
Units, in the second place, Tetrads, or so many Fours (or Quaternions,) in the
third place so many Sixteens, in the fourth place so many times Four Sixteens,
or 64.s. etc. always proceeding in a Quadruple Proportion. For which way of
Numeration there might be found out terms as commodious as those we now use,
and which are thereby grown Familiar to us, as one, ten, twenty, a hundred, a
thousand, etc. which will be evident by what follows: One, Vnum 1 One. Ten,
December 10 Quatuor, Tetras, a Quaternion or Four. Twenty, Viginti 20 a
Biquaternion Thirty, Triginta 30 a Triquaternion Hundred, Centum 100 a
Tetraquaternion Thousand, Mill 1000 a Quartan Ten Thousand, 10000 etc. a
Tetraquartan, etc.


DEFINITION IV.
A Magnitude is whatever is conceived to be Extended or Continuous, or has
parts one without another, and contained within some common Term or Terms:
wherein that is called a Point which is conceived (as indivisible, or) to have
no Parts, and so no Magnitude, but is notwithstanding the beginning or first
Principle of all Magnitude.

DEFINITION V.
IF we conceive a Point (A) ( Fig. 1.) to be moved toward B, by this motion it
will leave a trace, or describe the Magnitude AB of one only Dimension, that is
Length without Latitude, or which at least we are to conceive so, and is called
a Line: If that Line AB be conceived again so to be moved, as that its extreme
Points AB shall describe other Lines BC and AD, it will describe by that Motion
the Magnitude AB CD, or (to denote it more compendiously by the Diagonal
Letters) AC or BD, having both length and breadth, but without any depth or
thickness, or at least so to be conceived, and this is called Superficies or
Surface: Lastly, if this Surface AC be conceived so to move, e. g. upwards or
downwards, that its opposite Points A and C again describe other Lines AF and
CH, and consequently each of its Lines other Surfaces, etc. by this Motion
there will be formed a Magnitude of three Dimensions, which we call a Solid or
Body, which we will also denote by the two diametrically opposite Letters AH
and DG. But as this Motion of the Point, Line, or Surface, may be various, so
there will be produced by them various sorts of Lines, Surfaces, and Solids:
But these Productions stop here, and proceed no further; for the Motion of a
Body can only produce another Body greater than the first, but no more new
Dimensions.

CONSECTARYS.
I. POints therefore being moved through equal Intervals in the same or a like
way or trace ( e. g. in a straight or the shortest trace) describe equal Lines;
and

II. The same or equal Lines moved through the same Right-lined or Curvilinear
Paths, describe equal Surfaces; and

III. Equal Surfaces moved according to the same Methods and Conditions
describe equal Solids: which, if rightly understood, are the first certain and
infallible Foundations of the Method of Indivisibles. But here you must take
care to distinguish between the way which the Line it self describes, and that
which its Ends or extreme Points describe: For although e. g. the Point a (Fig.
24.) moves along in a more oblique way than A, and so describes a longer Line a
c; yet the Line a b describes by a parallel Motion, an equal space with the
Line A B, (viz.) the same which the whole Line A b, whereof they are parts,
would describe. See Faber's Synopsis, p. m. 13.

DEFINITION VI.
BUT that we may a little further prosecute this Genesis of Magnitudes (as very
much conducing to understand their Nature and Properties) if the Point A moves
to B the shortest way, it describes the Right Line AB; but if in any (one)
other it will describe the Curve or Compounded Line ACB: From whence, with F.
Morgues, we may infer these

CONSECTARYS.
I. THat two Right Lines Eucl. Ax. 14.
beginning from the same Point A, and ending in the same Point B, will
necessarily coincide, nor can they comprehend or enclose Space; for if they
did, one must deviate, and so would cease to be a Right Line.

II. In a Space comprehended by three Right Lines AB, BC, CA, Eucl. Ax. 14.
any two taken together, must needs be greater than any one alone. Moreover we
may add this before hand;

III. In a Circle a Right Line drawn from A to B ( Fig. 3) will fall within the
Circle, because the Curve Line ADB described, as we shall hereafter show, being
longer than a Right Line, must necessarily fall beyond it, or on the outside of
it. And lastly,

IV. A Tangent, or Line (b) which does not cut or enter into the Circle,
touches it only in one Point.

Moreover if a Right Line AB ( Fig. 4.) move on another Right Line BC,
remaining in the same Position to it, it will generate a Plan Surface, to which
a Right Line being any way applied, will touch it with all its point, as Faber
rightly describes it; if a Right Line be moved on a Curve, or a Curve on a
Right Line, etc. they will generate a Curve Surface, called Gibbous, or Unequal
without, and Concave within.

DEFINITION VII.
IF a Right Line be fixed at one of its ends A, and the other be moved round (
Fig. 5.) it will describe in this Motion a Circular Plane, or a Circle; and by
the motion of its end or extreme Point B, Eucl. l. 1. Prop. 20.
the Periphery or Circumference of that Circle BEF. Eucl. Prop. 2. lib. 3.
The fixed Point A is called the Center of that Circle; the Lines AB, AC, etc.
its Radii or Semi-Diameters; all of which are equal one to another. Any Right
Line BC drawn from one part of the Circumference through the Center to another,
is called the Diameter, and divides the Circle into two Semicircles BECB and
BFCB. The Circumference of a Circle, whether great or small, is divided into
360 equal parts called Degrees, and each Degree into 60 Minutes, etc. From this
Geniture of the Circle presupposed, there evidently follow these

CONSECTARYS.
I. THat 2 Circles which cut one another cannot have the same common Center;
for if they had, the Radii ED and EA drawn from the common Center E ( Fig. 6.)
would be equal to the common Radius EB that is the part to the whole.

II. Nor can two Circles touching one another within side, have one and the
same Center, for the same reason.

III. Of Lines falling from any given Point without the ( Fig. 7.) Circle, and
6 of the same Book.
and Eucl. 8. l. 3.
passing through the Periphery to the opposite Concave part of it, that which
passes through the Center of it, is the longest, viz. AB; and of the other that
which is nearest to it is longer than that which is more remote: But on the
contrary of those which fall on the Unequal Periphery, that which tends toward
the Center, as Ab, is the least, and the rest gradually greater, and there can
be but two, as AE and AF, or Ae and Af, equal: All which will appear very
evident by drawing other Circles from the Center A through B, D, E, and b, d, e.
Or thus; having drawn two other Circles, from the Radii AB and Ab, if we
conceive the Radii Ab and Cb to move toward the right hand, their ends will
always recede further from one another; the same is also evident of the Radii
AB and CB, moved also to the right together.

IV. Moreover ( Fig. 8.) of all the Lines drawn within the Circle Eucl. 5 l. 3
the Diameter is the greatest, and the rest gradually less, by how much the
more remote they are from the Center, etc. Which will be very evident to any
one who contemplates a Circle inscribed in a Square, as also the Genesis of
Curvity it self; as also many other ways which I shall now omit; or to mention
one more thus; because the two Radii CA and CB being moved, in order to meet
together, necessarily approach nearer to one another in their extreme Points.

DEFINITION VIII.
THE Aperture or opening of two Lines ( Fig. 9.) AB, AD, etc. that are both
fixed at one end at A, and the other ends opened or removed farther and farther
from one another, is called an Angle, Prop. 15. lib. 3.
and usually denoted by 3 Letters, D, A, B, (whereof that which denotes the
Angular Point, always stands in the middle,) and measured by the Arch of a
Circle BD, or a certain number of Degrees which it intercepts. The greatest
Aperture of all BAC is when the 2 Legs of the Angle AB and AC make one Right
Line, and is measured by a Semicircle, or 180 Degrees. The mean or middle
Aperture BAE or CAE, when one Leg EA is erected on the other AB or AC at Right
Angles, so that it inclines neither one way nor the other, (thence called a
Perpendicular) is named a Right Angle, whose measure is consequently a Quadrant
(or quarter part) of a Circle or 90 Gr. Wherefore a Semicircle is the measure
of two Right Angles: An Aperture or Angle BAD less than a Right Angle (and so
measured by less than 90 degrees) is called an Acute Angle; and that which is
greater than a Right Angle, as DAC (and so consisting of more than 90 degrees)
is called an Obtuse Angle. Whence me may now draw these

COROLLARYS.
I. TWO or more Contiguous Angles Eucl. 13. lib. I. with the Coroll.
constituted on the same Right Line BC, and at the same Point A (as DAB, and
DAC or DAB, DAE and EAC) make two Right Angles, as filling the Semicircle; and
consequently,

II. All the Angles that can be constituted about the Point A (as filling the
whole Circle) are equal to 4 Right ones: As also on the other side Euclid. l.
1. Prop. 14.
if two Right Lines AB and AD meet on the same point A of another Right Line
AC, and make the Contiguous Angles equal to 2 Right ones, that is, if they fill
a Semicircle, BC will necessarily be the Diameter of a Circle, and consequently
a Right line.

III. If one of the Contiguous Angles BAE be a Right one, the other CAE will be
so also.

IV. If two Right Lines AB, CD, cut one another in E, the 4 Angles they make
will be equal to 4 Right ones.

V. And as it is evident at first sight ( Fig. 10.) that any Circle having one
half (or Semicircle) folded on the other, at the Diameter ECD, the two
Semicircles EHD, and EID, must needs agree, or every where coincide one with
the other; so if the Angle ACD be supposed equal to the Angle BCD, that is, the
Arch AD to the Arch BD, having one Leg CK or CL common; the others AC and BC
being supposed before equal,

1. The Bases BL and AL, KB and KA, will be also equal; for these will coincide
too, and therefore the Angles also.

2. The Line AB being bisected in K, the two Angles Eucl. l. 1. 4 and 3.
lib. III. 3.
at K will also coincide and be equal, and consequently Right Angles: and
contrariwise,

3. The Angles at the Base of equal lib. 1. 5.
Legs, CAB, CBA, and also those below the Legs, the Legs being produced to F
and G, are equal.

4. Consequently the Spaces ACL and BCL, ACK and BCK are equal to one another.

5. The Contiguous Angles AED and BED insisting on equal Arches AD and BD are
equal, and e contra; as also those that are not Contiguous, if their Vertex's
are equidistant from E, etc.

6. It is hence also manifest, that a Perpendicular erected on the middle of
any Line AB, inscribed in any Circle, passes through its Center, by what we
have just now said; and if you likewise erect Perpendiculars on the middle of
any 2 Lines, ab and bm (Fig. 11.) connecting any 2 Arches, or any 3 Points, a,
b, m, that are not placed all in the same Right Line, those 2 Perpendiculars
ke, no, will determine (by their Intersection) the Center of a Circle that
shall pass through these 3 Points.

DEFINITION IX.
IF one Right Line DE cut or pass through another AB ( Fig. 12) the opposite
Angles at the top or intersection ACD and ECB are called Vertical; as also the
other two ACE and DCB: Whence follow these

COROLLARYS.
I. THat the Vertical Angles are always Eucl. lib. 1. 15.
Equal; for both ACD and ECB with the third, ACE, which is common to both, fill
or are equal to a Semicircle; as likewise both ACE and DCB with the third ECB,
which is common.

II. Contrariwise, if at The same Prop. Schol. 1.
the Point C of the Right Line DE, the 2 opposite Lines AC and CB make the
Vertical Angles x and z equal, then will AC and CB make one Right Line; for,
since x and o make a Semicircle, and z and x are equal, by Hypoth. o and z will
also make or fill a Semicircle, whose Diameter will be ACB.

III. By the same Argument it will appear, that of 4 Lines Schol. 2.
proceeding from the same Point so as to make the opposite Vertical Angles
equal, the 2 opposite ones AC and CB, as also DC and CE, will make each but one
Right Line; for since all the 4 Angles together make a whole Circle, or 4 Right
Angles, and the sum of x and o is equal (by Hypoth.) to the sum of o and z, it
follows, that both the one and the other will make Semicircles, whose Diameter
will be AB and DE, and so Right Lines.

DEFINITION X.
IN any Circle, a Right Line, as D.G, that subtends any Arch of it DGB, is
called the Chord of that Arch ( Fig. 13.) BF (a part cut off from the
Semidiameter BC passing through the middle of the Chord) is called the Sagitta or
Intercepted Ax, but most commonly the Versed Sine; and DF let fall from the
other extremity of the given Arch BD, on the Semidiameter at Right Angles, is
called the Right Sine of that Arch BD, or of the Angle BCD; also DI is called
the Right Sine of the Complement (or for brevity sake, Sine Compl.) of that
Arch DH, or Angle DCH, etc. but the greatest of all the Right Sines HC let fall
from the other extremity (or end) of the Quadrant (which is indeed the same as
the Semidiameter of the Circle) is called the whole Sine or Radius; lastly, BE
is called the Tangent of the Arch BD or Angle BCD, and CE its Secant: Whence
Mathematicians, for the sake of Trigonometrical Calculations, have divided the
whole Sine or Radius of the Circle into 1000, 10000, 100000, 1000 000, 10000
0000, etc. parts, thence to make a proportionable Estimate of the number of
Parts in the Sine, Tangent, or Secant of any Arch, etc. as may be seen in the
Tables of Sines, Tangents, and Secants. From these Suppositions and
Explications of the Terms, we shall now infer from this Definition the following

COROLLARYS.
I. IN equal Circles (and so much more Among the rest Vid. Eucl. 28 and 29 lib.
3, and also partly the 26 and 27.
in one and the same) as the Radii or Semidiameters BC and bc are equal, so
also it is evident, that the Right Sines DF and Df, of equal Arches BD and bd,
or equal Angles BCD and bcd, also the Tangents BE and be, and Secants CE and
ce, and Subtenses or Chords DG and dg, also the Sagittae or intercepted Axes BF
and bf, of double the Arches DBG and dbg, etc. will be equal, and so consist of
an equal number of Parts of the whole Sine or Radius, etc. which both is
evident from what we have said before, and may be further evinced, if one
Circle be conceived to be put on the other, and the Radius BC on the Radius bc,
that so they may coincide, by reason of the equality of the Arches BD and bd;
and so of all the rest. And e contra,

II. In unequal Circles, the Sines, Tangents, etc. of equal Angles BCD or bcd
(Fig. 14.) or similar Arches, or Arches of an equal number of Degrees, BD and
bd, will be also similar or like, etc. i. e. the Sine df consists of as many
parts of its Radius bC, as the Sine DF does of its Radius BC, etc. e. g. if the
Radius BC be double of the Radius bc, each thousandth part of the one, will be
double of each thousandth Page 12.
14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

part of the other, but they are alike 1000 in each; because the degrees in the
Circumference of the little one, particularly in the Arch bd are but half as
big as those in the Arch BD, and yet equal in number in both. Thus also if the
Sine DF contains 700 of the 1000 parts of its Radius BC, df will also contain
700 of the 1000 parts of its smaller Radius bc, and in like manner the Chords
DG and dg, and the Tangents BE and be, etc. contain a like number of parts,
each of its own Radius.

SCHOLION.
IT may not be amiss here to note by the by (although it may seem more proper to
be taught after the Doctrine of Proportions) that if, v. g. the degrees of a
greater Circle be each of them respectively double, or triple, or quadruple,
etc. of the degrees of a less Circle, according as the Radius of the one is
double or triple to the Radius of the other, then, at least as far as
Mechanical Practice can require, you may find the Arch of a greater Circle
equal to the whole Periphery of a less, viz. if you take reciprocally that part
of the greater Periphery, which shall be as the Radius of the less to the
Radius of the greater, or as one degree of the less Periphery to one degree of
the greater. e. g. if the less Radius bc be half the greater BC, and so also
the Periphery, and each of the degrees of the one, be one half of the
Periphery, and of each of the degrees of the other, one half of the greater
Periphery will reciprocally be equal to the whole less Periphery, or 180
degrees of the one to 360 of the other, etc.

2. The same (at least in this case where the Radius cb is double of the Radius
CB) may be done also Geometrically by the same reason. Having described Circles
on each Radius, suppose the Radius CB ( Fig. 15.) so to move with an equable
motion about its Center c, as to take or move the Radius of the greater Circle
cb along with it, and coming, v. g. to I. stops that also at 1, and going
forward, to II. stops that again at 2, etc. Hence it will be manifest to any
attentive Reader, that when the less Radius CB shall have described the
Semicircumference B. II. III. the greater Radius cb having moved to 3, will
have described precisely a quarter of its circumference; and if still the less
Radius C. IV. moves on to the right hand, and continues to carry the greater c
4 along with it onwards the same way, it will necessarily follow, that in the
same moment as the Radius C. IV. (together with c 4.) shall come to its first
situation in B, having described a whole Circle, the opposite Radius c 4 will
be come to 5, and have described half its Circle, having moved all along with
an equal Motion. Hence it is evident, that the whole least Circle answers
exactly to half the greater, and half of the first to a quarter of the last; as
also the Quadrant B. II. to the Octant (or 8th. part) b 2, etc. whence any Arch
being given, as B. I. in the least Circle, if you draw through I the Radius of
the greater Circle c 1. you will cut off an Arch b 1. equal to the given Arch in
magnitude, but only half in the number of degrees.

3. Hence follows naturally that celebrated Proposition of Euclid, that the
Angle at the Center BC. I. or BC. II. is double of the corresponding Angle at
the Periphery bc. 1. or bc. 2, etc. which in this case is manifest, and in the
other 2 ( Fig. 16.) of the wholes or remainders DCD and DPD it is also Eucl. p.
20. l. 3.
certain; which is true also of the parts BCD and BPD to be added or subtracted
by the first Case.

Eucl. p. 9. l. 1.
4. Hence we have a new way of bisecting any given Angle CDE, or Arch CE ( Fig.
17.) viz. if you make C B equal to the Leg DC, and from this, as Radius,
describe an Arch BF equal to the Arch CE, and draw DF.

And with the same facility we might obtain the Trisection, if the greater
Radius being triple to the less, was thus carried along by an equable Motion,
as we have shown how to do already in a double Radius; and this at first sight
may seem very probable.

But whether the triple Radius be immediately carried round by the simple
Radius C B, or by means of the double Radius cb, neither the one nor the other
will cause an equable Motion. For in the latter Case, while the Radius cb
describes the quadrant Bb, the Radius de will not describe so much as a
Quadrant; but while cb with the same velocity describes the other Quadrant bf,
the Radius de will come to g, describing an Arch as much greater than a
Quadrant as the former was less. In the former case on the contrary, the Radius
C B moved on to D beyond a Quadrant, while de was carried from B to e, but if
the Radius CD moving on, should again carry de along with it, the one would
describe the same Arch eB, while the other would describe one less than before.

5. Hence the Angle at the Center ACE ( F g. 19.) upon the Arch AE, is equal to
the Angle ADB at the Periphery, upon double that Arch AB.

6. Hence the Angle ADB in the Semicircle (Number. 1.) Eucl. 31. lib. 2.
is a Right Angle, in a Segment less than a Semicircle (Number. 2.) is an obtuse
Angle, and in a greater (Number. 3) an Acute one, because the Angle at the Center
ACE upon the half Arch, is equal to the Angle ADB pr. praeced. 5. and is a
Right Angle in the first Case, Obtuse in the second, and Acute in the third.

7. Hence Angles in the same Segment, or Eucl. 26 and 27. lib. 3.
on equal Segments of equal Circles, or on the same or equal Arches, are all
equal and e contra.

DEFINITION XI.
WHen 2 or more Lines AB and CD are so continued as to keep always the same
distance from one another (whose Genesis may be conceived to proceed from the
uniform Motion of 2 Points A and C, always keeping the same distance from each
other) they are called Parallels: But as it evidently follows from this
Definition, that Eucl. lib. 1. 30.
those Lines which are Parallel to one third, are parallel to one another
(since adding or subtracting equal Intervals to or from other equal ones, the
sums or remainders must needs be equal;) so if the Parallels are Right Lines
and cut transversly (or slopingly across) by another Right Line OF, you will have
these

COROLLARYS.
I. THE Angles Eucl. lib. 1. 29.
which we call Alternate ones, GHK and HGI ( Fig. 21.) are equal by Corollary
I. Definition X. since the distances GK and HI, which are the Right Sines of
the said Angles, are supposed equal.

II. The External Angle EGA is also equal to the Internal opposite Angle GHK,
by Consect. 1. Definit. 9. because that External Angle EGA is equal to the
alternate Vertical one HGI.

III. The same Internal Angle GHK, with the other internal opposite one on the
same side AGH (as well as the External one EGA, by Coroll. 1. Definit. 8.) are
equal to two Right ones.

IV. On the contrary, If any Right Line OF lib. 1. Prop. 27 and 28
cutting 2 others AB and CD transversly, makes the alternate Angles GHK and HGI
equal, their Right Sines, by Consect. 1. Definit. 10. will be equal, and
consequently the Lines AB and CD parallel: and the same will follow, if the
External Angle be supposed equal to the Internal, or the 2 Internal ones on the
same side equal to 2 Right ones; since from either Hypothesis the former will
immediately follow.

V. From whence it appears more than one way (b) That the 3 Internal Angles of
any Triangle (e. g. H, G, K, which will serve for all) taken together, lib. 1.
Prop. 32,
are equal to two Right ones, and the External one GHD is equal to the two
Internal opposite ones. For we might either conclude with Euclid, that 1, 2, 3,
together make 2 Right ones, by Consect. 1. Definit. 8. but 2=II and 3=III pr. 1
and 2 of this, therefore I, II, III=2 Right ones; or with others, 1, II, 4 are
= 2 R. but 1=I and 4=III pr. 1st of this. Therefore, etc. or more briefly with
F. Pardies, 1=I pr. 1st of this, but 1, II, III, together = to 2 Right ones, by
the 3d of this; therefore I, II, III=2 R. Q. E D.

DEFINITION XII.
IF a Right Line AB ( Fig. 22.) be conceived to move from the top of a plain
Angle CAD with a motion always parallel to its self, so that at one end A it
shall always touch the Leg AC, and all along cut the Leg AD, while at length
being come to F, it shall only touch that Leg with its other end B, and so fall
at length wholly within the Angle CAD: It will describe by this motion within
the Legs CAD the Triangular Figure EAF, and without them the Triangular Figure
BAF; its parts within them a f continually increasing, and the other without fb
continually decreasing; but with all its Parts, or the whole Line, it will
describe the Quadrangular Figure AEFB: Consequently if the other Leg AD of the
given Angle CAD ( Fig. 23.) or any part of it AB, be moved along the other Leg
remaining parallel to it self, it will also describe a Quadrilateral Figure,
which will be also equilateral, if the Line describing it AB, be equal to the
Line AE according to which it is directed; but if either of the Lines, as AD be
greater than the other, the opposite Sides will be only equal; for the
describent or describing Line is always necessarily equal to its self, and the
Points A, B, D, moved with an equal Motion, describe also in the same time
equal Lines AE, BF, DG. From these Geneses of Quadrangles and Triangles we have
the following

CONSECTARIES.
I. THese Quadrilateral Figures are also Parallelograms, i. e. they have their
opposite Sides Parallel; Schol. Prop. 34. lib. I.
because the Line that describes them is supposed to remain always parallel to
its self, and the Points A and D, or A and B, to be always equidistant.

II. Because the 2 Internal opposite Angles The first part of the same Proposit.
A and E, and also E and F, etc. are equal to 2 Right ones, by Consect. 3.
Definit. 11. if one Angle v. g. that at A be a Right one, all the others must
necessarily be so too [in which case the quadrilateral and equilateral Figure
AF is called a Square, and the other AG an Oblong, or Rectangle:] if there be
no Right Angle, the opposite Angles transversly or cross-ways, a and f, or a
and g are equal, because both the one and the other, with the third (e) make 2
Right ones [in which case the quadrilateral Equilateral af is called a Rhombus,
but the other ag a Rhomboid.

III. The Transversal (or Diagonal) Line the latter part of the same Prop.
in any Parallelogram, divides it into two equal Triangles AEF and FAB; for all
the Lines and Angles on each side are equal, and as the describent (Line) AB
moved through the Angle EAF upon the Line AE described the Triangle AEF; so the
Line OF, equal to the former, moved after the same way, through the Angle AFB
also equal to the former Angle, upon the equal Line FB, must necessarily
describe an equal Triangle; or, in short, all the Indivisibles af, or their
whole increasing Series, are necessarily equal to the like number of
Indivisibles fb, increasing reciprocally after the same way.

IV. All Parallelograms that are between the same Parallels AB and CF ( Fig.
24.) i. e. having the same Altitude lib. 1. Prop. 35 and 36
and the same or equal Bases, as CD or CD and cd, are equal among themselves;
for they may be conceived to be described by the equal Lines AB and ab equally
moved through the same or equal Intervals of the Parallel Lines; so that all or
each of the Indivisibles or Elements AB will necessarily be equal to all and
each of the Indivisibles ab; for they all along answer one to the other both in
number and magnitude.

SCHOLIUM.
HEre you have a Specimen of the Method of Indivisibles, introduced first by
Bonaventura Cavallerius, and since much facilitated; and although these
Indivisibles placed one by another, or as it were laid upon an heap, cannot
compose any Magnitude, yet by an imaginary Motion they may measure it, and as
it were, after a negative way, demonstrate the Equality of two Magnitudes
compared together, viz. if we conceive a certain number of such Elements in any
given Magnitude, and thence conclude that in another consisting of the like
Elements, ordered or ranked after the same way, there can be neither more nor
less in number than in the first; thence follows their Equality, etc.

V. Hence therefore it is also Evident, that Triangles upon the same and equal
Bases as CD and cd, and placed between the same Parallels, are necessarily
equal, because they are the half of equal Parallelograms AD and ad, by the 3d
Consectary of this Definition.

VI. F. Mourgues ingeniously concludes from hence, viz. because the 2 Internal
opposite Angles lib. 1. Prop. 37 and 38, and 41.
lib. I. Prop. 32. otherwise.
on the same side in any Parallelogram, are equal to two Right ones, and so all
together equal to four; that therefore the three Angles of any Triangle ABC (
Fig. 25. which may always be completed into a Page 18.
25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

Parallelogram) are equal to half of those four, or to two Right ones. This may
be yet more briefly conceived thus; the Angles b+ c+ d (the sum of the two
inferior ones) = to two Right ones; but a = alternate d: therefore b+ c+ a =
to two Right ones, Q. E. D.

VII. Because it is manifest in Rectangular Parallelograms, if the Altitude AB,
and Base BC ( Fig. 26.) measured and divided by the same common Measure, be
conceived to be (multiplied or) drawn one cross the other, that the This is
manifest from its Genesis; for the five parts of the Line AB by its motion
along the part of the Base BE, describes 5 little Squares, and moving along the
following part, describes five more, etc.
Area AC, thereby described, will be divided into as many little square
Measures or Area's, as the number of their Sides multiplied together would
produce Units; therefore the Area of any other Parallelogram will be after the
like manner produced, if the Base be multiplied by the Perpendicular height,
equally as if it were a Rectangle of the same Base and Altitude.

VIII. Consequently also you may have the Area of any Triangle, by Consectary 3
and 5. if the Base be multiplied by half the Perpendicular height; or, the
whole Base being multiplied by the height, if you take the half of the product.

DEFINITION XIII.
BUT as there are various Species of Triangles, while first with relation to
their Sides, one is called Equilateral, as ABC ( Fig. 27.) because all its
Sides are equal; another Equicrural or Isosceles, as DEF, because it has two
equal Sides DE and OF, while its Base DF may be either longer or shorter; and a
third is called Scalenum, as GHI, because it has all its Sides unequal; then
again in respect to their Angles, one is called Rectangled, as a, b, c, because
it has one Right Angle at a;

Another Obtusangled, as d, e, f, because it has one obtuse Angle at d; a third
is called Acuteangled, as g, h, i, because all its three Angles are Acute: So
each of these kinds has its peculiar properties, which we shall partly
hereafter demonstrate in their proper places, and partly deduce here as

CONSECTARYS.
I. ALL Equilateral Triangles are also Equiangular, and consequently
Acutangled; for, having found a Center for three Points, and the Periphery A,
B, C, (see Fig. 28.) by Consect. 6. Definit. 8. the three Arches AB, BC, and
AC, answering to equal Chords; and consequently the three Angles at the Center
O are equal, by Consect. 1. of Definit. 10. and therefore the three Angles at
the Periphery also, as being half of the other, by the 3d Consectary of the
same Definition. Each Angle therefore is one third part of two Right ones, by
Consect. 6. Definit. 12. two thirds of one Right Angle, i. e. 60 degrees, and
consequently Acute.

II. It follows also by the same Reason in an Isosceles Triangle, that the
Angles at the Base opposed to equal Sides are equal, and lib. I. Prop. 5. the
same otherwise demonstrated.
consequently Acute; for having circumscribed a Circle about it, equal Arches
will correspond to the equal Chords DE and OF, and equal Angles at the Center
DO and FOE will correspond to them, and equal ones at the Periphery DFE, and
FDE to these again. And it is evident that each of these are less than a Right
Angle h. e. an Acute one, because all three are equal to two Right ones.
Wherefore if the third is a Right Angle, the other two at the Base will
necessarily be half Right ones.

SCHOLIUM.
WE will here (a) show by way of Anticipation, the truth of the Pythagorick
Theorem, esteemed worth an Hecatomb: Which hereafter we will demonstrate after
other different ways; viz. In a Right Angled Triangle BAC (Fig. 29.) the Square
of the greatest Side opposite to the Right Angle, is equal to the Squares of
the other two Sides taken together. For having described the Squares of the
other two Sides, AC dE, DE ab (taking ED=AB) and the Square of the greatest BC
cb, it will be evident, that the parts X and Z are common to each, and that the
two other Triangles in the greatest Square BAC and BDb, are equal to the two
Triangles bac and Cdc which remain in the two Squares of the lesser Sides; and
so the whole truth of the Proposition will be evident, while these two things
are undoubtedly true: 1. That the Side of the greatest Square Bb will
necessarily concur with the Extremity of the less Db, and the other Side of the
greatest Square Cc with its Extremity c, will precisely touch the Continuation
of the Sides of the two least Squares dEa; as you will see them both expressed in
the Figure. 2. The said two Triangles are every way equal; for the Angles at C
with the intermediate one at Z, make two Right ones, therefore they are equal;
but the Side CA is equal to the Side cd, and CB to Cc, and the Angles at A and
d Right ones. Wherefore if we conceive the Triangle ABC to to be turned about
C, as a Center to the right hand, it will exactly agree with the Triangle Cdc,
and the Point B will necessarily fall on the continued Line d E, as agreeing
with the Line AB. Hence it is now evident, that Ca= BD, and because ba is also
= bD, and the Angles at a and D Right ones. Where, if we conceive the Triangle
bac to be moved about b as a Center, until ba coincides with bD, and ac with
DB, bc will also necessarily coincide with bB Q. E. D.

To this Demonstration of Van Schooten's, which we have thus illustrated and
abbreviated, we will add another of our own, more like Euclids, but somewhat
easier, which is this: Having drawn the Lines (as the other Figure 29 directs)
the ACD being on the same Base AC with the Square AI, and between the same
Parallels, is necessarily one half of it, but it is also half of the
Parallelogram CF being on the same Base with it, viz. DC; therefore this
Parallelogram = AI. In like manner ABE is half the AL, and also half the
Parallelogram BF, therefore BF= AL: therefore CF + BF that is the of BD = to
the two AI + AL. Q. E. D. For because the Side BE occurs to, or meets the Side
LK, and the Side CD the Side IH continued, it yet more apparently follows;
because the Angles a and b, and also c and d, are manifestly equal, as making
both ways, with the Intermediate x or z, Right Angles. Therefore the BAC being
turned on the Center B and laid on BLE will exactly agree with it, and turned
on the Center C and laid on CID, will agree with that also, etc.

DEFINITION XIV.
ALL Rectilinear or Right Lined Figures that have more than three or four Sides
(to the latter sort of which, there remains to be added another Species besides
Parallelograms, called Trapeziums, whose Angles and Sides are unequal, as K, L,
M, N, Fig. 30.) are called by one common Name Poligons, or Many-sided and
Many-Angled Figures, and particularly according to the Number of their Sides
and Angles, Pentagons, Hexagons, Heptagons, etc. All whereof, as also Trapezia,
being resolvible into Triangles by Diagonal Lines, (as may be seen in the 31
and foregoing Fig.) you have these

CONSECTARYS.
I. YOU have the Area of any Polygon by resolving it into Triangles, and then
adding the Area's of each Triangle found by Consect. of Definition 12 into one
Sum.

II. The Area of the Trapezium KLMN (in the first of the Fig. 30) whose two
opposite Sides, at least KL and MN, are Parallel, may be had more
compendiously, if the Sum of the Sides be multiplied by half the common height
KO.

SCHOLIUM.
HEnce we have the foundation of Epipedometry or Masuring of Figures that stand
on the same Base, and Ichnography; in the Practice whereof this deserves to be
taken special Notice of, that to work so much the more Compendiously, you ought
to divide your Figure into Triangles, so that ( Fig. 31.) 2 of their
Perpendiculars may (as conveniently can be) fall on one and the same Base. For
thus you will have but one Base to measure, and 2 Perpendiculars to find the Area
of both: But for Ichnography, the distance of the Perpendiculars from the
nearest end of the Base must be taken; which we shall supersede in this Place
and Discourse more largely on hereafter.

2. This resolution of a Polygon into Triangles may be performed by assuming a
point any where about the middle, and making the sides of the Polygon the Bases
of so many Triangles; (see the 2d Figure marked 31) wherein it is evident; 1
That all the Angles of any Polygon are equal to twice so many right ones,
excepting 4, as the Polygon has sides; for it will be resolved into as many
Triangles as it has sides, and each of these has its Angles equal to 2 right
ones. Subtracting therefore all the Angles about the Point M (which always make
4 right ones by Cons. 2. Def. 8.) there remain the rest which make the Angles
of the Polygon. 2 All the external Angles of any right lined Figure (e, e, e,
etc.) are always equal to 4 right ones; for any one of them with its Contiguous
internal Angle is equal to 2 right ones pr. Consect. 1 of the said Def. and so
altogether equal to twice so many right ones as there are Sides or internal
Angles of the Figure. But all the internal Ones make also twice so many right
Ones, excepting 4 therefore the external Ones make those 4.

DEFINITIOF XV.
AMong all these plain Figures those are called Regular whose Angles and Sides
are all equal, as among trilateral Figures the Equilateral Triangle, among
Quadrilateral ones, the Square, and in other kinds, several Species which are
not particularized by Names; but all others in whose Angles or Sides there is
any inequality, are called Irregular: Though some of these also, and all the
other may be inscribed in a Circle. Whence you have these

CONSECTARYS.
I. THE Areas of the Regular Figures may be obtained yet easier, if having
found their Center (by Consect. 6. Definit. 8.) you draw from thence the Right
Lines CB, CA, etc. (Fig. 32.) till there be formed as many Triangles ACB, ACF,
etc. as the Figure has Sides; for since all these Triangles have their Bases
AB, BF, as so many Chords, and their Altitudes CD, CG, as so many parts of
intercepted Axes DE and GH, and also equal pr. Consect. 1. Definit. 10. and so
by Consect. 5. Definit. 10. are equal among themselves; one of their Area's
being found and multiplied by the number of Sides, or half the Altitude by the
Sum of all the Sides, you will have the Area of the whole Polygon: For it is
manifest from what we have already said, and very elegantly Demonstrated by F.
Pardies, That any Regular Polygon inscribed in or circumscribed to a Circle, is
equal to the Triangle Aza, one Leg whereof is equal to the Perpendicular
height let fall from the Center upon any Side, and the other to the whole
Periphery of the Polygon. Now if the Triangles into which the Polygon is
resolved, do all stand on the same Right Line Aa, ( Fig. 32) and are all equal
and of the same height, to which the Perpendicular AZ is equal, it will
necessarily follow, that each pair of Triangles ABZ and ABC, BZF and BCF, etc.
are equal among themselves, pr. Consect. 5. Definit. 12. and consequently the
Sum of all the former will be equal to the Sum of all the latter, that is, the
Triangle Aza to the Polygon given.

II. Since Regular Figures inscribed in a Circle, by bisecting their Arches AB,
BF, etc. may be easily conceived to be changed into others of double the number
of Sides, (as a Pentagon into a Decagon, etc.) and that ad Infinitum; a Circle
may be justly esteemed a Polygon of infinite Sides, or consisting of an
infinite Number of equal Triangles, whose common Altitude is the Semidiameter
of the Circle: So that the Area of any Circle is equal to a Right Angled
Triangle (as AZa) one of whose Sides AZ is equal to its Archimedes of the
Dimension of the Circle, Prop. 1.
Semidiameter, and the other Aa to its whole Circumference.

SCHOLIUM.
IT may not be amiss to note these few things here, concerning the Inscription
of Regular Figures in a Circle.

I. Having described a Circle on any Semidiameter AC, Euclid. Prop. 15. lib. 4.
( Fig. 33. N. 1.) that Semidiameter being placed in the Circumference, will
precisely cut off one sixth part of it, and so become the Side of a Regular
Hexagon: and so the Triangle ABC will be an Equilateral one, and consequently
the Angle ACB and the Arch AB 60 Degrees, by Cons. 1. Definit. 13.

II. Hence a Right Line AD, omitting one point of the division B, and drawn
Eucl. 2d Coroll. of the same.
to the next D, gives you the Side of a Regular Triangle inscribed in the
Circle, and subtends twice 60, i. e. 120 Degrees.

Page 24.
33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40



III. If the Diameters of the Circle AD and DE ( N. 2.) cut one another at
Right Angles in the Center C, the Right Lines AB, BD, etc. will be the Sides of
an inscribed Square ABDE: For Eucl. 6. lib. 4.
the Sides AB, BD, etc. are the equal Chords of Quadrants, or Quadrantal
Arches, and the Angles ABD, BDE, etc. will be all Right ones, as being Angles
in a Semicircle ( per Schol. 6. Definit. 10.) composed each of two half Right
ones, by Consect. 2. Definit. 13.

IV. Euclid very ingeniously shows us how to Inscribe a Regular Pentagon also,
Lib. 4. Prop. 10 and 11. and also a Quindecagon (or Polygon of 15 Sides) Prop.
16. But though the first is too far fetched to be shown here, yet (supposing
that) the second will easily and briefly follow:

In a given Circle from the same point A ( N. 3.) inscribe a Regular Pentagon
AEFGHA, and also a Regular Triangle ABC; then will BF be the Side of the
Quindecagon, or 15 Sided Figure. For the two Arches AE and OF make together 144
Degrees, and AB 120: (a) Therefore the difference BF will be 24, which is the
15th. part of the Circumference.

V. The Invention of Renaldinus would be very happy, if it could be rightly
Demonstrated; (as he supposes it to be in his Book of the Circle) which gives
an Universal Rule of dividing the Periphery of the Circle into any number of
equal Parts required, in his 2d Book De Resol. and Comp. Mathem. p. 367. which
in short is this: Upon the Diameter of a given Circle AB Fig. 34.) make an
Equilateral Triangle ABD, and having divided the Diameter AB into as many equal
Parts, as you design there shall be Sides of the Polygon to be Inscribed, and
omitting two, e. g. from B to A, draw through the beginning of the third from D,
a Right Line, to the opposite Concave Circumference, and thence another Right
Line to the end of the Diameter B, which the two parts you omitted shall touch
thus, e. g. for the Triangle, having divided AB into three equal parts, if
omitting the two B2, through this beginning of the 3d you draw the Right Line
DIII, and thence the Right Line III.B, which will be the Side of the Triangle;
and so IV.B will be the Side of the Square, VB the Side of the Pentagon, etc.

N. B. The Demonstration of these ( Renaldinus adds, p. 368.) we have several
ways prosecuted in our Treatise of the Circle: Some of the most noted Ancient
Geometricians, have spent a great deal of pains in the Investigation and
Effection of this Problem, and several of the Moderns have lost both time and
pains therein: Whence, we hope, without the imputation of Vain Glory, we may
have somewhat obliged Posterity in this point.

DEFINITION VI.
IF the Plane of any Parallelogram AC ( Fig. 25.) be conceived to move along a
Right Line AE, or another Plane AF downwards, remaining always Parallel to its
self; there will be generated after this way a Solid having six opposite Planes
Parallel, two whereof, at least, will be equal to one another, whence it is
called a Parallelepiped; and particularly a Cube or Hexaedrum, if the
Parallelogram ABCD that describes it be a Square, and the Line along which it
is moved, AE, equal to the Side of that Square, and Perpendicular to the
describing Plane, and consequently all the six Parallel Planes comprehending
this Solid, equal to one another. But if the describing or Plane Describent (
Fig. 36.) be a Triangle or Polygon, the Solid is called a Prism, if a Circle,
it is called a Cylinder. Now from the Genesis of these Solids you have the
following

CONSECTARYS.
I. IF the Planes or Parallelograms Describent Eucl. l. 11. p. 29, 30, 31
ABCD and abcd (Fig. 37.) are equal, and their Lines of Motion AE and ae also
equal; the Solids thereby described, viz. Parallelepipeds, Cylinders, and
Prisms, (which will therefore have their Bases and heigths equal) will be equal
among themselves; because the describent Indivisibles of the one, will exactly
answer, both in number and position, to those of the other, as we have already
shown in Parallelograms; Consequently therefore,

II. Any Parallelepiped Eucl. l. 11. p. 28.
may be divided by a Diagonal Plane BDHF (or a Plane passing through its
Diagonals) into two equal Prisms; for by Consect. 3. Definit. 12. the Triangles
ABD and BCD, are equal, and are supposed to be moved by an equal Motion through
equal spaces.

III. And since it is evident, even by this Genesis of them, that in Right
Angled Cubes and Parallelepipeds, if the Base ABCD ( Fig. 38.) being divided
into little square Area's, be multiplied by the height AE, divided by a like
measure for length, after this way you may conceive as many equal little Cubes
to be generated in the whole Solid, as is the number of the little Area's of
the Base multiplied by the number of Divisions of the side AE; you may moreover
obtain the Solidity of any other Parallelepipeds, that are not Right Angled
ones, by multiplying their Bases and Perpendicular Heigths together.

IV. Moreover since every Triangular Prism is the half of a Parallelepiped, and
any Multangular Prism may be resolved into as many Triangular ones, as its Base
contains Triangles; you may obtain the Solidity (or Solid Contents) either of
the one or the other, if you multiply the Triangular, or Multangular Base of
them into their Perpendicular Height.

V. After the same manner you may likewise have the Solidity of a Cylinder,
which may be considered as an Infinite Angled Prism, just as the Circle is as
an Infinit-Angled Polygon.

DEFINITION XVII.
IF any Triangle ABC ( Fig. 39. N. 1.) be conceived to move with one of its
Plane Angles C, from the Vertex or top of a Solid Angle (determined by two
Planes aAb and cAa joined together in the common Line Aa) with a motion always
parallel to it self; so that its extreme Angular Point A shall always remain in
the Line Aa, but with its Sides AB and AC shall all along raze on the two
Angular Planes, till at length it falls wholly within the Solid Angle: by this
its motion it will describe within the Solid Angle, the Figure we call
Pyramidal, whose Base will be the Triangle abc, and its Vertex A will also
describe without it another Quadrangular Pyramid, whose common Vertex will be
the same A, but the Base the Quadrangle Cb, described by the Side of the
moveable Triangle BC: The first Pyramid it will describe with its Triangular
Parts, (...) continually increasing from the point A, and ending in the
Triangle abc; but the latter Pyramid will be described by the remaining parts,
continually decreasing downwards from the whole ABC, and the Quadrangular
Trapeiza (...) at length ending in the Right Line bc: So that in the mean while
the said Triangle with its whole space describes, according to what we have
said before, the Triangular Prism composed of those two Pyramids. From this
Geeesis of Pyramids you will have the following

CONSECTARYS.
I. OF what sort soever the Describing Triangles are ABC, ABC ( N. 2.) fo they
are equal; and whatever the Solid Angles are, comprehended under the Planes
abA, and acA, abA and acA, so they are accommodated to the Plane Angles A and
A, and such that, etc.

DEFINITION XVIII.
THere may be exhibited another easier Genesis of Cones and Pyramids, but it
respects only the Dimension of the Surface, and not of the Solidity of them,
viz. If you have a fixed point A that is not in the Angular Plane BCDEF ( Fig.
41.) and a Rght Line AF let fall from that point to any Angle of the Plane, be
conceived to move round the sides BC, CD, etc. This Plane by its motion will
describe as many Triangles ABC, CAD, etc. as the Angular Plane has Sides. And
these Triangles all meeting at the point A, make that Solid which we call a
Pyramid. Now if instead of the Angular Plane there be supposed a Circular one,
(or an Angular one of Infinite Sides) the Solid thence produced is called a
Cone, whose Surface is equal to Infinite Triangles, constituted on the Base
BCDE, and whose Solidity would consequently equal an Infinite Angled Pyramid of
the same height. And after the same manner by the motion of the Line AF,
remaining always Parallel to it self about Parallelograms or Triangular Planes,
will be generated Parallelipipeds, Prisms, and Cylinders. But as one Pyramid
will be produced more upright than another, according as the point A stands
more over the middle of the Plane BCD, etc. (Fig. 42.) or Page 28.
41

42

43

44

45

46

47

Schemes for rai-sing the five Regular Bodies

respects it more obliquely: So in particular a Cone is called a right Cone,
when the line AO being let fall to the Center of the circular Plane (otherwise
called the Axis of the Cone) constitutes on all sides right Angles with it; but
it is called an Oblique or Scalene Cone, when the Ax stands obliquely on the
Base. Which distinction may also be easily understood when applied to
Cylinders, though a right Cone and Cylinder may also be conceived to be generated
after another way, as if for the one a Triangle and for the other a right
angled Parallelogram AOB and LAOB be be conceived to be moved round a line AO
considered as immovable (whence it is called an Ax;) and also a truncated Cone
may be formed if a right angled Trapezium, Archimedes lib. I de Con. and Cylin.
prop. 7. and 8.
2 of whose Sides are parallel be moved, etc. And as we have deduced the
Solidity of these Bodies from the foregoing Genesis, so their external
Surfaces, as also of Prisms and Parallelepipeds may easily be found from the
present Genesis, by any one who attentively considers the following

COROLLARYS.
I. SInce the whole external Surface, except the Base, of any Pyramid is
nothing but a System of as many Triangles ABC, CAD etc. as the Pyramid has
Sides; if the Area's of those Triangles separately found by Consect. 8. Def.
12. be added into one Sum, you will have the Superficial Area of the whole Pyramid.

II. If a Pyramid be cut with a Plane b, c, d, e, parallel to its Base BCDE (
Fig. 41.) The Surface of that truncated Pyramid comprehended between the
prallel Planes may be obtained if having found the Surface of the Pyramid A
bcde cut off from the rest by Consect. 1. you subtract it from the Surface of
the whole Pyramid.

II. The external Surface of a right Pyramid that stands on a regular Polygon
Base is equal to a Triangle, whose Altitude is equal to the Altitude of one of
the Triangles which compose it, and its Base to the whole Circumference of the
Base of the Pyramid.

IV. Therefore the Surface of a right Cone, by what we have already said, is
equal to a Triangle whose height is the side of the Cone, and the Base equal
to the Circumference of the Base of the Cone.

V. The Surface of a truncated right Cone, or Pyramid is equal to a Trapezium
which has 2 parallel Sides the lowest of which is equal to the Perifery of the
Base, and the other to the Perifery of the Top or upper Part, and the height,
to the intercepted Part.

VI. The Surface of a right Cylinder or Prism is equal to a Parallelogram which
has the same height with them, and for its Base a right line equal to the
Perifery of that Cylinder or Prism.

DEFINITION XIX.
IF a semicircular Plane ADB ( Fig. 43. N. 1.) be conceived to move round its
Diameter AB which is fixed, as an Axis, by this Motion it will describe a
Sphere, and with its Semicircumference the Surface of that Sphere; every part
whereof is equally distant from the middle Point of that Axis C (which is
therefore called the Center of that Sphere.) Now if ( N. 2.) this semicircular
Ambitus Archimedes lib. I. de Cono and Cyl. Prop. 22. Coroll. and Prop. 23.
be conceived to be divided before that revolution, first into 2 Quadrant^ AD,
and BD, and then each of those again into as many parts equal in Number and
Magnitude as you please, and having drawn the Chords AF, FE, ED, etc. let the
Polygon AFEDGHB Inscribed in the Semicircle be conceived together with it to be
turned about the Axis AB; then will A 1 F, and B 4 F describe 2 Cones about the
Diameters F f, and H h; and the Trapezia about the Axes 1, 2, 2 C, C 3, and 34,
will describe so many truncated Cones, and the lines AF, FE, etc. so many
Conical Superficies, by the Antecedent Def. and so the whole Polygonal Plane
AFEDGHB a Conical Body inscribed in the Sphere, and contained under only
Conical Surfaces. And as any attentive Person may easily perceive such a Body
to be less than the ambient Sphere, and its whole Surface less than the Surface
o^ the ambient Sphere; so he may as easily trace these following

CONSECTAYS.
I. IF the Arches AF, FE, etc. be further bisected, and a Polygonal Figure of
double the number of Sides inscribed in the Semicircle, and conceived to be
moved round after the way we have already shown, the Pseudoconical Body hence
arising, will approach nearer and nearer to the Solidity of the Sphere, and the
Surface of the one to the Surface of the other, and hence (if we continue this
Bisection, or conceive it to be continued ad Infinitum) you may infer.

II. That a Sphere may be looked upon as much a Pseudoconical Body, consisting
of infinite Sides, and it is Surface will be equal to the infinite Conical
Surfaces of that Body; which we will take further notice of below.

DEFINITION XX.
IF the Diameter AB of the Semicircular Plane ADB ( Fig. 43. N. 3.) be
conceived to be divided into equal Parts (as here the Semidiameter AC into 3.)
and if the circumscribing Parallelograms CE, 2 E, 1 G on the transverse
Parallels CD, 2 e, 1 f be conceived together with the Semicircle it self to
revolve about the fixed Ax AB; it is evident that there will be formed from the
Semicircle a Sphere as before, and from the Circumscribed Parallelograms, so
many circumscribed Cylinders of equal height: but if all the Altitudes or
Heighths of these are bisected or divided into two, and so make the number of
circumscribing Parallelograms double, there will be formed (by moving them
round as before) double the Number of Cylinders of half the height, but which
yet being taken together, approach much nearer the solidity and roundness of
the Sphere, than the former, which were fewer in Number ( viz. the six latter
Parallelograms approach nearer to the Plane of the Circle than the three
former) and thus if that bisection of the Altitudes be conceived to be
continued ad infinitum, the innumerable Number of those infinitely little
Cylinders will coincide with the Sphere it self. Moreover if you conceive any
Polyedrous or Multilateral Figure to be circumscribed about the Sphere (which
we here endeavor to delineate by the Polygon ABCD N.4. circumscribed about the
Circle) and the solid Angles thereof to be cut by other Planes ab, which shall
touch the Sphere; it is manifest there will thence arise another Polyedrous
Figure, the Solidity whereof will approach nearer to the Solidity of the
Sphere, and its Surface to the Spherical Surface than the former, and if the
Angles of this be again in like manner cut off, there will still arise another
new Solid, and new Surface approaching yet nearer to the Solidity and Surface
of the Sphere than the former, etc. and so after an infinite Process they will
coincide with the Sphere and its Surface themselves. Whence flow these

COROLLARYS.
I. THE Sphere may be considered as a Polyedrous Figure, or as consisting of
innumerable Bases, i. e. composed of an innumerable Number of Pyramids, all
whose Vertex's meet in the Center, and so whose common height is the
Semidiameter of the Sphere, and the sum of all the Bases equal to the
Superficies of the Sphere.

II. If you can find a Proportion between a Cylinder of the same height with
any Sphere, and whose Base is equal to the greatest Circle of that Sphere, and
innumerable Cylinders circumscribed about it, as we have just now shown; then
you may also obtain the Proportion between the said circumscribed Cylinder and
the inscribed Sphere: Which to have here hinted may be of service hereafter in
its proper place.

DEFINITION XXI.
THere remain those Bodies to be considered which are called Regular, which
correspond to the Regular Plane Figures; and as those consist of equal Lines
and Angles, so these likewise are comprehended under Regular and Equal Planes
meeting in equal solid Angles; and as those may be Inscribed and Circumscribed
about a Circle, so may the latter likewise in and about a Sphere. But whereas
there are infinite Species of Regular Plane Figures, there are only five of
Regular Solids; the first whereof is contained under four Equal and Equilateral
Triangles, whence it is named a Tetraedrum; the second is terminated by six
equal Squares, and thence is called Hexaedrum, and otherwise a Cube; the third
being comprehended under eight Equal and Equilateral Triangles, is called an
Octaedrum; the fourth is contained under twelve Regular and Equal Pentagons,
and so is named a Dodecaedrum; the fifth, lastly, is contained under twenty
Regular and Equal Triangles, and is thence nominated an Icosaedrum. Besides
these five sorts of Regular Bodies there can be no other; for from the
concourse of three Equilateral Triangles arises the Solid Angle of a
Tetraedrum, from four the Solid Angle of an Octaedrum, from five the Solid
Angle of an Icosaedrum; from the concourse of four Squares you have the Solid
Angle of an Hexaedrum; from that of three Pentagons you have the Solid Angle of
a Dodecaedrum; and in all this Collection of Plane Angles, the Sum does not
arise so high as to four Right ones. But four Squares, or three Hexagons
meeting in one Point, make precisely four Right Angles, and so by Consect. 2.
Definit 8. would constitute a Plane Surface, and not a Solid Angle. Much less
therefore could three Heptagons or Octagons, or four Pentagons meet in a Solid
Angle, to form a new Regular Body; for those added together would be greater
than four Right Angles. But now, for the Measures of these five Regular Bodies,
take the three following

CONSECTARYS.
I. SInce a Tetraedrum is nothing else but a Triangular Pyramid, and an
Octaedrum a double Quadrangular one, their Dimension is the same as of the
Pyramids in Schol. of Definit. 17.

II. The Solidity of an Hexaedrum may be had from Consect. 3. Definit. 13.

III. A Dodecaedrum consists of twelve Quinquangular Pyramids, and an
Icosaedrum of twenty Triangular ones, all the Vertex's or tops whereof meet in
the Center of a Sphere that is conceived to circumscribe the respective Solids,
and consequently they have their Altitudes and Bases equal: Wherefore having
found the Solidity of one of those Pyramids, and multiplied it by the number of
Bases (in the one Solid 12, in the other 20) you have the Solidity of the whole
respective Solids.

DEFINITION XXII.
BEsides these Definitions of the Regular Bodies, we may also form like Idea's
of them from their Genesis, which particularly Honoratus Fabri has given us a
short and ingenious System of, in his Synopsis Geometrica, p. 149. and the
following.

I. Suppose an Equilateral Triangle ABD to be inscribed in a Circle ( Fig. 44.
N. 1.) whose Center is C, whence having conceived the Radii CA, CB, CD, to be
drawn, imagine them to be lifted up together with the common Center C, so that
the point C ascending Perpendicularly, at length you will have the Line^ EA, EB,
ED, equal to the Lines AB, BD, DA, After this way there will be generated, or
made a Space consisting of fou^ Equal and Equilateral Triangles, which is
called a Tetraedrum Hence we shall by and by easily demonstrate, the quantity
o^ the Elevation CE, and the Proportion of the Diameter of the Sphere OF to be
Circumscribed to the remaining part CF and so the reason of the Euclidean
Genesis proposed lib. 13 Prop. 13.

II. Much like this, but somewat easier to be conceived, is the Genesis of the
Octaedrum, where by a mental raising of the Center C ( Fig. 44. N. 2.) of the
Square ABDE inscribed in the Circle, together with the Semidiameters CA, CB,
CD, CE until being more and more extended they at length become the Lines AF,
BF, DF, OF, all equal among themselves, and (...) the side of the Square AB or
BD; and its manifest, that by the like extension conceived to be made downwards
to G, the^ will be formed eight equal and regular Triangles, which w^ all
concur in the two opposite Points F and G. We might also deduce another Genesis
of the Octaedrum from a certai^ Section of a Sphere, and also give the like of
a Hexaedrum o^ Cube: but we have already given the easiest, of the one, vi^
that which is also common to Parallelepipeds; and that of the other just now
given is sufficient to our purpose.

CHAP. II. Containing the Explication of those terms, which relate to the
affections of the Objects of the Mathematics.
DEFINITION XXIII.
EVery Magnitude is said to be either Finite if it has any bounds or terms of
its Quantity; or Infinite if it has none, or at least Indefinite if those
bounds are not determined, or at least not considered as so; as Euclid often
supposes an Infinite Line, or rather perhaps, an Indefinite one, i. e.
considered without any relation to its bounds or Ends: By a like distinction,
and in reality the same with the former, all quantity is either Measurable, or
such that some Measure or other repeated some number of Times, either exactly
measures and so equals it, (which Euclid and other Geometricians emphatically
or particularly call Measuring) or else is greater; or on the other side
Immense, whose Amplitude or Extension no Finite Measure whatsoever, or how many
times soever repeated, can ever equal: In the first Case, on the one Hand, the
Measure ( viz. which exactly measures any quantity) is called by Euclid an
aliquot Part lib. 5. Def. 1.
or simply a Part of the thing measured: as e. g. the Length of one Foot is an
aliquot Part of a Length or Line of 10 Foot. In the latter Case the Mea^ure
(which does not exactly measure any Quantity) is called an Aliquant Part, as a
line of 3 or 4 Foot is an Aliquant part of a Line of 10 Foot. Now therefore,
omitting that perplexed Question, whether or not there may be an infinite
Magnitude, we shall here, respecting what is to our purpose, deduce the
following

CONSECTARY.
EVery Measure, or part strictly so taken, is to the thing Measured, or its
whole, as Unity to a whole number, for that (which is one) repeated a certain
number of times, is supposed exactly to measure the other.

DEFINITION XXIV.
IF the same Measure measures 2 different quantities (whether the one can
exactly Measure the other or not) those Quantities are said to be absolutely
Commensurable; but if they can have no common Measure; they are called
Incommensurable* Notwithstanding which they both retain one to the other a
certain relation of Quantity, which is called Reason or Proportion, a^ we shall
further show hereafter. In the mean while we have hence, as an infallible Rule
to try whether Quantities can admit o^ a Common Measure or not, this

CONSECTARY.
THose Quantities are Commensurable, whereof Euclid lib. 10. Prop. 5, 6, 7, 8.
one (...) to the other, either as Unity to an whole Number, or a^ one whole
Number to another, for either one o^ them is the Measure of the other, as also
of i^ self, and then it is to that other as Unity to (...) Number by the
Consect. of the preced. or els^ they admit of some third Quantity for a common
Measure which will be to either of them separately as Unity to some Number:
therefore they are one to another as Number to Number.

DEFINITION XXV.
IF 2 Quantities of the same Kind, considered as Measures on^ of the other,
being applied one to the other, exactly agree or are exactly equal every way,
(as e. g. 2 Squares on the sam^ common Side, or two Triangles whose Lines
Angles and Space exactly agree and conicide) or at least may be equally
measured by a common Measure applied to both) as e. g. a Square and an Oblong,
or a Rhombus, or Triangle, each of whose Area's were 20 square Inches, although
they do not agree in Line^ and Angles; the first may be called Simply Equal,
and the other totally equal, or equal as to their wholes: But if one be greater
and the other less, they are Unequal, and that which exceeds i^ called the
greater, and that which is deficient the less, and tha^ part by which the less
is exceeded by the greater, in respect to the greater is called Excess, in
respect to the less Defect, and by a common Name they are called the
Difference. All which as they are plain and easy, so they afford us a great
many self-evident Truths, which are used to be called Axioms, as these and the
like

CONSECTARYS.
I. THe whole is greater than its Part, whether it be an Aliquot or aliquant
Part.

II. Those Quantities which are equal to a third are equal betwixt themselves.

III. That which is greater or less than one of the equal Quantities is also
greater or less than the other.

IV. Those Quantities which, being applied one to the other, or placed one upon
the other, either really or mentally, agree; may be esteemed as totally equal:
And on the Contrary,

V. Those Quantities which are totally equal will agree, etc. To which might be
added several others which we have already made use of and supposed as such in
the preceding Definitions.

DEFINITION XXVI.
THere are moreover Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division, which
are common affections of all Quantities as well as of Numbers. Addition is the
Collection of several Quantities (for the most part of one kind) into one total
or Sum; which is either done so, that the whole (which is commonly called the
Sum or Aggregate) obtains a new Name, or else by a bare connection of the
Quantities to be added by the Copulative and, or the usual Sign + ( i. e. plus
or more) as for Example 2 Numbers... and.... (suppose 3 and 4) added together
make the Sum....... ( i. e. 7, or which is the same thing 3+4;) and this Line
-- added to this other -- gives the Sum -- which is nothing but the 2 Lines
joined, or taken together. But now if we would treat of these Lines, or any
other 2 Quantities to be added, more generally; by calling the first a (a) and
the latter (b) we may fitly write their Sum a+ b.

SCHOLIUM.
HAving thus explained the Term of Addition, these and the like Axioms emerge
of themselves: If to equal Quantities you add Equal the Sum will be Equal; but
if to Equal you add unequ^^ the Aggregate will be unequal, etc. Moreover it may
not be amiss to admonish the Tyro of these 2 things. 1. In Addition may be see^
the vast usefulness of that very Ingenious though familiar Invention mentioned in
Definit. 3. for hereby we may collect into one Su^ not only Tens, and Hundreds,
but Thousands, Millions, My riads, as though they were only Units; which we will
Illustrate by an Example.

DEFINITION XXVII.
SUbtraction is the taking one Quantity from another (of the same kind;) which
is so performed that either the remainde obtains a new Name, or by a bare
separation of the Subtrahen^ by the privative Particle less, or the usual Sign
- which stand for it, as e. g.... or three being subtracted from...... * or 7,
the remainder or difference is.... or 4 and this Lin^ -- Subtracted from that
-- leaves -- Now if we would signify this more generally either of the^ Lines,
or the Number above, or any 2 Quantities whatsoeve^ that are to be Subtracted
one from the other, by naming the first (a) and the latter (b) we shall have
the remainder a -- ^ Herein are evident these and the like Axioms: If from
equ^^ Quantities you Subtract Equal ones, the Remainders or Differences (...)
be equal. Here it will be worth while to take notice of, from this and the
preced. Definit. the following

CONSECTARYS.
I. IF a negative Quantity be added to it self considered a positive (as - 3 to
+ 3 or - a to + a) the Sum wi^^ be (...) for to add a Privation or Negative is
the same thing a^ to Subtract a Positive, wherefore to join a Negative and
Pos^^^ve together, is to make the one to destroy the other.

II. If a negative be subtracted from its positive (- a from + a) the remainder
will be double of that positive (+2 a) for to subtract or take away a privation
or negative, is to add that very thing, the privation of which you take away;
for really that which in words is called the addition of a Privation, is in
reality a Subtraction, and a subtraction of it, is really an addition; and what
is here called a Remainder, is indeed a Sum or Aggregate; and what is there
called a Sum, is truly a Remainder. Thus,

III. If the positive Quantity (+ a) be taken from the privative one (- a) the
remainder is double the privative one (-2 a) since, taking away a positive one,
there necessarily arises a new Privation which will double that you had before.
Hence,

IV. You have the Original of the Vulgar Rules in Literal Addition and
Subtraction: If the Signs of the unequal Quantities are different, in the room
of Addition you must subtract, and in room of Subtraction add, and to the sum
or remainder, prefix the Sign in the first place of the greatest, in the next
of that from which you Subtract: but if the Signs are both the same, and the
greatest quantity to be subtracted from the less, you must, on the contrary,
subtract according to the natural Way, the least from the greater, and prefix
the contrary Sign to the remainder: Which Rules you may see Illustrated in the
following Examples: Addition Subtraction. 4 b-2 a from 2 a+ b from 3 a+2 b 3
b+5 a Subst. a- b Subst. 2 a+3 b 7 b+3 a R. a+2 b R. a- b

NOTE.
Instead of the Authors 4th Consect. as far as it relates to Subtraction, which
may seem a little perplexed, take this general Rule for Subtraction in Species,
viz. Change all the Signs of the lower Line, or Subtrahend, and then add the
Quantities, and you have the true Remainder.

SCHOLIUM.
IN this Literal Subtraction, we have not that convenience which the invention
of Vulgar Notes supplies us with, that from the next foregoing Note we may
borrow Unity, which in the following Series goes for 10, etc. This is done in
Tetractycal Subtraction only with this difference, that an Unite here borrowed
goes only for 4. That the easiness of this Operation may appear, we will add
one Example, wherein from this number, -- you are to subtract this,
1232002310232 321012321223 310323323003 Wherever therefore the inferior Note
is greater than the superior one, the facility is much greater here than in
common Subtraction, because never a greater number than 3 is to be subtracted
out of a greater, than 4 and 2: but if the inferior number be greater than the
superior, you borrow unity from the left hand, which is equivalent to 4; the
rest is performed as in common Subtraction.

DEFINITION XXVIII.
MVltiplication, generally Speaking, is nothing else but a Complex or manifold
Addition of the same quantity, wherein that which is produced is peculiarly
called the Product, and those quantities by which it is produced, are called
the Multiplicand and the Multiplier: The first denotes the Quantity which is to
be multiplied, or added so many times to its self; and the other the Number by
which it is to be multiplied, or determins how many times it is to be added to
it self. The same terms are applied moreover to Lines and other Quantities. But
here are two things to be chiefly noted; 1. That the Multiplication of one
number by another, or of a Line by a Line, may be considered as having a double
Event; for the Product may be either of the same or a different kind, as, e. g.
when.... 4 is multiplied by 3... the product may be considered either as a
Line, thus,............ or as a Plane Surface in this Form, 12 dots arranged in
three rows and four columns Whence it is also named a Plane Number, and the
product is conceived to be formed by the motion of an erect Line AB, consisting
of 3 equal parts, along another BC, consisting of 4 equal parts, and conceived
as lying along. So also the Multiplication of Lines ( e. g. of the Line A -- B
by the Line B -- C) may be conceived to be so performed, that the Product also
shall be a Line, e. g. C -- D (concerning the usefulness of which
Multiplication in Geometry, we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter;) or
so, that the Product shall be a Plane or Surface, arising from the motion of
the erect Line AB, along AC, conceived as lying along; as we have already
shown. But as for the most part these Planes so produced are called Rectangles,
if the Lines that form them are unequal; but if they are equal they are called
Squares, (otherwise the Powers of the given Quantities;) and in this case the
Lines that form them are called Square Roots; so also if those Planes are
multiplied again into a third Quantity (as either a Line or a Number) there
will arise Solids, and particularly if that third Quantity be the Root of the
Square, the Product is called a Cube, etc. The other thing to be noted is, That
both these ways of Multiplying either Numbers or Lines, are expressed by a very
compendious, tho arbitrary way, of Notation, viz. by a bare Juxtaposition of
the Letters which denote such and such Species of Quantities, as, e. g. if for
the forementioned Number or Line AB we put a, and for BC b, the Product will be
ab; or if the Efficients are equal, as a and a the Square thence produced, will
be aa or a{powerof2}; and if this Square be further multiplied by its Root a,
then the Cube thence produced will be aaa or a{powerof3}, etc. Which being
premised, you have these following

CONSECTARIES.
I. IF a Positive Quantity be multiplied by a Positive one, the Product will be
also Positive; since to multiply is to repeat the Quantity according as the
Multiplier directs: Wherefore to multiply by a Positive Quantity, is to repeat
the Quantities positively; as on the other side, to multiply by a Privative, is
so many times to repeat the Privation of that Thing: Which we shall show
further hereafter.

II. Equal Quantities ( a and a) multiplied by the same (b), or contrariwise,
will give equal Products ( ab and ab or ba).

III. The same Quantity (z) multiplied by the whole Quantity ( a+ b+ c) or by
Eucl. lib. 2. prop. 1.
all its parts separately, will give equal Products. Also

IV. The whole ( a+ b) whether it be multiplied by lib. 2. prop. 2.
it self, or by its parts separately, will give equal Products.

SCHOLIUM I.
THe Vulgar Praxis of Numeral Multiplication, is founded on these two last
Consectarys, as e. g. to multiply 126 by 3; you first multiply 6 by 3, then 2,
i. e. 20 by 3, then 1, i. e. 100 by the same, and then add each of those
partial Products into one Sum: In like manner being to multiply 348 by 23, you
first multiply each Note of the Multiplicand by the first of the Multiplier (3)
and then by the second (2) ( i. e. 20) etc. which is to be done likewise after
the same manner in Tetractical Multiplication; only in this latter, which is
more easy, you have nothing to reserve in your mind, but all is immediately
writ down, (which might also be done in Vulgar Multiplication) as may be seen
by this Example underneath, as also the great easiness of this sort of
Multiplication, beyond the common way, because there is no need of any longer
Table than that we have shown page 7.

^

SCHOLIUM II.
It is manifest from what we have said,

I. IF the Base of a Parallelogram be called (b) and its Altitude a, its Area
may be expressed by the Product ab, by Cons. 7. Definit. 12.

II. If the Base of a be b or eb, and its Altitude a its Area will be half ab
or half eab, by Consectary 8. of the same Definition.

III. If the Base of a Prism or Parallelepiped or Pyramid be half ab or ab, and
its Altitude c, the solid Contents of that Prism will be half abc, and of the
Parallelepiped abc, by Consect. 3 and 4. Def. 16. and of the Pyramid abc, by
Cons. 3. Def. 17.

DEFINITION XXIX.
DIvision, in general, is a manifold or complicated Subtraction of one quantity
(which is called the Divisor) out of another (which is called the Dividend)
whose multiplicity, or how many times the one is contained in the other, is
shown by another quantity arising from that Division, which is therefore called
the Quote or Quotient. Here also the Divisor is of the same kind with the
Dividend, or of a different kind, e. g. of the same kind if the
product............ (12) be divided by (3) whence you will have the Quotient....
(4) or dividing the aforementioned Line CD by the Line AB you will again have the
Line BC; but of a different kind, if the plane number above found 12 dots
arranged in 3 rows and 4 columns or the Rectangle ABCD be divided by a
Retroduction, or a moving backwards again the erect Side AB, by whose motion
the Rectangle was first formed, that so the Line BC may remain alone again. But
both these kinds of Division as they have their peculiar Difficulties in
Arithmetic and Geometry, which we shall further elucidate in their proper
places; so they may be universally and very easily performed in Species (or by
Letters) which will be sufficient to our present purpose; or by a bare
separation of the Divisor from the Dividend, if it be actually therein
included; or by placing the Divisor underneath the Dividend with a Line
between. Thus if ab be to be divided by (b) the Quotient will be a; if by a,
the Quotient will be (b); but if a or ab be to be divided by c which Letter
since it is not found in the Dividend, cannot be taken out of it) the Quotients
are a / c and ab / c i. e. a or ab divided by c, after the same manner as if 2
were to be divided by 3; which Divisor, since it is not contained in the
Dividend, is usually placed under it, by a separating Line thus,, 2 divided by
3.

SCHOLION.
HOW difficult Common Division is, especially of a large Dividend by a large
Divisor, is sufficiently known: but how easily it is performed by Tetractical
Arithmetic, we will barely bring one Example to show. If the Product found in
Schol. 1. of the preceding Definition, 1200 203 22 be again to be divided by
its Multiplier 133, it may be performed after the usual way, but with much more
ease, as the following Operation will show; or according to a particular way of
Weigelius, by writing down the Divisor, and its double and triple, in a piece
of paper by it self, after this way: 123 312 1101 Divisor, Double, Triple. and
then moving that piece of Paper to the Dividend, note, which of those three
Numbers comes nearest to the first Figures of the Dividend; for that barely
subtracted gives the Remainder, and will denote the Quotient to be writ down in
its proper place; as the operation itself will show better than any words can.

Thus after Weigelius's way: ^

DEFINITION XXX.
EXtraction of Roots is a Species of Division, wherein the Quotient is the Root
of the given Square or Cube, etc. But the Divisor is not given, neither is it
all along the same (as it is in Division) but must be perpetually found, and
they are several. And as the Squares of Simple Numbers 1, 2, 3, etc. viz. 1, 4,
9, 16, etc. and their Cubes 1, 8, 27, 64, etc. may be had immediately out of a
Multiplication Table, as also their Roots, without any further trouble; and
likewise in Species, as the Roots of the Square aa or a{powerof2}, or of the
Cube aaa or a{powerof3}, are without doubt (a); so if the Square Root be to be
extracted out of de, or the Cube Root out of fgm (because the letters are
different, and no one can be taken for the Root) the Square Root is commonly
noted by this Sign de, the Cube Root by this C, or 3 fgm, etc. as also in
Numbers that are not perfect Squares (as e. g. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 15,
17, 19, etc.) we can no otherwise express the Square Roots, then after this
manner 2, 7, 19, etc. and in those that are not perfectly Cubical (as all
between 1, 8, 27, 64, etc.) we can only express their Cube Roots after some
such manner, c. 7, or 37. c. 61, or 361 etc. Which forms of Roots in specious
Computation, we call Surd Quantities, in Vulgar Arithmetic Surd Numbers, i. e.
such as cannot be perfectly expressed by any Numbers; although we have Rules at
hand to determine their Values nearer and nearer ad Infinitum.

These Rules accommodated to Square and Cube Numbers, etc. which otherwise are
more difficult to be comprehended, appear plain and easy to him, who
multiplies a Root expressed by 2 Letters (called therefore commonly a Binomial)
first Quadratically, then Cubically, etc. For he will have as

CONSECTARYS.
I. THE Square of any assumed Root, as also, Prop. 4. lib. 2. Eucl. and at the
same time a general Rule for Extracting the Square Root, all expressed in these
few Notes:

aa+2 ab+ bb.

II. The Cube of the same Root, a New Theorem, and at the same time a Rule for
Extracting any Cube Root, contained in this Theorem:

a{powerof3}+3 aab+3 abb+ bbb.

SCHOLIUM I.
WHich that we may more plainly show, especially as far as it relates to the
Rules of Extraction, consider, 1. That the Root of the Square aa+2 ab+ bb is
already known (for we assumed for the Root the Quantity a+ b) so that now we
are to see which way this Root is to be obtained out of that Square by
Division. It will presently appear, that the first Note of the Root a, will
come out of the first part of the Square aa, and the other part b must be
obtained out of the remainder 2 ab+ bb; and so as there are 2 Notes of the
Root, the Square must be distinguished as it were into 2 Classes, each of which
gives a particular note of the Root. Then it is manifest, that the first Note
of the Root (a) may be obtained out of the Square aa by a simple Extraction.
Now it is evident, if I would have by Division the other Note of the Root, the
next following part of the remaining Classis must be divided by 2 a, the double
of the Quotient just now found, and that nothing should remain after this
Division (for now we have the whole Root a+ b) you must not only subtract the
Product of the Divisor and this new Quotient, but also the Square of this new
Quotient: Which is the Vulgar Method and Rule for the Extraction of Square
Roots taught in common Arithmetic.

Likewise if you would extract the Root of the abovementioned Cube, which we
already know, having formed it from a+ b, it is manifest, that the first Note
of the Root a will come out of the first part of the Cube a{powerof3}, and the
other b, must be obtained out of the remainder 3 abb+ bbb, and so, as there are
two Notes of the Root, the Cube must be distinguished, as it were into two
Classes, each of which will give a particular Note of the Root. Now it is
manifest, the first Note of the Root a is obtained by simple Extraction of the
Root out of the Cube aaa. It is moreover evident, if I would have by Division
the other Note of the Root b, the next remaining part must be divided by 3 aa
(the triple Square of the precedent Quotient, or thrice the precedent Quotient
multiplied by it self) and, that nothing should remain after this division (for
now we have the whole Cube Root a+ b) you must not only subtract from the
remaining Dividend the Product of the Divisor, and the new Quotient (3 aab) but
also the Product of the Square of the new Quotient, and thrice the precedent
Quotient (3 abb) and moreover the Cube of that new Quotient b{powerof3}: Which
is the Method of extracting Cube Roots in Vulgar Arithmetic.

SCHOLIUM II.
FRom what we have said you have also the Reason of another rule in Arithmetic
which teaches how to approach continually nearer and nearer to the Square and
Cube Roots of numbers that are not exact Squares and Cubes; viz. by adding to
the given Number perpetually new Classes and Ciphers or o's, two at a time, to
the Square, and three to the Cube, and so continue on the operation as before;
which will add Decimal Parts to the Integrals before found; and the next
operation (if you add a second Class of Ciphers) will exhibit Centesimal
Parts, and so on ad Infinitum. For Example, If I would have the Square Root of
2 pretty near, I can assign no nearer whole Number than 1. But by adding a new
Class of 2 Ciphers, i. e. multiplying the given Number by 100 (whereby the
Root is multiplied by 10) you will have 14, nearly the Root of 200, that is, 14/10
or 1 4/10 much nearer the Root of 2 than the former; and thus you may always
come nearer and nearer ad Infinitum, but never to an exact Root. For if you
could have the exact Root of 2, or 3, or 5, etc. in any Fraction whatsoever,
that Fraction must be of such sort, that its Numerator and Denominator being
squared, the Fraction thence arising must exactly equal 2 or 3, or 5, etc. that
is, its Numerator must be exactly double, or trible, or Quadruple, etc. of of
the Denominator; which can never be, because both are Squares, and in a Series
of Squares no such thing can happen. Hence you have these

CONSECTARYS.
III. THat it is a certain mark of Incommensurability, if on^ quantity is 1,
and other the 2, or 3, or 5, etc*

IV. That these sorts of Quantities are notwithstanding Commensurable in their
Powers, i. e. their Squares are as 1 and 2 or as a number to a number.

V. Those Quantities which are to one another, as 1 an^ 2, or as 2 and the 3
are incommensurable in Power also. Which being rightly understood, you may
easily comprehend several Eucl. l. 10 Prop. 9, 10, 11 12, 13 etc.
Propositions of lib. 10 Eucl. especially aft^^ some few things premised
concerning Reason and Proportion.

SCHOLIUM. III.
FRom what we have shown may easily be concluded, the to any proposed Quantity
whatsoever, which Euclid cal^ lib. 10. Def. 5, 6, ^ 8, 9, 10, 11.
Rational, and for which we may always put I, there may be several others both
commensurable and incommensurable, and that either simply or in power so; those
which are commensurable to a Rational given Quantity, either Simply or only in
Power (which, e. g. are to it, as 2, 3, 4, etc.,,, etc. or as 2, 3, 4,,,, etc.)
are called also Rational: but those which are Incommensurable both ways ( i. e.
both simply and in power) as (^, etc.) are called Irrational. In like manner
the Squar^ of a given Rational Quantity (as I) is called Rational, an^
Quantities commensurable to it (as 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.,, ^ etc.) are called also
Rational; but incommensurable on^ (2, 5, etc.) Irrational, and the Sides and
Roots of the^ more Irrational.

DEFINITION XXXI.
ANy Quantities whatsoever of the same kind, whether commensurable or
incommensurable, equal or unequal, admit of a twofold respect or relation of
their magnitude, one whereof, when only the difference or excess of one above
another is respected (as 10 which is 3 more than 7) is called an Arithmetical
Reason or Respect; the other, wherein respect is rather had to the Amplitude,
whereby one is contained once, or a certain number of times in the other (as 3
is contained thrice in 10 and part more) is called Geometrical Reason, or by
way of Emphasis, only Reason, and by others Proportion; and this Reason or
Proportion, if the less is exactly contained a certain number of times in the
greater (as 3 in 6, or 4 in 12) is generally called, on the part of the
greatest term, Multiple, and on part of the less, Submultiple, and particularly
in the first Example double, when 6 is taken in respect to 3, and subduple when
3 is taken in respect to 6; in the other triple and subtriple, etc. If the less
be contained in the greater once or more times, unity only remaining over and
above (as 3 in 4 and 4 in 9) the Reason or Proportion is called Superparticular
and Subsuperparticular, and is noted by the terms Sesqui and Subsesqui, joining
the ordinal Name of the lesser Term; as the the Reason of 4 to 3 is called
Sesquitertian, and contrariwise Subsesquitertian; the Reason of 9 to 4 is
called double Sesquiquartan, and contrariwise Subduple Subsequiquartan, etc. If
lastly, the less be contained in the greater once, or a certain number of
times, several units remaining over and above, it is commonly called
Superpartient Reason and is expressed by the word Super or Subsuper, joined
with the adverbial Name of the remaining Parts, and the ordinal Name of the
lesser Term; thus, e. g. the Reason of 7 to 4, is called Supertriquartan, 12 to
5 double Superbiquintan, etc. but when the Quotient arises by the division of
the greater term by the less, and is commonly expressed in the same words, it
is also commonly called by the name of Reason (e. g. 2 is the name of the
Reason of 6 to 3, 2 of 9 to 4, or contrariwise, etc.) as also the quotient
arising by division of the Consequent by the Antecedent (as in the first case,
4/9 in the latter) by which name the antecedent Term of the Reason being
multiplied, produces its Consequent; which is evident by naming any Reason e or
i, or o, etc. Thus if the antecedent Term be called a or b etc. the Consequent
may be rightly called ea or eb, oa or ob, etc. and because in an Arithmetical
Relation we only respect the excess of the first above the following, or of the
following above the foregoing (which may be called x or z) if the antecedent
(which may be called a or b) be less, the consequent may properly be called a+
x or b+ z; but if it be greater, the other will be a- x or b- z.

CONSECTARYS.
I. WE may hence readily infer, that if the Diameter of any Circle be called a
the Circumference may be called ea, (for whatever the proportion is between
them, i^ may be expressed by the Letter e) and the Area, according to
Consectary 2. Definition 15, will be eaa.

II. If for the Base of any Cylinder or Cone you put eaa and the Altitude (b)
the Solidity of that Cylinder may be rightly expressed by eaab, by Consect. 5.
Definit. 16, and of the Cone by eaab, by Consect. 4. Definit. 17.

DEFINITION XXXII.
AS the Identity (or sameness) of several Geometrical Reasons used to be called
Geometrical Proportionality, or emphatically Proportion; so the similitude (or
likeness) of severa^ Arithmetical Reasons, is deservedly called Arithmetical
Proportionality, or by a particular Name Progression; and consequently those
Progressionals, or Arithmetical Proportionals, which exceed one another by the
same difference, either uninterruptedly or continually as 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, etc.
ascending, or 30, 28, 26, 24, 22, 20, etc. descending; or interruptedly, as 2
and 5, 7 and 10, 11 and 14, etc. ascending; or 30 and 26, 24 and 20, 1^ and 13,
etc. descending: For which, and all other in what cas^^ soever, we may
universally put this (or such like) continua^ Progression, v. g. a, a+ x, a+2
x, a+3x, etc. ascending; o^ a, a- x, a-2x, a-3x, etc. descending, but in an
interrupted Progression, v. g. b and b+ z and c and c- z, d and d- z, etc.
descending. Whence you have this

CONSECTARY.
ANY Difference being given, the following Terms of me Progression, continually
proceeding from the first assumed or given one, may be found; as also several
Antecedents that interruptedly follow the given or assumed ones, viz. by adding
or subtracting the given Difference to or from the former Terms to find the
latter.

DEFINITION XXXIII.
IN like manner, since Reasons are said to be the same, which have the same
Denomination of Reason, those quantities will be proportional which continually
ascend by the same denomination of Reason, as 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, etc. or
descend, ^s 81, 27, 9, 3, 1. there by the Denomination of the Reason 2, here 3;
or that ascend interruptedly, as 2, 4; 3, (...): 5, 10, etc. or descend, as 40,
10; 28, 7; 20, 5; 8, (...), etc. Whence you have these

CONSECTAYS.
HAving two Terms given, or only one with the Denomination of the Reason ( e.
g. the Term 2 with the Denomination of the Reason 3, or universally the first
Term a with the Denomination of the Reason e) it will be easy to find ^s many
more Terms of the Geometrical Progression or Pro^ortion as you please, viz. by
always multiplying the Antece^ent by the Denomination of the Reason, that you
may have 2, (...), 18, 54, etc. or a, ea, e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a, etc. in
continued, or 2 and (...), 4 and 12, 5 and 15, etc. and aea, beb, ded, etc. in
^iscontinued or interrupted Proportion.

Thus having rightly understood what we have said in this ^3 and 31 Definition,
there will follow these Corollarys as so ma^y Axioms.

II. That equal Quantities have the same proportion to the same Quantity Eucl.
lib. Prop. 7.
and the same has the like to equal Quantities.

III. But a greater quantity has a greater Reason to the same prop. 8.
than a less, and the same has a greater proportion to a less Quantity than to
a greater.

IV. On the contrary, those that have the prop. 9.
same proportion to the same quantity, and that likewise the same to them are
equal.

V. But that which bears a prop. 10
greater proportion to the same is greater; but that to which the same bears a
greate^ proportion is less.

VI. Proportions equal to one third 16.
are also equal amon^^ themselves, etc.

DEFINITION XXXIV.
HEre remain two things to be taken notice of; First the If any whole (quantiy)
be so divided into two equ^^ parts Eucl. Definit. 3. lib. 6
that the whole, the greater part an^ the less are in a continual proportion;
the (whole) is said to be cut in extreme and me^ Reason. 2. In a continual
Series of that kind (...) Proportionals ( e. g. 2. 4. 8. 16. 32, etc. or a,
(...) e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a, e{powerof4} a, etc.) the Reason of the
first Ter^ to the third Eucl. Definit. 10. l. 5.
(2 to 8, or a to e{powerof2} a) is pa^ticularly called Duplicate, and to the
4th ((...) or e{powerof3} a) Triplicate, etc. of that Reason which the same
first Te^ has to its second, or any other antecedent of that Series to (...)
Consequent: But generally these Duplicate and Triplicate Re^sons, etc. as
others also of the first Term to the third or four^^ of Proportions continually
cohering together, (whether the are the same as in the foregoing Examples, or
different as (...) these, 2, 4, 6, 18, or a, ea, eia, eioa, etc. viz. if the
nam^ of the first Reason be e, of the second i, (...) the third o, etc.) I say,
the Reasons of the fir^^ Term (2 or a) to the third (6 or eia) (...) to the 4th
(18 or eioa) are said to be compoun^ed of the continual intermediate Reasons.

Now from our general Example, what Eucl^ says, is manifest,

CONSECTARY I.
THat the denomination of a compounded Reason arises from the Multiplication of
the denominations of the given Simple Eucl. l. 6. Def. 5.
Reasons; as the denomination of the reason compounded of both ( viz. a to eia)
is produced by multiplying the denomination of the first Reason e by the
denomination of the second Reason i, and the denomination of the Reason
compounded of the three ( viz. a to eioa) is produced by the denomination of
the first Reason e, multiplied by the denomination of the second Reason i; and
the Product of these by the denomination of the third Reason o, etc.

CONSECTARY II.
SO that it is very easy after this way, having never so many Reasons given,
whether continued (as 2 to 3, 3 to 6, or ^a, ea, eia,) or interrupted or
discrete (as 2 to 3, and 5 to 10, or a to ea, and b to i b) to express their
compounded Reason: ^n the first case it easily obtained by the bare omission of
the intermediate Term or Terms (2 to 6, or a to eia;) and in the other by
multiplying first of all the Names of the compounding Reasons among themselves
(1 and 2, e. and i.) and by the Product (3 or ei) as the name of the Reason
compounding the first Term (2 or a) that you may have the o her 6 or eia) or
(if any one had rather do so in this latter case) by turning the discrete or
interrupted Reasons into continued ones, by making as 5 to 10 in the second
Reason, so is the Consequent of the first 3 to 6, or as b to ib, so ea to eia,)
and then by referring the first 2 to the third 6, or the first a to the third
eia, etc. In a word therefore, any Duplicate Reason may be appositely expressed
by a to e{powerof2} a, and Triplicate by a to e{powerof3} a, the one
immediately discernible by a double, the other by a triple Multiplication into
itself; as you may also commodiously, and denote others compounded, e. g. of 2
by a to eia, of 3 by a to eioa, etc.

SCHOLIUM.
WE will here advertise the Reader, that tho the Names (...) duplicate and
triplicate Reasons, etc. are chiefly appropriate to Geometrical
Proportionality, yet the Moderns have also accommodated them to Arithmetical
also; as e. g. That Arithmetic^ Progression is called Duplicate, whose Terms
are the Squares (...) Numbers Arithmetically Proportional ( e. g. 1, 4, 9, 16,
25 etc.) and Triplicate, whose Terms are Cubes, (etc. as 1, ^ 27, 64, etc.

DEFINITION XXXV.
AND now at length we may understand what Magnitud^ Geometers particularly call
like, or similar. Whereas ^ General one number may be said to be like another,
one rig^^ Line to another, one obtuse Angle to another, a Triangle ^^ a
Triangle, and the like; but an Acute Angle is not like ^ Obtuse one, nor a
Triangle like a Parallelogram, or a rig^^ Line like a Curve one; or a Square
like an Oblong, etc. Yet among those Figures which may after that rate in
general be sa^^ to be like, there is notwithstanding a great deal of
dissimi^^tude; therefore in a strict Sense we call only those Right Li^^ed
Figures similar or like (a) which have each of their Angl^ respectively equal
to each of the other (as A and A) B and B C and C, etc. Fig. 48.) and the Sides
about those equal A^gles Proportional, viz. as BA to AC, so BA to AC, etc.
((...) and among Solid Figures those are said to be Similar, each o^ whose
Planes are respectively Similar one to the other, and equ^^ in number on both
sides; as, e. g. the Plane AC is similar to the Plane AC, and CG to CG, etc.
and six in number on bo^^ sides.

Page 54.
47

48

49

50

51

52

53



Book I.
Section II. Containing several Propositions demonstrated from the foregoing
Foundations.
CHAP. I. Of the Composition and Division of Quantities.
Proposition I.
THE Sum and Difference of two unequal Quantities added together, make double
of the greatest.

Demonstration.
Suppose a be the greatest, b the least, then will their Sum be a+ b And their
Difference a- b Their Sum 2 a, by Consectary 1. Definition 27, Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce by a bare Subsumption Eucl. lib. 6. Definit. 1.
you have the truth of Consect. 1. Definit. 8. that 2 unequal contiguous Angles
on the same Right Line, ACD and ACE ( Fig. 49. lib. II. Def. 9.
) i. e. if we call the Right Angle BCD or BCE (a) and the difference between
the one and the other (b) a+ b and a- b, make 2 a, i. e. are equal to 2 right
ones. Eucl. 13. l. 1.


Proposition II.
IF the Difference of two unequal Quantities be subtracted from their Sum, the
Remainder will be double of the least.

Demonstration.
If from the Aggregate or Sum a+ b You subtract the Difference a- b The
Remainder will be 0+2 b by Consectary 2. Definition 27. Q. E. D.

Proposition III.
BUt if the Sum or Aggregate be subtracteed from the Difference, the remainder
is so much less than nothing, as is the double of the last Quantity.

Demonstration.
For if from the Difference a- b You subtract the Sum or Aggregate a+ b The
Remainder will be -- 0-2 b by Consectary 3 of the aforesaid Definition. Q. E. D.

Proposition IV.
IF a Positive Quantity be multiplied by a Negative one, or contrariwise, the
Product will be a Negative Quantity.

Exposition.
If a- b is to be multiplied by c; it is certain, that a multiplied by c, makes
ac a Positive Quantity, by Consect. 1. Definit. 28. Moreover b by the same c (a
Negative by a Positive) will make - bc; and so the whole Product of a- b by +
c, will be ac- bc.

Demonstration.
Suppose a- b= e; therefore ec will be = to the Product of a- b by c: and since
a- b is = e by the Hypoth. adding on both sides h, you will have a= e+ b. by
Schol. Definit. 26. and multiplying both sides by c, ac= ec+ bc, by Consect. 2.
Definit. 28. and by further subtracting from each side bc, you will have ac- bc=
ec, that is, to the Product of a- b by c. Q. E D.

CONSECTARY.
SInce ac- bc is the Product of a- b by c, it is manifest also, that if ac- bc
be divided by c, you will have a- b for the Quotient; and so always a Positive
Quantity (as ac) divided by a Positive one, c, will give a Positive Quotient;
but a Negative Quantity - bc divided by a Positive one, will give a Negative
Quotient.

Proposition V.
IF a Negative Quantity be multiplied by a Negative one, the Product will be
Positive.

Exposition.
Suppose a- b is to be multiplied by - c; it is certain, that (...) multiplied
by - c will give the Negative Quantity - ac, by Prop. 4. but - b multiplied by
the same - c will produce + bc, and so the whole Product will be - ac+ bc.

A Demonstration like the former.
Suppose a- b= e, then will - ec = the Product of a- b by - c: and since a- b
is = e, adding b on both sides you will ^ave a= e+ b, by Schol. Definit. 26. and
multiplying both sides by - c, you will have ac=- ec- bc, by Prop. 4. and Consect.
^^. Definit. 28. and by adding bc on both sides, you will have - ac+ bc=- ec, i.
e. to the Product of a- b by - c Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. SInce therefore a- c+ bc arises from a- b by - c, it is manifest, that if -
ac+ bc be divided again by - c, you will again have a- b, and consequently a
Negative Quantity divided by Negative, will give a Positive Quotient but a
Positive Quantity + bc divided by a Negative one, will give a negative Quotient
- b.

II. We have therefore the Foundation and Demonstration o^ the Rules of
Specious Computation, in the multiplication an^ division of Compounded
Quantities, viz. that the same Sig^ multiplied together (as + by + or - by -)
give + but different (as + by - or - by +) give the Sign - Which Rules the
following Examples will Illustrate, as als^ several other we shall meet with in
the following Chapter.

Multiplication.
^

Division.
^

CAAP. II. Of the Powers of QUANTITIES.
Containing (after a compendious Way) most part of the 2d Book of Euclid; and
the Appendix of Clavius to Lib. 9. Prop. 14.

Proposition VI.
IF any whole Quantity be divided into two parts Eucl. lib. 2. prop. 3. A. C.
also the third.
the Rectangle contained under the whole, and one of its parts, is equal to the
Square of the same part, and the Rectangle contained under both the parts.

Demonstration.
Let a+ b represent the whole a+ b b one part of it, or a the other. ab+ bb the
Rectangle, aa+ ab the Rectangle. (See Fig. 50.) Q. E. D.

Proposition VII.
IF a whole Quantity be divided into two parts Eucl. Prop. 4. lib. 2.
the Square of the whole is equal to the Squares of both those parts and 2
Rectangles contained under them.

Demonstration.
This is evident from the preceding, and may moreover thus appear further.

Let the Parts be a and b, then will the whole be ^

Which if you multiply by it self ^

You have the Square ^

(See Fig. 51. N. 1.) Q.E.D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. HEnce you have the Original Rule for Extracting of Square Roots, as we have
shown after Definition 30. and here have further Illustrated in Scheme No 2.

II. Hence it naturally follows, that the Square of double any Side is
Quadruple of the Square of that Side taken singly.

III. Hence also you have the addition of surd Numbers, or in general of surd
Quantities, by help of the following Rule (supposing in the mean while their
Multiplication:) Suppose these 2 Surds 8 and 18, or more generally 75 aa and 27
aa, are to be added together; first add their Squares 8 and 18, etc. then
double their Rectangle (144) that is, multiply it by the 4, and then the double
of this 576, i. e. having extracted the Square Root, (24) and added it to the
Sum of the first Squares (26) the Root of the whole Sum (50) viz. 50, is the
Sum of the two surd Quantities first proposed.

SCHOLIUM.
BUT if it happens that the Root of the double Product cannot be expressed by a
Rational Number (as, when the proposed Quantities are Surds, as 3 and 7, to
whose Squares 3+7, i. e. 10, you must add the double Product of 7 by 3, i. e.
84, which cannot be expressed by a Rational Number) then that double Product
must be joined under a Surd Form, or Radical Sign, to the Sum of the Squares
(thus, viz. 10+84) and to this whole Aggregate prefix another Radical Sign,
thus, ^; or also you may only simply join the Surd Quantities proposed by the
Sign + thus, 3+7. Here also you may note, that the two Surd Quantities proposed
in the first case of Consectary 2. are called Communicants; in the other case
of this Scholium, Non-Communicants: For in this case each quantity under the
Radical Sign may be divided by some Square, and have the same Quotient ( e. g.
8 and 18, may be divided the first by 4, the other by 9, and the Quotient of
both will be 2; likewise 75 aa and 27 aa may be divided, the one by 25 aa, the
other by 9 aa, the Quotient of both being 3; and then if the Quotient on both
sides be left under the Radical Sign, and the Root of the dividing Square set
before it, the same quantities will be rightly expressed under this form: 22
and 32, also 5 a3 and 3 a3; and then the addition is easy, viz. only
collecting or adding together the Quantities prefixed to the Radical Sign; so
that the Sums will be of the one 52 and of the other 8 a3, which are indeed the
same we have shown in Consect. 2. For if contrariwise we square the Quantities
that stand without, or are prefixed to the Radical Sign, and then set those
Squares (25 and 64 aa) under the Radical Sign, multiplying by the Number
prefixed to it, you will have for the one 50, for the other 192 aa (Consect. after
Schol-Prop. 22.)

Proposition VIII.
IF any whole Quantity ( viz. Line or Number) be divided Eucl. and Clav. 5.
into two equal parts, and two unequal ones, the Rectangle of the unequal ones,
together with the Square of (the intermediate part or) the difference of the
equal part from the unequal one, is equal the Square of the half.

An Universal Demonstration.
Suppose the parts to be a and a, and the whole 2 a; let one of the unequal
Parts be b, the other will be 2 a- b, and the difference between the equal and
unequal part a- b.

The equal ones ^

Rectangle ^

Difference ^

The Sum will be aa (the other parts destroying one another) Q.E.D. ( Vid. Fig.
52.)

Proposition IX.
IF to any whole Quantity divided into two equal parts Eucl. and Clav. 6.
you add another Quantity of the same kind, the Rectangle or Product made of
the whole and the part added, multiplied by that part added, together with the
square of the half, will be equal to the Square o^ the Quantity compounded of
that half, and the part added.

Demonstration.
Let the whole be called 2 a, the part added b, then the quantity compounded of
the whole and the part added will b^ 2 a+ b; and that compounded of the half
and the part added a+ b.

The Quantity compounded of the whole, and the part added is, ^ the half a
Comp. ^

Multip. by the part added ^

2 ab+ bb of the half aa= aa+2 ab+ bb

( Vid. Fig. 53.) Q. E. D.

Proposition X.
IF a Quantity be divided any how into Eucl. and Clav. prop. 7. l. 2
two parts, the Square of the whole, together with that of one of its parts, is
equal to two Rectangles contained under the whole and the first part, together
with the Square of the other part.

Page 63.
54

55

56

57

58

59

60



The Universal Demonstration.
Let a be one part and b the other, the whole a+ b a+ b the whole. The whole a+
b a the first part * a+ b aa+ ab aa+ ab 2 ab+ bb 2 aa+2 ab the double rectangle
of the whole aa+2 ab+ bb add bb the of the other part * add aa Sum 2 aa+2 ab+
bb = to the Sum.... 2 aa+2 ab+ bb ( Vid. Fig. 54. No 1.) Q.E.D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce you have the Subtraction of Surd Numbers, or more generally of Surd
Quantities, by help of the following Rule.

Add the Squares of the given Roots according to Consect. 3. Prop. 7. and from
their Sum subtract the double Rectangle of their Roots; the Root of the
Remainder will be the difference sought of the given Quantities.

As, if the 8(BC) is to be subtracted from 50AC ( Fig. 54, No 1.) you must add
50, i. e. the whole Square AD) and 8, ( i. e. the other Square superadded DE,)
and the Sum will be 58, equal to the two Rectangles AF and FE+GH, by ^his Prop.
I find therefore those two Rectangles by multiplying 50 by 8, and then the
Product 400 by 2 or 4, thereby to obtain the double Rectangle 1600, i. e.
(having actually Extracted the Root) 40. This double Rectangle therefore ^or
40, being subtracted out of the superior Sum, the remainder 18 will be the GH,
and so its Root ( viz. 18) gives ^he required Difference between the given Surd
Quantities.

SCHOLION.
BUT this Subtraction may be performed yet a shorter way, if each quantity
under its Radical can be divided by some square, so that the same Quotient may
come out on both sides that is, if the Surd Quantities are Communicants, as e.
g. 5^ (the number 50 being divided by 25) is equal to 52 a^ 8 to 22; for then
the numbers prefixed to the Radical Sig^ being subtracted from one another (
viz. 22 from 52) yo^ have immediately the remainder or difference 32, i. e. 1^
But if the proposed Quantities are not Communicants (as if the 3 is to be
subtracted from 7) the remainder may be brief^ expressed by means of the Sign -
thus, ^, or accordin^ to the foregoing Consectary, thus, ^.

Proposition XI.
IF any Quantity be divided into two parts, Eucl. and Clav. prop. 8.
the Quadru^ Rectangle contained under the whole and one of its parts, toget^^^
with the Square of its other parts, will be equal to the Square of (...)
Quantity compounded of the whole and the other part.

Demonstration.
Suppose a+ b the whole. b one part. ab+ bb the Rectangle of these two. mult.
by 4 4 ab+4 bb the Quadruple Rectangle. Add aa the Square of the other part.
Sum aa+4 ab+ bb

The Quantity compounded of the whole and the first part ^

Square of the Compound Quantity Q. E ^

( Vid. Fig. 55.)

Proposition XII.
IF any Quantity be divided into two equal parts Eucl and Clav. prop. 9.
and into two other unequal ones, the Squares of the unequal parts taken
together will be double the Square of half the quantity, and the Square of the
difference, viz. of the equal and unequal part, taken together.

Demonstration.
Suppose the equal parts to be a and a, the difference (b) the greater of the
unequal Parts to be a+ b, the less a- b.

The greater part ^ The less ^ Half ^ Difference ^ Sum of these 2 aa+2 abb Sum
aa+ bb

Q. E. D. ( Vid. Fig. 56.)

Proposition XIII.
IF to any whole Quantity Eucl. and Clav. x.
divided into two equal parts there be added another Quantity of the same kind,
the Square of the Quantity compounded of the whole, and the quantity added,
together with the square of the quantity added, will be double the square of
the half the quantity, and the square of the Sum of the half and the part added
taken together.

Demonstration.
Suppose the whole to be 2 a, the half parts a and a, the quantity added b;
then the quantity compounded of the whole and the quantity added, will be 2 a+
b, and that of the half and the quantity added a+ b.

Comp. of the whole ^ and quantity added

Sum

Half ^

Qu. compouded of hal^ ^ and qu. added,

Sum 2 aa+2 ab+^^ Manifestly the half of the former Sum. Q.E.D.

CHAP. III. Of Progression, or Arithmetical Proportionals.
Proposition XIV.
IF there are 3 Quantities in continued Progression, or ^ Arithmetical
continued Proportion, the Sum of the Extrem^ is double of the middle Term.

Demonstration.
Such are e. g. a, a+ x, a+2 x ascending, or a, a- x, a-2 x descending.

By Definition 32. the Sum of the Extremes in the first 2 a+2 x, in the latter
2 a-2 x; in both manifestly double the middle Term Q.E.D.

Proposition XV.
IF there are 4 of these Continued Proportionals, the Sum ^ the Extreme Terms
is equal to the Sum of the me^^ Terms.

Demonstration.
Such are e. g. a, a+ x, a+2 x, a+3 x, etc. ascending, or a, a- x, a-2 x, a-3
x, etc descending; in the one the Sum of the Extremes is 2 a+3 x, in the other
2 a-3 x; and also of the means 2 a+3 x and 2 a-3 x Q. E D.

Proposition XVI.
IF there are never so many of these continued Proportionals, the Sum of the
Extremes is always equal to the Sum of any 2 other of them, equally remote from
the Ex^remes, or also double of the middle Term, if the number of the Terms is
odd.

Demonstration.
Suppose a, a+ x, a+2 x, a+3 x, a+4 x, a+5 x, a+6 x, etc. or a, a- x, a-2 x,
a-3 x, a-4 x, a-5 x, a-6 x, and the Sum of the Extremes, as also of any 2
equally remote from the Extremes, and the double of the middle Term is in the
first Series 2 a+6 x, in the latter 2 a-6 x, etc. Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM I.
NOR can we doubt but that this will always be so, how far soever the
Progression be continued; if you consider that the last Term contains in it
self the first, and moreover the difference so many times taken, as is the
number of Terms excepting one, but that the first has no difference added to
it; and therefore tho the last since one contains one difference less than the
last; the second on the contrary has one more than the first, and consequently
the Sum of the one will necessarily be equal to the Sum of the other; and in
like manner the last except two, contains two Differences less than the last;
but, on the contrary, the third exceeds the first by a double Difference, the
double Difference being added to it, etc. as is obvious to the Eye in our first
universal Example. Hence you have these

CONSECTARYS.
I. YOU may obtain the Sum of any Terms in Arithmetical Proportion, if the Sum
of the Extremes be multiplied by half the number of Terms, or (which is the
same thing) half the Sum by the number of Terms,

II. To obtain therefore the Sum of 600, or never so many such Terms, you need
only have the Extremes and the number of Terms: So that you have a very
compendious Way of proceeding in Questions that are solvible by these
Progressions, if, having the first Term and Difference of the Progression
given, you can obtain the last, neglecting the intermediate ones.

III. But you may obtain the last Term, by Multiplying the given given
Difference by the given Number of Terms lessened by Unity, and then adding the
first Term to the Product; as i^ evident from the preceding Scholium.

IV. Hence we may easily deduce this Theorem, that the Sum of any Arithmetical
Progression beginning from o, is subduple of the Sum of so many Terms, equal to
the greatest, as is the number of Terms of that Progression. For if the first
Term is o and the last x, and the given number of Terms a, the Sum of the
Progression will be ax, by Consect. 1. but the Sum of so many Terms equal to
the greatest, ax. Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM II.
NOw if any one would be satisfied of the truth of this last Consect. without
the literal or specious Notes, let him consider, that if the first Term be
supposed to be o, the last (whatever it is) will be the sum of the Extremes.
The last therefore multiplied by half the number of Terms, gives the Sum of the
Progression, by Consect. 1. and the same last Term multiplied by the whole
number of Terms, gives the Sum of so many Terms equal to the greatest. But that
this must needs be double of the precedent it is evident, because any
Multiplicand being multiplied by a double multiplier, must needs give a double
Product. Now as this Consectary will be of singular Use to us hereafter for
Demonstrating several Propositions, so the three former are the very same
Practical Rules of Arithmetic, which are commonly made use of in Arithmetical
Progressions; for the Illustration whereof Swenterus gives us several Ingenious
Examples in his Delic. part 1. Quest. 70. etc.

CHAP. IV. Of Geometrical Proportion in General.
Proposition XVII.
IF there are three Quantities continually (a) Proportional, the Rectangle of
the Extremes, is equal to the Square of the mean Term.

Demonstration.
Such are e. g. a, ea, e{powerof2} a, The mean Term, ^ The Extremes Rectangle
Square Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM.
MOreover if three Quantities on each side are in the same Continual
Proportion, as the Rectangles of the Extremes made Cross-ways, are equal to the
Rectangle of the mean Term; being every way e{powerof2} ab.

Whence by the way may appear that Proposition of Archimedes Eucl. 17 l. 6 and
20 l. 7.
lib. I. de Sphaer. and Cyl. Prop. 14.
That the Surface of a Right Cone is equal to the Circle, whose Radius is a
mean Proportional between the Side of that Cone and the Semidiameter of the
Base. For suppose OF to be a mean Proportional between the side of the Cone BC
( Fig. 57.) and the Semidiameter of the Base CD, since an equal number of
Peripherys answer to an equal number of Radii in the same Proportion; half the
Product of the first Line BC into the last Periphery, e{powerof2} ab (that is,
by Consect. 4. Definit. 18. the Surface of the given Cone) will be equal to
half Product of the mean Line into the mean Periphery, e{powerof2} ab (i. e. by
Consect. 2. Definit. 15.) to the Area of the Circle of the mean Proportional
OF. Q. E. D.

The same Proposition of Archimedes may also be Demonstrated after this Way: If
the side of the Cone BC be called b, and the Semidiameter of the Base a) so
that the Periphery may, by Consect. 1. Definit. 31. be 2 ea, and so the Surface
of the Cone, by Consect. 4. Definit. 18. eab) the ab will be a mean
proportional between b and a, by this 17th Proposition; which being taken for
Radius, the whole Diameter will be 2 ab, and the Periphery 2 e ab; therefore by
Consect. 2. Definit. 15. half the Radius ab multiplied by the Periphery (since
ab multiplied, by ab necessarily produces ab) will give you the Area of the
Circle by that mean lib. I. de Sphaer. and Cyl. prop. 15.
Proportional, equal to the Surface of the given Cone, which before was
expressed in the same Terms. Q. E. D.

Hence also naturally flows this other Proposition, That the Surface of the
Cone ( e{powerof2} ab) is to its Base ( ab) as the Side of the Cone (
e{powerof2} b) is to the Radius of the Base b, as may appear from the Terms.

Proposition XVIII.
IF E^cl. 16 l. 6 and 19. l. 7.
4. Quantities are Proportional, either continuedly or dircretely, the Product
of the Extremes is equal to the Product of the Means.

Demonstration.
Suppose one Continual Proportional, a, ea, e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a.

Extremes e{powerof3} a Means e{powerof2} a a ea Prod. e{powerof3} aa = Prod.
e{powerof3} aa. Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM.
ON this Theorem is founded the Rule of Three in Arithmetic; so called because
having 3 Numbers, (2. 5. 8.) it finds an unknown fourth Proportional. For although
this fourth be, as we have said, unknown, yets its Product by 2 is known,
because the same with the Product of the Means, 5 and 8. Wherefore the Rule
directs to multiply the third by the second, that you may thereby obtain the
Product of the Extremes: which divided by one of the Extremes, viz. the first,
necessarily gives the other, i. e. the fourth sought.

Proposition XIX.
IF 2 Products (on the other side) arising from the Multiplication of 2
Quantities, are equal, those 4 Quantities will be at least directly
Proportional.

Demonstration.
Suppose eba be the equal Product of the Extremes, and eab of the Means; the
Extremes will either be eb and a, or e and ba, or b and ea, as also the Means.
But what way soever either is taken, there can be no other Disposition or
placing of them, than one of the following.

1 eb eb a a -- ee ab -- ea b; or inversly. -- a eb -- ab e -- b ea 2 e e e ba
ba -- eb a -- ea b; or inversly. -- ba e -- a eb -- b ea 3 b b ea ea -- a eb --
ba e; or inversly. -- ea b -- eb a -- e ba; or inverting the Order of them all.

In all these Dispositions there may be immediately seen a Geometrical
Proportion, by what we have in Definition 3^ and 33.

CONSECTARSY.
I. AS we have shown one Sign of Proportionality in the Definition of it, viz.
That the same Quotient will arise by dividing the Consequents by the
Antecedents; so now we have another Sign of it, viz. The Equality of the
Products of the Extremes and Means.

II. By a bare Subsumption may hence appear the Truth of Prop. 14. lib. 6.
Euclid. at least partly: Which we shall yet more commodiously show hereafter.

Proposition XX.
IF there are never so many Continual Proportionals, the Product of the
Extremes is equal to the Product of any 2 of the Means that are equally distant
from the Extremes, as also to the Square of the mean or middle Term, if the
Terms are odd.

Demonstration.
Such are e. g. a, ea, e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a, e{powerof4} a, e{powerof5}
a, e{powerof6} a, etc. and the Product of the Extremes, and of any two Terms
equally remote them, and the Square of the mean or middle Term, every where
e{powerof6} aa. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM I.
NOR can there be any doubt but this will always be so, how far soever the
Progression is continued; if (...) consider that the last Term always contains
the first, (...) way of Reason, so many times multiplied as is the place of
that Term in the rank of Terms, excepting one. Although therefore the last Term
but one is in one degree of its Reason less than (...) last, ^he second on the
contrary, is in one more than the (...) re^ore the Product of the one will
necessarily (...) ^e Product of the other. Thus also the las^ (...) Degrees of
Proportion lower than the (...) being to be multiplied into that, exc^^ds (...)
fi st (...) of the Proportion, etc. as may be seen thou U^iver^al Ex^^^^^ Hence
you have the following

CONSECTARIES.
^. HAving some of the Terms given in a Continual Proportion ( e. g. suppose
10) you may easily find any other that shall be required ( e. g. the 17th) as
the last; If ^he 2 Terms given, being equally remote from the first and that
required (as are e. g. the eigth and tenth) be multiplied by one another, and
this Product, like that also of the Extremes, be divided by the first.

II. But this may be performed easier, if you moreover take ^n this
Observation, That if, e. g. never so many places of proportionals, passing over
the the first, be noted or marked by Ordinals or Numbers according to their
places (as in this universal Example) a, ea, e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a,
e{powerof4} a, e{powerof5} a, e{powerof6} a, I. II. III. IV. V. VI. The place
of the 7th Term is (e. g.) VI. (and so the place of any other of them being
less by Unity than its number is among the Terms) and also composed of the
places of any other equal^y distant from the Extremes, e. g. V. and I. IV. and
II. or ^wice III. etc.

III. Here you have the Foundation of the Logarithms, i. ^ of a Compendious Way
of Arithmetic, never enough to b^ praised. For if, e. g. a rank of Numbers
from Unity, con^^nually Proportional, be signed or noted with their Ordinals,
as w^ have said, as Logarithms, 1. 2. 4. 8. 16. 32. 64. 128. 256, etc. I. II.
III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. and any two of them (as 8 and 32) are to be
multiplied together; add their Logarithms III and V, and their Sum VII^ gives
you the Logarithm of their Product 256, as the Te^^ equally remote from the 2
given ones and the first, and (...) whose Product with the first (which is
Unity) i. e. it self w^^^ be equal to the Product of the Numbers to be
multiplied: A^^ contrariwise, if, e. g. 128 is to be divided by 4, subtracting
t^^ Logarithm of the first II from the Logarithm of the second V^ the remaining
Logarithm V points out the number sought 3^ so that after this way the
Multiplication of Proportionals (...) by a wonderful Compendium, turned into
Addition, and the Division into Subtraction, and Extraction of the Square Ro^^
into Bisecting or Halving, (for the Logarithm of the Squa^^ Number 16 being
Bisected, the half II gives the Root sough^ 4) of the Cube Root into Trisection
(for the Logarithm of the Cube 64 being Trisected, the third part gives the
Cubi^ Root sought 4).

SCHOLIUM II.
THat we may exhibit the whole Reason of this admirabl^ Artifice (which about
35 years ago was found out b^ the Honorable Lord John Naper Baron of
Merchiston in Scotland and published something difficult, but afterward
rendered much easier and brought to perfection by Henry Briggs, the first
S^vilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford.) I say that we may exhibit the whole
Reason of it in a Synopsis, after an easy way when its use appeared so very
Considerable in the great Numbers in the Tables of Sines and Tangents, nor yet
could they be useful without mixing vulgar Numbers with them, especially in the
Practical Parts of Geometry, the business was to ac^ommodate this Logarithmical
Artifice to them both. First therefore that Artists might assign Logarithms to
all the common Numbers proceeding from 1 to 1000 and 10000, etc. ^hey first of
all pick out those which proceed in continued Geometrical Proportion, and
particularly, tho arbitrariously, those which increase in a Decuple Proportion,
e. g. 1. 10. 100. 1000. 10000, etc.

But now to fit them according to the Foundation of Consect. 8. a Series of
Ordinals in Arithmetical Progression, we do'nt only substitute the simple
Number 1, 2, 3, etc. but augmented with several Ciphers after them, that so we
may also assign their Logarithms in whole Numbers to the intermediate Num^ers
between 1 and 10, 10 and 100, etc. Wherefore, by ^his first Supposition,
Logarithms in Arithmetical Proportion, ^nswer to those Numbers in Geometrical
Proportion, after the ^ay we here see, 1 10 100 Log. 0000000 10000000 20000000
1000 10000 30000000 40000000, etc. As that they also exhibit certain
Characteristical initial Notes, whereby you may see, that all the Logarithms
between 1 and ^0 begin from 0, the rest between 10 and 100 from 1, the ^ext
from 100 to 1000 from 2, etc.

The Logarithms of the Primary Proportional Numbers being ^hus found, there
remained the Logarithms of the intermediate Numbers between these to be found:
For the making of which, after different ways, several Rules might be given
drawn from ^he Nature of Logarithms, and already shown in Consect. 3. See
Briggs's Arithmetica Logarithmica, and Gellibrand's Trigonometria Britannica;
the first whereof, chap. 5. and the following, shows ^t length both ways
delivered by Neper in his Appendix. But ^he business is done more simply by A.
Vlacq. in his Tables of Sines etc. whose mind we will yet further explain thus:
If you are ^o find, e. g. the Logarithm of the Number 9, between 1 and ^0,
augmented by as many Ciphers as you added to the Logarithm of 10, or the rest
of the Proportionals ( h. e. between 10000000 and 100000000) you must find a
Geometric^ Mean Proportional, viz. by multiplying these Numbers togeth^^ and
extracting the Square Root out of the Product, by Pr^ 17. Now if this Mean
Proportional be less than 9 augmen^^ by as many Ciphers, between it and the
former Denary Number you must find a second mean Proportional, then betwe^^
this and that same a third; and so a fourth, etc. but if it (...) greater, then
you must find a mean Proportional between and the next less, etc. till at
length after several Operation you obtain the number 9999998, approaching near
90000000. Now if between the Logarithm of Unity a^ Ten ( i. e. between 0 and
10000000) you take an Arithm^tical Mean Proportional (05000000) by Bisecting
their S^ by Prop. 14. and then between this and the same Logarithm Ten, you
take another mean, and so a third and a fourth, (...) at length you will obtain
that which answers to the last abo^ mentioned, viz. 9. See the following
Specimen.

A TABLE of the Geometrical Proportionals betwe^^ 1 and 10, augmented by 7
Ciphers, and of t^^ Arithmetical Proportionals between 0 and 10000000 being the
Logarithms corresponding to them.
Geometrical Mean Proportionals. Arithmetical Logar. mean Proportionals
31622777 First, 05000000 56234132 Second, 07500000 74989426 Third, 08750000
86596435 Fourth, 09375000 93057205 Fifth, 09687500 89768698 Sixth, 09531250
91398327 Seventh, 39609375 90579847 Eighth, 09570312 90173360 Ninth, 09550781
89970801 Tenth. 09541015

Which is thus made: In the first Table a Geometrical Mean ^^oportional between
10 000 000 and 100 000 000 the first Number of it; then another Mean between
that and ^e same last 100000000, gives the second; and so to the ^^th,
93057205. Which, since it is already greater than the ^ovenary, another Mean
between it and the precedent fourth, ^^comes in order a sixth, but sensibly
less than the Novenary. therefore between it and the fifth you will have a
seventh ^ean yet greater than the Novenary; and between the sixth ^^d seventh,
an eighth, somewhat nearer to the Novenary, but ^t yet sensibly equal, but
somewhat bigger; moreover between ^^e sixth and eighth you will have a ninth,
between the ninth ^^d sixth a tenth gradually approaching nearer the Novenary,
but ^^t somewhat sensibly differing from it. Now if you con^ue this inquiry of
a mean Proportional between this tenth, (...) somewhat too little, and the
precedent ninth as somewhat ^o big, and so onwards, you will at length obtain
the Num^^r 8999 9998, only differing two in the last place from the ^ovenary
Number augmented by seven Ciphers, and conse^ently insensibly from the Novenary
it self. But for the Lo^arithm of this in the second Column, by the same
process you ^^e to find Arithmetical Mean Proportionals between every 2
^ogarithms answering to every two of the superior ones, till you and, e. g.
the Logarithm of the tenth Number 09541015, ^d so at length the Logarithm of
the last, not sensibly differ^^g from the Novenary, 09542425.

Thus having found, with a great deal of labor, but also ^ith a great deal of
advantage to those that make use of them, ^^e Logarithms of some of the numbers
between 1 and 10, and ^0 and 100, etc. you may find innumerable ones of the
other ^ntermediate Numbers with much less labor, viz. by the help ^f some
Rules, which may be thus obtained from Consect. 3 of ^e precedent Proposition.
The Sum of the Logarithms of the ^umber Multiplying and the Multiplicand, gives
the Logarithm of the ^roduct. 2. The Logarithm of the Divisor subtracted from
the Lo^arithm of the Dividend, leaves the Logarithm of the Quotient: ^he
Logarithm of any number doubled, is the Logarithm of the Square, ^ripled of the
Cube, etc. 4 The half Logarithm of any number is ^he Logarithm of the Square
Root of that number, the third part of (...) the Cube Root, etc. Thus, e. g. if
you have found the Logarithm of the number 9, after the way we have shown, by
the same reason you may find the Logarithm of the number 5 ( vi^ by finding
mean Proportionals between the second and the fi^ number of our Table, and
between their Logarithms, etc. and by means of these 2 Logarithms you may
obtain several others: First, since 10 divided by 5 gives 2; if the Logarith^
of 5 be subtracted from the Logarithm of 10, you will have the Logarithm of 2, by
Rule the second. Secondly, since 10 m^^tiplied by 2 makes 20, and by 9 makes
90, by adding the Logarithms of 10 and 2, and 10 and 9, you will have the
L^garithms of the numbers 90 and 20, by Rule 1. Thirdly Since 9 is a Square,
and its Root 3, half the Logarithm of (...) gives the Logarithm of 3, by Rule
4. since 90 divided by (...) gives 30, the Logarithm of this number may be had
by s^^tracting the Logarithm of 3 from the Logarithm of 90, b^ Rule the second.
Fifthly, 5 and 9 squared make 25 and 8* the Logarithms of 5 and 9 doubled, give
the Logarithms (...) these numbers, by Rule 3. In like manner, sixthly, the Su^
of the Logarithms of 2 and 3, or the Difference of the L^garithms of 5 and 30,
give the Logarithm of 6, and the Su^ of the Logarithms of 3 and 6, or 2 and 9,
gives the Log^rithm of 18; the Logarithm of 6 doubled, gives the Logarithm of
36, etc. And after this way you may find and reduce it to Tables, the
Logarithms of Vulgar Numbers from 1 to 100^ (as in the Tables of Strauch. p.
182, and the following) or (...) 100000 (as in the Chiliads of Briggs) But as
to the manner ^deducing the Tables of Sines and Tangents from these Logarithms
of Vulgar Numbers, we will show it in Schol. of Pr^^ 55, only hinting this one
thing beforehand; that this Artifi^ of making Logarithms is elegantly set
forth by Pardies in hi^ Elements of Geometry, pt 112. by a certain Curve Line
then^^ called the Logarithmical Line; by the help whereof he suppose Logarithms
may be easily made; and having found those o^ the numbers between 1000 and
10000, he shows, that all others may be easily had between 1 and 1000.
Wherefore w^ shall Discourse more largely in Schol. Definit. 15. lib. 2.

Proposition XXI.
IF the first Term of never so many Continual Proportionals, be subtracted from
the last, and the Remainder divided by the name of the Reason or Proportion
lessened by Unity, the Quotient will be equal to the Sum of all except the last.

Demonstration.
ea e{powerof2} a e{powerof3} a e{powerof4} a e{powerof5} a The last Term less
the first e{powerof6} a- a

Divided by the name of the Reason lessened by unity. e-1 * Quote. e{powerof5}
a+ e{powerof4} a+ e{powerof3} a+ e{powerof2} a+ ea+ a; And it is evident from
the Operation, that the same will always happen tho the number of Terms be
continued never so far. e-1 e-1 e-1 e-1 e-1 e-1

CONSECTARYS.
I. WHerefore in adding never so great a Series of Geometrical Proportionals,
since it is enough that the first and last Term, and the Name of the Reason be
known, by this Prop. and having found at least some of the Terms of the
Proportion, any other may be afterward found, whose place will be compounded
of the places of the two Antecedent ones, according to Consect. 2. Prop. 20.
viz. by Multiplying the Terms answering to the two abovementioned places, and
dividing the Product by the first Term; thence it will be very easy to add a
great Series of Proportionals into one Sum, tho the particular separate Terms
remain almost all of them unknown.

SCHOLIUM.
THese are the same Practical Arithmetical Rules concerning Geometrical
Progressions; for the illustration of which Swenterus in Delic. has given us so
many pleasant Examples, li^ 1. Prop. 59. and fol. First of all, that famous
Example is of the kind which relates to the Chequer-work'd Table or Board t^
fling Dice on, with its 64 little Squares, which Dr. Wa^^ has translated out of
the Arabic of Ebn Chalecan, into Latin in Oper. Mathem. part. 1. Chap. 31. for
the illustration of which we have heretofore composed an Exercitation, and
shall he^ only note these few things: If there are supposed 64 Terms (...)
double Proportion from Unity, and the first of them, note^ with their local
Numbers, are these that follow; 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 I II III IV V VI VII You
may have the Term of the 13th place, 8192, by mu^tiplying together the VIth and
VIIth place; and the Ter^ of the XXVIth place, by squaring or multiplying this
new Product again by it self, and moreover the Term of the L^^ place, by
multiplying that Product again by itself; and furthe^ more the Term of the
LIXth place, by multiplication of the number last found by the number of the
VIIth place, and lastly the Term of the LXIIId place ( i. e. the last in the
proposed Series) by multiplying this last of all by the number of the IV^^
place.

II. Moreover you may, by this Art, collect infinite Seri^ of Proportional
Terms into one Sum, although it is impossible (...) run over all the Terms
separately, because infinite. e. g. in (...) continued Series of Fractions,
decreasing in a double Propo^tion, ^, ^, etc. ad infinitum, if you take them
bac^wards, you may justly reckon a Cipher or 0, for the fi^^ Term (for between
and 0 there may be an infinite Numbe^ of such Terms) and the infinite Sum of
these Terms will b^ precisely equal to Unity; for subtracting the first 0, from
the last, and the remainder being divided by the name of the Reason lessened by
1, i. e. by I. which divides nothing, the Quotient is the Sum of all the Terms
excepting the last, by Prop. 21. and so the last being added, the Sum of all in
that Series will be I. Now if the last is not but I, the Sum of all will
necessarily be 2; if 2 be the last, the Sum of all will be 4; in a word, it
will be always double the last Term.

III. And since in this case the Sum of all the precedent Terms is equal to the
last Term, the one being subtracted from the other, there will remain nothing,
i. e. -- -^-^, etc. in Infinitum, is = 0, and also 1 --, etc. or 2-1 --. etc. =
0.

IV. In like manner the Sum of infini^e Fractions decreasing in triple Reason
in an infinite Series (+^+^+^, etc.) will be equ^l to: for if from the last
(again in an inverted Order) you subtract the first 0, and the Remainder be
divided by the name of the Reason lessened by Unit, i. e. by 2, the Quotient
will be the Sum of all the antecedent Terms, and adding to this last or ^ the
Sum of all will be ^ or.

V. Thus an infinite Series of Fractions decreasing from in a Quadruple
Proportion (+^+^ etc.) is equal to; for subtracting the first 0 from the last,
and the remainder being divided by the name of the Proportion, i. e. by 3, you
will have ^ the sum of all except the last, and adding also the last or ^,
you will have the whole Sum ^ or.

VI. Thus also an infinite Series decreasing from in a Quintuple Proportion
(+^+^, etc.) is equal to: +^+^, etc. is equal to etc. and so any Series of this
kind is equal to a Fraction, whose Denominator is less by an Unit than the
Denominator of the last Fraction in that Series.

VII. Generally also, any infinite Series of Fractions decreasing according to
the Proportion of the Denominator of the last Term, and having a common
Denominator less by an unit than the Denominator of the last Term (e. g. +^+^,
etc. or +^+^, etc. or +^+^, etc.) is equal to Unity, after the same way as the
Series Consect. 2. which may be comprehended under this kind, and which may be
demonstrated in all its particular cases by the same method we have hitherto
made use of, or also barely subsumed from Consect. 4, 5, and 6. For since +^+^,
etc. is equal to; +^+^ will be equal to ^, or 1, and so in the rest.

VIII. Particularly the sum of ^, etc, decreasing in a Quadruple Proportion, is
equal to ^; and the sum of ^, etc. is equal to ^; and the sum of ^, etc.
decreasing in Octuple Proportion, is equal to: For subtracting the first Term
0, and dividing the remainder by the name of the Reason lessened by 1, i. e. by
3, the Quotient ^ gives the sum of all except the last. This therefore ( viz.
^) being added, the sum of all will be ^ or ^: In like manner ^ being divided
by the name of the Reason lessened by Unity, the Quotient will give ^, and
adding the last, the sum of all will be ^ i. e.. So that hence it is evident,
that ^, etc. or -^, etc. in Infinitum, will be equal to nothing; also -^-^-^
etc. = 0.

IX. The Sum of a simple Arithmetical Progression (i. e. ascending by the
Cardinal Numbers) continued from 1, ad Infinitum, is S^^duple of the Sum of the
same number of Terms, each of which is equ^^ to the greatest; or on the
contrary, this latter Sum is double of the fo^mer. We might have subsumed this
in Consect. 4. Prop. 16. for, prefixing a Cipher before Unity, it will be a
case of that Consectary, the Sum of the Progression remaining still the same.
B^^ that this is true, in an infinite Series beginning from Unity (f^^ in a
finite or determinate one, the proportion of the Sum is always less than
double, tho it always approaches to it, and come so much the nearer by how much
greater the Series is) (...) shall now thus Demonstrate: To the Sum of three
Terms, (...) 2, 3, i. e. 6, the sum of as many equal in number to the greatest,
i. e. 9, has the same Proportion as 3 to 2; but t^ the sum of six Terms, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, i. e. 21, the su^ of as many equal to the greatest, i. e. 36, has
the same proportion as 3 to 1+, that is, as 3 to 2-, the decrease being: but to
the sum of 12 Terms, which may be found b^ Consect. 1. Prop. 16.=78, the sum of
so many equal to the greatest, viz. 144. has the same proportion (dividing both
sid^ by 48) as 3 to 1 ^, i. e. 3 to 1++ (for 24 make, a^^ the remainder ^ is
the same as) that is, as 3 to 2 -- ^^ the decrement being now. Since therefore,
by doubling the number of Terms onward, you will find the decrement to be ^, an^
so onwards in double Proportion; the sum of an infinite Number of such Terms,
in Arithmetical Progression, equal to the greatest will be to the sum of the
Progression from 1, ad Infinitum, as 3 to 2 -- -^, etc. that is, by Consect. 2
and 3, as 3 to 2-, that is, as 3 to 1, or as 2 to 1. Q.E.D.

X. The Sum of any Duplicate Arithmetical Progression ( i. e. a Progression of
Squares of whole numbers ascending) continued from 1 ad Infinitum, is subtriple
of the Sum of as many Terms equal to the greatest as is the number of Terms:
For any such finite Progression is greater than the subtriple Proportion, but
approaches nearer and nearer to it continually, by how much the farther the
Series of the Progression is carried on. Thus the Sum of 3 Terms 1, 4, 9=14 is
to thrice 9=27 as 1 ^, or 1 ^, or 1++^ to 3 (dividing both sides by 9,) the Sum
of six Terms, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, viz. 91. to six times 36, i. e. to 216
(dividing both sides by 72) is as 1++^ to 3; and the Sum of 12 Terms 650, to 12
times 144, i. e. to 1728 (dividing both sides by 576) is as 1++^ to 3, etc. the
Fractions adhering to them thus constantly decreasing, some by their half
parts, others by three quarters (for ^ is ^; therefore the first decrement is ^
and ^, is ^; therefore the second decrement is ^, etc.) Wherefore the Sum of
the Infinite Progression will be to the Sum of the like number of Terms equal
to the greatest, as ^, etc. to 3, that is, by Consect. 3 and 8, as 1 to 3.
Q.E.D.

XI. The Sum of a triplicate Arithmetical Progression ( i. e. ascending by the
Cubes of the Cardinal Numbers) proceeding from 1 through 27, 64, etc. ad
Infinitum, is Subquadruple of ^he Sum of the like number of Terms equal to the
greatest. For the Sum of 4 Terms, 1, 8, 27, 64, i. 100, to 4 times 64, i. e.
256 (dividing both sides by 64) will be found to be as 1++^ to 4; but the Sum
of 8 Terms, 1, 8, 27, 64, 125, 216, 343, 582, i. e. 1296 to 8 times 512, that
is, 4096 (dividing both Sides by 1024.) will be found to be as 1++^ to 4, etc.
The adhering Fractions thus constantly decreasing, the one by their part, the
others by ^^ (for ^ is ^, and ^ is ^, etc. Wherefore the Sum of the Infinite
Progression will be to the Sum of a like (Infinite) number of Terms, equal to
the greatest, as ^, etc. ^, etc. to 4; that is, by Consect. 3 and 8, as 1 to 4.
Q. E. D.

XII. The Sum of an Infinite Progression, whose greatest Term is a Square
Number, the others decreasing according to the odd numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. is
in Subsesquialteran Proportion of the Sum of the like number of equal Terms, i.
e. as 2 to 3. For the Sum of three such Terms, e. g. 9, 8, 5, i. e. 22 to
thrice 9, i. e. 27. is (dividing both sides by 9) (...) 2 ^, viz. ^ to 3, or
2+-^ to 3. But the Sum of s^^ such Terms, 36, 35, 32, 27, 20, 11, i. e. 161, to
six time 36, i. e. 216 (dividing both sides by 72) is as 2+-^, etc. the
adhering Fractions thus always decreasing, some by, others by, as above in
Consect. 10. Wherefore the Sum of the Infinite Progression will be to the Sum
of the like number of Terms equal to the greatest, as ^, etc. to 3, i. e. by
Consect. 3 and 8, as 2 to 3. Q E. D.

SCHOLIUM II.
THus we have, after our method, demonstrated the chie^ Foundations of the
Science or Method, or Arithmetic ^^ Infinites, first found out by Dr. John
Wallis, Savilian Professo^ of Geometry at Oxford, and afterward carried
further by Det^lerus Cluverus, and Ismael Bullialdus. And from these
Foundations we will in the following Treatise demonstrate, and that directly
and a priori, in a few Lines, the chief Propositions o^ Geometry, which the
Ancients have spent so much labor, and composed such large Volumes to
demonstrate, and that but indirectly neither.

Proposition XXII.
THe Powers of Proportionals whether continuedly or discretely, such as the
Squares, Cubes, etc. are also Proportional.

Demonstration.
Continual Proportionals. Discrete Proportionals. a ea e{powerof2}a
e{powerof3}a a ea b eb Squares aa e{powerof2}a{powerof2} e{powerof4}a{powerof2}
e{powerof6}a{powerof2} a{powerof2} e{powerof2}a{powerof2} b{powerof2}
e{powerof2}b{powerof2} Cubes a{powerof3} e{powerof3}a{powerof3}
e{powerof6}a{powerof3} e^a{powerof3} a{powerof3} e{powerof3}a{powerof3}
b{powerof3} e{powerof3}b{powerof3}

Q E. D.

SCHOLIUM.
YOu founded in this Truth, 1. the Reason of the Multiplication and Division of
Surd Quantities: For since from the Nature and Definition of Multiplication, it
is certain, that 1 is to the Multiplier as the Multiplicand to the Product (for
the multiplicand being added as many times to it self as there are Units in the
Multiplier, makes the Product) if the 5 is to be multiplied by 3, then as 1 to
the 3, so the 5 to the Product; and, by the present Proposition, as 1 to 3, so
5 to the Product, i. e. to 15. Wherefore the Product is 15; and so the Rule for
Multiplying Surd Quantities is this: Multiply the Quantity under the Radical
Signs, and prefix a Radical Sign to the Product. Eucl. lib. 6. prop. 22.
Likewise since it is certain from the Nature of Division, that the Divisor is
to the Dividend as 1 to the Quotient (for the Quotient expresses by its Units
how many times the Divisor is contained in the Dividend) if the 15 is to be
divided by 5, you will have 5 to the 15 as 1 to the Quotient, and, by the present
Scholium, 5 to 15, as 1 to the of the Quotient, i. e, to 3. Therefore the
Quotient is the Root of 3, and so the Rule of dividing Surd Quantities this;
viz. Divide the Quantities themselves under the Radical Signs, and prefix the
Radical Sign to the Quotient.

II. Hence also flows the usual Reduction in the Arithmetic of Surds, of Surd
Quantities to others partly Rational, and on the contrary, of those to the form
of Surds, e. g. If you would reduce this mixed Quantity 2 a b, i. e. 2 a
multiplied by the b, to the form of a Surd Quantity; which shall all be
contained under a Radical Sign; The Square of a Rational Quantity without a
Sign 4 aa, if it be put under a Radical Sign, in this form 4 aa, it equivalent
to the Rational Quantity 2 a; but the 4 aa being multiplied by b makes 4 aab.
by N^ 1. of this Scholium. Therefore 4 aab is also equivalent to the Quantity
first proposed 2 a b. Reciprocally therefore, if the form of a mere Surd
Quantity 4 aab, is to be reduced to on^ more Simple, which may contain without
the Radical Sig^ whatever is therein Rational, by dividing the Quantity
comprehended under the sign by some Square or Cube, etc. as here by 4 aa, (i.
e. 4 aab by 4 aa, i. e. 2 a) the Quotient will be b, which multiplied by the
Divisor 2 a, will rightly express the proposed Quantity under this more simple
Form 2 a^ Which may also serve further to illustrate the Scholia of Prop. 7.
and 10.

Proposition XXIII.
IF there are four Quantities Proportional, (a, ea, b, eb) they will be also
Proportional, 1. Inversly. ea to a as eb to b. 2. Alternatively, Eucl. 15, 16.
v. 9 10, 13, vi^.
a to b as ea to eb. 3. Compoundedly, 18, v.
a+ ea to ea, so b+ eb to eb. 4. Conversly, a+ ea to a as b+ eb to b. 5.
Dividedly, 17, v.
a- ea to ea as b- eb to or a eb or (...)

6. Eucl. 15, 16. v. 9 10, 13, vi^.
By a Syllepsis, a to ea as a+ b to ea+ eb. 7. By a Dialepsis, a to ea as a- b
to ea- eb.


Which are all manifest, by comparing the Rectangles of the Means and Extremes
according to to Prop. 19. and its Consect. 1. or by dividing any of the
Consequents by their Antecedents, according to Def. 31.

Proposition XXIV.
IF in a Eucl. 3, 20, 22. lib. v. 14. vii.
double Rank of Quantities you have as a to ea, so b to eb,
and also as ea to oa, so eb to ob,
then you will have also by proportion of Equality orderly placed, as the first a,
to the last oa, in the first Series; so the first b, to the last ob, in the
second Series.


Which is manifest from the Terms themselves.

Proposition XXV.
BUt Eucl. 21, 23. lib. v.
if they are disorderly placed as oa to ea so eob to ob
* as ea to a so ob to eb, * you will have here again by proportion of Equality,
as the first oa to the last a, in the first Series; so the first eob to the
last eb, in the second Series.
As is evident from the Rectangles of the Extremes and Means, as also from the
very Terms.

Proposition XXVI.
IF Eucl. 1. 12. v. 5. 6. 12. vii.
as the whole ea to the whole a, so the part eb to the part b; then also will
the Remainder Remainder Whole Whole ea- eb to the a- b, as the ea to the a.
This is evident from the Rectangle of the Extremes and Means, both which are
eaa- eab. Q.E.D.

Proposition XXVII.
REctangles or Products having one common Efficient or Side, are one to another
as the other Efficients or Sides.

Demonstration.
Suppose the Products to be ab and ac, having the common Efficient a; I say
they are as b to c, so ab to ac.
Which is evident at first sight, by comparing the Products of the Extremes and
Means, and also fully shows, that other way of proving Proportionality, whereby
by dividing the Consequents by their Antecedents, the identity or sameness of
the Quotients are wont to be demonstrated.

SCHOLIUM I.
I. THe Reduction of Fractions either to more compounded or more simple ones is
founded on this Theorem; on the one hand by multiplying, on the other by
dividing, by the same quantity, both the Numerator and the Denominator, as, e.
g, ^ and ^ and ^,, ^, ^, etc. are in reality the same Fractions. And

II. The Reduction of Fractions to the same Denomination, as if ^ and ^ are to
be changed into two others that shall have same Denominator; Eucl. 5 and 19.
lib. v. 7 and 11. l. 7.
this is to be done by multiplying the Denominators together for a new
Denominator, Besides several other Prop. see also the 17 and 18 lib. vii.
and each Numerator by the Denominator of the other for a new Numerator, and
you will have for the two Fractions above -- ^ and ^

SCHOLIUM II.
WE will here for a conclusion of Proportionals, show the way of cutting or
dividing any Quantity in Mean and Extreme Reason, viz. if for the greater Part
you put x, the less will be a- x; and so by Hypoth. these three, a, x and a- x,
will be proportional, by Def. 34. Therefore by Prop. 17. the Product of the
Extremes aa- ax = to the Square of the Mean xx, and (adding on both sides ax)
aa= xx+ ax; and moreover adding on both sides aa, you will have ^ aa= xx+ ax+ aa.
Now this last Quantity, since it is an exact Square, whose Root is x+ a, you will
have ^ aa= x+ a, and (subtracting from both sides ^ a) ^ aa- a= x.

Now therefore we have a Rule to determine the greater part of a given Quantity
to be divided in Mean and Extreme Reason, viz. if the given Quantity be a Line,
e. g. AB= a (Fig. 58.) join to it Eucl. 11. lib. II. and 30. lib. vi.
at Right Angles AC= a: Wherefore by the Theorem of Pythagoras from Schol.
Definit. 13. the Hypothenuse CB, or, which is equal to it, CD= aa; and
consequently AC= a being taken out of CD, the Remainder AD, or AE, which is
equal to it, will be = x, the greatest part sought; according to Euclid, whose
Invention this first Specimen of Analysis, by way of Anticipation, reduces to
its original Fountain. As for Numbers (tho none accurately admits of this
Section) the sense of the Rule, or which is all one as to the thing it self, is
this: Add the Squares of a whole Number and its half, and subtract the said
half from the Root of the Sum (which cannot be had exactly, since it is ^.

CAAP. V. Of the Proportion or Reasons of Magnitudes of the same kind in
particular.
Proposition XXVIII.
TRiangles and Parallelograms, also Pyramids and Prisms and Parallelepipeds,
lastly Cones and Cylinders, each kind compared among themselves, if they have
the same Altitude, are in the same Proportion to one another as their Bases.

Demonstration.
This and the following Proposition might have been by ^ bare Subsumption
added, as Consectarys to the precedent; for the Altitudes in the one, and Bases
in the other, may be looke^ on as common Efficients, and the Magnitudes
mentioned as their Products: But for the greater distinction sake, we will thus
Demonstrate them more particularly.

I. If the equal Altitudes of two Triangles, o^ Eucl. Prop. 1. lib. vi.
two Parallelograms, are called b and (...) Base of the one a, and of the other
ea; these Products will be ba and bea, the other ba and bea, by Def. 28. Schol.
2.

II. Likewise the equal Altitudes of two Prison Prop. 5.6. lib. xii. 25, 32.
xi. and Cons. 30 and 31 of the same
or Pyramids, may be called b, and the Proportion of their Bases expressed by a
and ea; a^^ the Prisms will be among themselves as ba to be^ and the Pyramids
as ba to bea, Prop. 11. lib. xii.
by the sai^ Schol. Number. 3. Prop. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, lib. lib. 1 and 29,
30, 31. lib. xi.


III. There is also the same Proportion of Cylinders and Cones as of Pyramids
and Prisms, by Consect. 4. Definit. 17. But, as a to ea so is ba to bea. - ba
to bea. - ba to bea.

Q.E.D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore Magnitudes of the same kind upon the same or equal Bases (dgr;) and
of the same height, are equal among themselves, and the contrary.

Proposition XXIX.
TRiangles and Parallelograms, Pyramids and Prisms and Parallelepipeds, Cones
and Cylinders, being on equal Bases, are in the same Proportion as their
heighths. Schol prop. 1. l. 6, 12, 13, 14


Demonstration.
Let all their Bases be called a, and the Proportions of their Heighths be as b
to eb: Therefore, 1. the Parallelograms, Parallelepipeds and Cylinders, are one
to the other of the same kind, as ba to eba; the Triangles as ba to eba; the
Pyramids and Cones as ba to 3 eba, by Def. 28. Schol. 2. But, as b to eb, so is
ba to eba. and ba to eba. and ba to eba.

Q.E.D.

Proposition XXX.
EQual lib. 6. prop. 14. 15. l. 11.34. l. 12.11, and its Coroll. also Prop. 15.
Triangles, Parallelograms, Prisms, Parallelepipeds, also equal Pyramids,
Cones, and Cylinders, have their Bases and Heighths reciprocally Proportional.

Demonstration.
For if for the equal Triangles you put ab, for the Cones and Pyramids ab, and
for the rest ab;

whether the Bases of the equal Quantities are supposed to be a, and so the
Altitudes on both sides b; or if the Base of the one be a and b the Altitude,
but the Base of the other b and the Altitude a, you will certainly have eitherways,

as a to a, so Reciprocally b to b; the Base of the former to the Base of the
latter, as the Altitude of the latter to the Altitude of the former, or,

as a to b, so Reciprocally a to b. Q.E.D.

CONSECTARY.
AND those Magnitudes of the same kind, whose Bases and Altitudes are thus
Reciprocal, are equal by Prop. 18. for the Product or Rectangle of the Extremes
is ab, and that of the Means ba.

Proposition XXXI.
TRiangles, Parallelograms, Prisms, Parallelepipeds, Pyramids, Co^^^ and
Cylinders, each kind compared among themselves, are in the Proportion
compounded of the Proportion of their Altitudes and Bases. Prop. 23. lib. 6.


Demonstration.
Suppose the Base of the one to be a, and the other ea, and the Altitude of the
one b, of the other ib; therefore the one will be to the other,

as a b to eiab,

or ab to eiab,

or ab to eiab; i. e. every where as a to ei^ i. e. in Proportion compounded of
a to ea, and of b to ib, by Consect. 2. Def. 34. Q.E.D.

SCHOLIUM.
FRom what we have hitherto Demonstrated, we may not only make an estimate of
Magnitudes of the same kind compared together, which is easy to any one who
attentively considers them; but also with F. Morgues, deduce a General Rule of
expressing the Proportions of any Rectilinear Planes or Solids, contained under
Plane Surfaces, by the proportion of one Right Line to another. For since the
one may be resolved into Triangles, and the other into Pyramids, having first
two Rectilinear Planes given and thus resolved, upon a Right Line I make the
abc (Fig. 49.) Equal to one of the Triangles of either of the Planes e. g. to
ABC; then having drawn the Parallel cm, if the BCD has the same Altitude with
the former, you need only join the Base BC to the Base ab. But if the Altitude
DS is greater than the Altitude of the other e. g. by, then you must make b f
equal to the Base bc augmented by a fifth part, and the Triangle bcf will =
BCD, and the whole acf = to the Rectilinear Figure ABCD. If now therefore I
likewise make another Triangle ghi equal to another Rectilinear Figure between
the same Parallels, then will the acf be to the ghi, that is, the Right Lined
Figure ABCD to the Right Lined Figure FGHIK, as af to gh, by Prop. 28. 2.
Having 2 Right Lined Solids given, and having resolved them into Triangular
Pyramids, they may be transferred between 2 parallel Planes, viz. by augmenting
or diminshing their Triangular Bases reciprocally, according to the excess or
defect of their Altitudes, as was done above with the Linear Bases; then those
Triangular Bases on both sides may be converted into one Triangular Base, and
consequently each Solid into a Pyramid equal to it self; which two Pyramids
will be one to the other as their Triangular Bases. And because the Proportions
of these Bases may be reduced to the Proportion of two Lines each to the other,
by No 1. of this; therefore also the Reason or Proportion of the two Solids may
be expressed by the Proportion of two Lines. Q.E.D.

Proposition XXXII.
CIrcles Eucl. Prop. 2. l. 12.
are in the same Proportion to one another as the Squares of their Diameters.

Demonstration.
Suppose a to be the Diameter of one Circle, and b of another; then by Definit.
31. Consect. 1. the Area of the one will be eaa, and that of the other ebb. But
as aa to bb so is eaa to ebb by Consect. 1. Prop. 19. Q E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
THe same will in like manner be manifest of like Sectors Circles, while for
the parts of the Periphery you put and ib, as for the wholes we put ea and eb:
for thus the A^ of the one will be iaa, and of the other ibb.

CONSECTARY II.
CYlinders whose Altitudes are equal to the Diameters of the Bases, are in
proportion to one another as the Cubes their Diameters; for the Cylinders will
be ea{powerof3} and eb{powerof3}, Cubes a{powerof3} and b{powerof3}.

CONSECTARY III.
HEnce also (whatever the Reason of the Sphere is to the Cylinder of the same
Diameter and Height; which will hereafter Demonstrate, and which in the mean
while will denote by the name of the Reason y) I say, hence Sphe^^ which have
the same Proportion to one another as these Cyli^ders ( viz. as ea{powerof3} to
eb{powerof3}, so yea{powerof3} to yeb{powerof3}) will also (by C^^ sect. 1.) be
in the same proportion as the Cubes, a{powerof3} to b{powerof3} is also evident
from these Terms themselves.

Proposition XXXIII.
THE Angle Prop. 18 lib. 12.
Eucl. Prop. 20. l. 3.
at the Center of any Circle ACB (Fig. 60) to an Angle at the Circumference
which has the same Arch its Base ADB, as 2 to 1.

Demonstration.
The truth of this has already appeared from Schol. Definit. 10. No 3. but here
we will demo^strate it otherwise in its three Cases, after E^clids way. In the
first Case DE being conceive Parallel to CB, by Def. 11. Consect. 1 and 2. the
External Angle ACB is = to the Internal A^gle Page 95.
61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

ADE, and the Angle BDE, is equal to the alternate Angle BCD, i. e. to the
other at the Base CDB, by Consect. 2. Definit. 13. Therefore BDE is as 1, and
CDE, i. e. ACB as 2.

In the second Case the whole ECB is double of the whole EDB, and the
subtracted Angle ECA is double of the subtracted Angle EDA, by Case 1.
Therefore the Remainder ACB is also double of the Remainder ADB, by Prop. 26.
In the third Case the part ECA is double of the part EDA, and also the part ECB
is double of the part EDB, by Case 1. Therefore the whole ACB is double the
whole ADB. Q.E.D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. HEnce all Angles ADB Eucl. prop. 21. 27. 31. lib. 3.
in the same Segment are equal, and the Angle ADB ( Fig. 61.) in a Semicircle
is a Right one; because the Aperture at the Center answering to it, ACB
contains two Right Angles: The Angle in a less Segment than a Semicircle EDF,
is greater than a Right one; because the Aperture at the Center EGHFC answering
to it, comprehends more than two Right Angles. An Angle, lastly, in a Segment
greater than a Semicircle GDH, is less than a Right one; because its double at
the Center GCH is less than two Right ones. All which we have already otherwise
demonstrated in Schol. Def. 10. No 6.

II. All the three Angles prop. 32. l. 1
of any Triangle ABD taken together, are equal to two Right ones; because they
are the half of the three at the Center C, which always make 4 Right ones, by
Definit. 8. Consect. 2.

III. Therefore any external Angle IAB, is equal to the two Internal opposite
ones at B and D; because that, as well as they with the other contiguous to
them BAD, make two Right ones, by Consect. 1. of the same Definit.

IV. And the greatest Side of a Triangle, because it insists on a Eucl. prop.
21. 27. 31. lib. 3.
greater Arch of a Circumscribed Circle, does also necessarily subtend a
greater Angle, by virtue of Consect. 1. hereof.

Proposition XXXIV.
IN Equiangular Triangles (ACB and abc, Fig. 62.) the Sides about the equal
Angles are Proportional, viz. as AB to BC, so ab to bc, and as BC to CA so is
bc to ca. etc. (b)

Demonstration.
For having described Circles through the Vertex of each Triangle, according to
Consect. 6. Definit. 8. by reason of the supp^sed equality of the Angles A and
a, B and b, C and c, the Arches also AB and ab, etc. will necessarily agree in
the number of Degrees and Minutes, by the foregoing 33 Prop, a^^ so also the
Chords AB and ab, BC and bc, etc. will agree in th^^ number of Parts of the
Radius or whole Sine ZA and za, (...) Consect. 2. Definit. 10. Wherefore as
many such Parts as A^^ has, whereof az has also 10000000, so many such also
will a^ have, whereof az has also 10000000, etc. Therefore AC^ to CB as ac to
cb, etc. Q. E. D.

CONSECTAYS.
I. WHerefore by the same necessity the Bases of such T^^angles AB and ab, will
be proportional to their A^titudes CD and cd, as being Right Sines of the like
Arches ((...) and cb, or rather CE and c e; and so for similar or like
Tria^gles (and consequently also Parallelograms) we may rightly suppose that
their Bases are as a to ea, and their Heighths as b (...) eb; tho we must not
immediately conclude on the contrary, tha^ because their Bases and Altitudes
are so, therefore they are S^milar.

II. As also in Similar Parallelepipeds it will be manifest (...) any attentive
Person, that the Bases are in a duplicate Propo^tion of the Altitudes. For
since the Planes of Similar Solids a^^ equal in number, and Similar each to the
other, if for A^ ( Fig. 63.) we put a, and for BC b, AB will = ea and BC= eb;
and so that Basis will be to this as ab to eeab. Moreover having let fall the
Perpendiculars EH and EH, the Triangle ^BH and EBH are similar, and by putting
c for BE, BE will be ec, putting also d for EH, EH will consequently be ed. But
the Reason of the Base ab to the Base eeab, is duplicate of the Reason of d to
e d, by Def. 34. Wherefore in Similar Parallelepipeds we may rightly suppose,
that their Bases are as a b to eeab, or as a to eea, and their Altitudes as d
to ed.

SCHOLIUM I.
FRrom this Proposition flows first of all the chiefest part of Trigonometry
for the Resolution of Right Angled: For since in any Right Angled Triangle, if
one side, e. g. AB ( Fig. 64.) be put for the whole Sine, the other BC will be
the Tangent of the opposite Angle at A (and in like manner if CB be the whole
Sine, BA will be the Tangent of the Angle C;) but if the Hypothenuse AC be made
Radius or whole Sine, then the Side BC will be the Right Sine of the Angle A,
or the Arch CD described from the Center A, and AB the Right Sine of the Angle
C, or the Arch AE, described from the Center C, (we will omit mentioning the
Secants, because the business may be done without them) which all follow from
Def. 10. Wherefore you may find, I. The Angles. 1. From the Sides by inferring
As one leg to the other, so the whole Sine to the Tangent of the Angle opposite
to the other Leg. 2. From the Hypoth. and one side, by inferring As the Hyp. to
the W.S. (whole sine) so the given leg to the S. of the opp. angle
II. The Sides. 1. From the Hypoth. and Angles: As the W. S. to the Hypoth. so
the Sine of the Angle, opposite to the Leg sought, to the Leg it self. 2. From
one Leg and the Angles: As the W. S. to the given Leg, so the Tangent of the
Angle adjacent to it, to the Leg sought. 3. From the Hypoth. and one of the
Sides: Having first found the Angles, it is done by the 2, 1. or by the
Pythagorick Theorem.
III. The Hypothenuse. 1. From the Angles and one of the Legs. As the S. of the
Angle, opposite to the given Leg, to that Leg, so the W. S. to the Hypoth. 2.
From the Legs given; Having first found the Angles its done by the 1. or by the
Pythagorick Theorem.



III. Inversly also, if two Triangles ABC and ABC ((...) the Figure of the
present Proposition) have one Angle of o^^ equal to one Angle of the other ( e.
g. B and B) and the Sid^^ that contain these equal Angles proportional ( viz.
as AB to B^ so AB to BC) then the other Angles (A and A, C and C will be also
equal, and the Triangles similar Eucl prop. 6. lib. 6.
for to (...) like Chords AB and AB, BC and BC, there answer by t^^ Hypoth.
like or similar Arches, i. e. equal in the number (...) Degrees and Minutes;
and to these also there answer equal A^gles both at the Periphery and Center.

IV. ( Fig. 65. No 1.) If Eucl. 2. lib. 6.
the Sides of the Angle BA^ are cut by a Line DE, parallel to the Base BC, the
Segments (...) those, Sides will be proportional, viz. AE to EC as AD to BD^
for by reason of the Parallelism of the Lines BE and BC, the Triangles ADE and
ABC are Equiangular: Therefore as the whole BA to the whole AC, so the part AD
to the part A^ and consequently also the remainder EC to the remainder D^ as
the part EA to the part AD, by Prop. 26. and alternative^^ by Prop. 24. EC will
be to EA as BD to AD.

SCHOLIUM II.
THere are several useful Geometrical Practices depend (...) this Consectary
and its Proposition. 1. That Eucl. l. 9 and 10. l. 6.
where^ we are taught to cut off any part required, e. ^ from a given Line AB,
and so generally to (...) or divide any given Line AC, in the same pr^portion
as any other given Line, is supposed (...) be divided in D, (and consequently
into as ma^^ equal parts as you please;) viz. if in the fi^^ Case, having drawn
any Line AF, you take AD^ 1, and make DB 2, and having joined CB, dra^^ the
Parallel LE: for as AD to DB so is AE to AC; that is, as 1 to 2, by this 4th
Consect. therefore AE is one third of the whole AC, etc.

II. A Rule Eucl. 11 and 12, l. 6.
to find a third Proportional to the 2 Right Lines given AB and BC (No 2. Fig.
65.) (or a fourth to three given;) if, viz. having drawn AF at pleasure, you
make AD equal to BC, and Joining DB, draw the Parallel EC: For as AB to BC, so
AD i. e. BC) to DE. Now if AD be not equal to BC but to another (viz. a) third
Proportional, then by the same Reason DE will be a fourth Proportional.

III. Another Rule Eucl. 13. lib. 6 and and Eucl. 8. lib. 6.
to find a mean Proportional between two Right Lines given AC and CB; which is
done by join^ng both the Lines together, and from the middle of the whole AB
describing a Semicircle, and from C erecting the Perpendicular CD: For since
the Angle ADB is a Right one, by Consect. 1. of the preceding Proposition, and
the two Angles at C are Right ones, and those at A and B common to the whole
Triangle ADB, and to the two partial ones ACD and BCD, ^hese two will be
Equiangular and Similar to the great one, and consequently to one another:
Therefore by the present Proposition, as AC to CD, so CD to CB, Q. E. D. and
also as AB to BD so BD to BC, and as AB to AD so AD to AC, etc.

IV. The Analytical Praxis of multiplying and dividing Lines ^y Lines, so that
the Product or Quotient may be a Line; and ^lso the way of Extracting Roots out
of Lines: Which Des Carts, gives us, p. 2. of his Geom. viz. assuming a
certain Line ^or Unity, e. g. AB (in Fig. 65. No 2.) if AC is to be multi^lied
by AD, having joined BD, and drawn the Parallel CE, ^he Product will be AE; for
it will be as 1 to ^he Multiplier AD, so the Multiplicand AC to ^he Product AE;
or if AE is to be divided ^y AC, having joined EC and drawn the Pa^allel BD,
the Quotient will be AD; (for AC ^he Divisor, will be to AE the Dividend, as an
^nit AB to the Quotient AD;) all which are e^ident from the Nature of
Multiplication and Division, and the Precedent Praxes. As also taking CB (in
the same Fig. No 3.) for Unity, if the Square Root is to be extracted out of
any other Line AC, this being joined to your Unity in one Line AB* and having
described thereon a Semicircle, the Perpendicular CD will be the Root sought,
as being a Mean Proportional between the two Extremes CB and AC, according to
Prop. 17.

V. A Right Line AG which divides Eucl. 3. lib. 6.
any given Angle A into two equal Parts ( Fig. 66.) being prolonged, divides
the Base BC proportionally to the Legs of the Angle AB and AC For having
prolonged CA to E, so that AE shall be = to AB^ the Angles ABE and AEB will be
equal, by Consect. 2. Def. 13. and consequently also equal to each of the
halves of the external Angle CAB, by Consect. 3. of the antecedent Proposition
Therefore the lines AG and EB will be parallel, by Cons. 1. Def. 11. Therefore
as AC to AE, i. e. to AB, so GC to GB, by Co^sect. 3. of this Proposition.
Q.E.D.

VI. Hence also there follows further, by conversion of the last inference, as
AC+AB to AC, so GC+GB ( i. e. BC) (...) GC; and inversly GC to BC as AC to
AC+AB; and lastly alternatively, GC to AC as BC to AC+AB.

N. B. This last Inference follows also immediately from the preceding
Consectary. For by reason of the Similitude of the ACG and ECB, as GC to AC so
BC to CE, i. e. to AC+AB.

SCHOLIUM III.
FRom these two last Consectarys there an^ these or two or three Practical
Rules, t^^ first whereof shows, how having the two Legs A^ and AC given, and
also the Base BC, to find the Se^ments GC and GB, made by the Bisection of the
Intercrural Angle^ (viz. by this inference, according to Consect. 6: As the Sum
(...) the Sides to one Side (e. g.) AC;) so the Sum of the Segmen^ of the Base,
i. e. the whole Base to one of the Segments, vi^ that next the said Side GC. 2.
It shows on the contrary, how having the Base and one of its Segments given,
and moreover the S^^ of the Sides, to find separately the Side AC next the
known Segment by inferring as the Sum of the Segments, or the Base BC to the
Sum of the Sides, so the given Segment GC to the sought AC: or also, 3dly,
Having only the Base and Sum of the Sides given, but not the Segment GC, yet to
express its Proportion to the next side AC, -- viz. in the Quantities of the
given Terms, by putting (by Consect. 6.) for GC the value of the Base BC, and
for AC the value of the Sum AB+AC; the great use of which last Rule will appear
hereafter in the Cyclometry (or Quadrature of the Circle) of Archimedes.

VII. In any Triangle ABC ( Fig. of the present Proposition) the Sides are to
one another as the Sines of their opposite Angles: For they are as the Chords
of the double Angles at the Center, by Prop. 33. therefore they are also one to
another as half those Chords, i. e. by Definit. 10. as the Sines of the half
Angles.

SCHOLIUM IV.
HEnce flow two new Rules of Plane Trigonometry, for Oblique-angled Triangles
to find, viz.

1. The other Angles: From 2 given Sides, and an Angle opposite to one of them:
by inferring As the Side opposite to the given Angle to the other Side, so is
the Sine of the given Angle to the sine of the angle opposite to the other
Side; which being given, the third is easily found.
II. The other Sides: From one side and the angles given, As the Sine of the
Angle opposite to the given side, to that side; so is the Sine of the Angle
opposite to the side sought to the side sought.

So that this way we have reduced all the Cases excepting one of Plane
Trigonometry, and consequently all Euthymetry to their original Foundations
(for in that Case of having two Sides, and the included Angle given, we may
find the rest by the Resolution of the Obliqueangled Triangle into two Right
Angled ones; and so it is done by the Rules we have deduced in ( Schol. 1.) I
say, excepting one, in which from the three sides of an Obliqueangled Triangle
given, you are required to find the Angles: the Rule to resolve which we will
hereafter deduce in the 2d Consect. of Prop. 45. from that Theorem which Euclid
gives us, lib. 2. Prop. 13.

VIII. Because in in the Right Angled BAC ( Fig. 67) BC is to CA as CA to CD,
by No 3. of the 2d Schol. of this Prop. the of CA will be = CE, by Prop. 17. In
like manner because as CB to BA so is BA to BD; the of BA will be = to BE:
Wherefore the two Rectangles BE and CE taken together, that is, the of the
Hypothenuse BC, will be = to the two 's BA and CA taken together: Which is the
very Theorem of Pythagoras demonstrated two other ways in Schol. of Definit. 13.

SCHOLIUM V.
THis Theorem of Pythagoras as it furnishes us with Rules of adding Squares
into one Sum, or subtracting one Square from another; so likewise it helps us
to some Foundations whereon, among the rest, the structure of the Tables of
Sines relies, etc. Whose use we have already partly shown in Schol. 1 and 4. 1.
If several Squares are to be collected into one Sum, having joined the Sides of
two of them so as to form a Right Angle, e. g. AB and BC ( Fig. 68. No 1.) the
Hypothenuse AC being drawn, is the Side of a Square equal to them both; and if
this Hypothenuse AC be removed from B to D, and the Side of the third Square
from B to E, the new Hypothenuse DE will be the Side of a Square equal to the
three former taken together. 2. If the Square of the side MN (No 2.) is to be
subtracted from the Square of the side LM. Having described a Semicircle upon
LM, and placed the other MN within that Semicircle, then draw the Line LN and
that will be the Side of the remaining Square. 3. Having the Right Sine EG of
any Arch ED given (but how to find the Primary Sines we will show in another
place), you may obtain the Sine Complement CG or OF, by the preceding Numb.
viz. by subtracting the of the given Sine from the of the Radius; and moreover
the versed Sine GD by subtracting the Sine Complement CG from the Radius CD. 4.
The Squares of the versed Sine GD, and of the Right sine EG being added
together, give the of the Chord ED of the same Arch, (which all are evident
from the Pythagorick Theorem) and half of that EH gives the Right Sine of half
that Arch. 5. From the Right Sine EG you have the Tangent of that Arch, if you
make, as the Sine Complement CG to the Right Sine GE, so the whole Sine CD to
the Tangent G I. 6. Lastly, From these Data you may also have the Secants (if
required) thus, as the Sine Complement CG to the W. S. CE, so the W. S. CD to
the Secant CI; or as the Right Sine EG to the W. S. E.C. so the Tangent ID to
the Secant IC; both which are evident by our 34th Proposition.

Consect. 9. If the Quadrant of a Circle (CBEG, Fig. 70.) be inclined to
another Quadrant (CADG) and two other Perpendicular Quadrants cut both of them,
viz. FBAG and FEDG, and the latter do so in the extremities of them both)
having let fall Perpendiculars from the common Sections E and B, through the
Planes of the Perpendicular Quadrants, and the inclined Quadrant, ( viz. on the
one side EG and BH, as Right Sines of the Segments EC and BC; on the other EI
and BK, as Right Sines of the Segments ED and BA) you will have 2 Triangles EIG
and BKH Right Angled at I and K, Equiangular at G and H (by reason of the same
inclination of the Plane CBEGC) and consequently similar, by our 34th
Proposition; wherefore as the Sine EG to the Sine EI, so the Sine BH to the
sine BK, or as EG to BH so EI to BK, and contrariwise.

SCHOLIUM VI.
HEnce you have several Rules of Spherical Trigonometry for resolving Right
Angled Lansberg. Geom. Triang. lib. 4. Prop. 12.
1. Having given in the Rightangled ABC the Hypothenuse BC and the Oblique
Angle ACB, for the Leg AB opposite to this Angle, make: as the sine T (EG) to
the sine of the Hypoth. (BH) so the sine of the given Angle (EI) to the sine of
the Leg sought (BK). 2. Having given the Hypothenuse BC and the Leg AB for the
opposite Angle ACB make as the sine Hypoth. (BH) to S. T. (EC) so the sine of
the given Leg ( BK) to the sine of the Angle sought (EI) 3. Having given the
side AB and the Angle opposite to it ACB, for the Hypothenuse BC (supposing you
know whether it be greater or less than a Quadrant) make as the sine of the
given Angle EI to the sine T. (EG) so the sine of the given Leg ( BK) to the
sine of the Hypoth. BH). 4. Having given in the Right Angled EBF (which we take
instead of ABC that so we may not be obliged to change the Figure) one Leg EB
and the Hypothenuse BF for the other Leg OF, you may find its complement, if
you make as the sine Complement o^ the given side (BH) to S. T. (EG) so the
sine Compleme^^ of the Hypothenuse (BK) to the sine Compl. of the side sought
(EI) 5. Having both Legs EB and OF given, for the Hypothenuse BF its Compl. BA
may be found thus: as S. T. (EG) is to the sine Cpmpl. (BH) of one side EB, so
the sine Compl. (EI) of the other side (OF) to (BK) the sine Compl. of the
Hypothenuse.

6. Having given in the same Right Angled Triangle EBF one Leg OF, and the
Angle adjacent to it ETB, first prolong into whole Quadrants BA to f, that A f
may = BF Hypoth. and BC to e that Ce may = EB, and AC to d that C d may = D^
the measure of the given Angle EFB: secondly from d through e and f let fall a
Quadrant through the extremities of the Quadrant B f and Be, that so the C de may
be Right Angled, in which there are given the Hypoth. C d = to the given Angle,
and the Angles C = to the Compl. of the given Leg ( viz. to the Arch ED) and
so, thirdly, there is sought the side de, as the Complement of the Arch of, or
of the Angle sought ABC, or EBF; viz. by the first case of this, by inferring,
as S. T. to the sine Hypoth. cd (i. e. of the given Angle EFB;) so the Angle
dce (i. e. DE the Compl. of the given Leg RF) to the sine de (as the Compl. of
the Angle fB e or EBF.

7. Having given, in the same Triangle, the side OF and the opposite Angle EBF
( i. e. the Arch of) for the other Angle EFB (that is the Hypoth. cd in the
cde) make by the third of this:

As the Sine of the Angle dce (i. e. the sine Compl. of the given Leg DE) to
the S. T. so the sine of the Leg de (i. e. the fine Compl. of the Angle EBF) to
the Hypoth. cd (i. e. the sine of the Arch DA or Angle EFB.).

8. Having the Oblique Angles given to find either of the sides, viz. OF; which
may be done thus by the second of this:

As the sine of the Hypoth. cd (i. e. the sine of the Angle at F) to the W. S.
so the sine de (i. e. the sine Compl. of the Angle at B) to the sine of the
Angle dce (i. e. the sine Compl. of the side sought OF.)

Consect. 10. The same being given as in Consect. 7. if instead of the Right
Sines EI and BK, you erect Perpendicularly DL and AM( Fig. 71) because of the
similitude of the Triangles DGL and AHM, you will have, as DG sine T. to DL the
Tangent of the Arch DE, so AH the Right Sine of the Arch AC to AM the Tangent
of the Arch AB; or as DG to AH, so DL to AM, and contrariwise.

SCHOLIUM VII.
HEnce flow the other Rules of Spherical Trigonometry for Resolving Right
Angled Triangles, viz. 9. Having given the side AC in the ABC, and the adjacent
Angle ACB, for the other side AB, make as the W. S. (DG) to the sine of the
given side (AH) so the Tangent of the given Angle (ACB) to the Tangent of the
Angle sought (AB.) 10. Having given the side (AB) and the opposite Angle (at C)
for the other side (AC, so you know whether it be greater or less than a
Quadrant) make as the Tangent of the given Angle (DL) to the Tangent of the
given Leg (AB) so the whole S. (DG) to the sine of the Leg sought ( viz. at
AH.) 11. Both sides being given, for the Angles, make, as the sine of one Leg
(AH) to the W. S. (DG) so the T. of the other Leg (AM) to the Tangent of the
Angle opposite to the same (at C.) 12. Having given moreover in the Right
Angled Triangle EBF the Hypothenuse (BF) and the Angle (EFB) for the adjacent
side OF, make, as the sine Compl. of the given Angle (AH) to the W. S. so the
Tangent Compl. of the Hypoth. (AM) to the Tang. Compl. of the Leg sought (DL)
13. Having given the side (OF) and the adjacent Angle F for the Hypoth. BF
make; as the W. S. to the sine Compl. of the given Angle (AH) so the Tangent
Complement of the given Leg (DL) to the Tangent Compl. of the Hypoth. (AM.) 14.
Having given the Hypoth. (BF) and one side OF for the adjacent Angle (F) make
as the Tang. Compl. of the given Leg (D. L.) to the W. S. so the Tang. Compl.
of the Hypoth. (AM) to the Sine Compl. of the Angle sought (AH). 15. Having
given the Hypoth. (BF, i. e. the arch Af, or the angle at d) and either of the
oblique angles (at F) for the other angle (EBF) make by help of the new
Triangle cde, by the 12th of this.

As the Sine Compl. of the angle cde (i. e. the Sine Compl. of the Hypoth. (AH)
to the W. S. so the Tang. Compl. of the Hypoth. cd (i. e. Tang. Compl. of the
given angle) to the Tang. Compl. of the Side de (i. e. to the Tang of the angle
sought ABC or EBF.)

16. Having given the oblique Angles to find the Hypoth. (BF, or the arch A f,
or the angle cde) it is done by the 14 of this Schol.

As the Tang. Compl. of the Leg de (i. e. the Tangent of the angle ABC or EBF)
to the W. S. so the Tangent Complement of the Hypoth. cd (i. e. the Tangent
Complement of the other angle EFB) to the Sine Compl. of the angle cde (i. e.
the Sine Compl. of the Hypoth. BC sought.)

So that now we have with Lansbergius (but much more compendiously)
Scientifically Resolved all the Cases of Rigt-angled Triangles; the Resolution
of Oblique-angled ones only now remaining.

Consect. 11. In Oblique-angled Spherical Triangles, as well as Right-angled
ones, the Sines of the angles are directly proportional to the Sines of the
opposite Sines. 1. Of the Right-angled ones this is evident from No 3. Schol.
6. and from the 9th Consect. For as the Sine of the angle A ( Fig. 72.) to the
Sine of BD, so the W. S. ( i. e. of the angle D) to the Sine of AB. 2. The same
is immediately evident of an Oblique-angled Triangle ABC, resolved into 2
Right-angled ones. For,

The Sine of the angle C is to the Sine of BD as the sine of the gle D to the
Sine of AB; and also,

The Sine of the angle C to the Sine of BD as the Sine of the angle D to the
sine of BC, by the 1.

In each Proportionality the means are the Sines of BD and D; therefore the
Rectangles of the Extremes of the Sines of AB into the Sine of A, and the Sine
of BC into the Sine of C, will be equal among themselves, since the Rectangles
of the same Means are equal, by Prop. 18. therefore by Prop. 19. as the Sine of
A to the Sine of BC, so the Sine of C to the Sine of AB, Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM VIII.
THe latter may appear of Oblique-angled Triangles after this way also; since
the Sine of the angle A is to the Sine of BD as the Sine of the angle D to the
sine of AB, call the first a, the second ea, the third b, the fourth eb; and
because the Sine of the angle C (which we call c) is likewise to the Sine of BD
( i. e. to ea) as the Sine of D ( i. e. b) to the Sine of BC (which will
consequently be ^) it will be manifest, that the Sine of the angle

A is to the sine of BC as the sine of the angle C to the sine of AB, i. e. as
a to.. ^, i. e... c to.. eb. by multiplying the Means and Extremes, whose
Rectangles are on both sides eab. Therefore as by the present and precedent
Consectary 7, it is universally true, That in any Triangle whether Right Lined
or Spherical, Right-Angled or Oblique-angled, the Sides or their Sines, are to
one another, as the Sines of their opposite Angles (which therefore is commonly
called a Common Theorem:) so also hence flow 2 new Rules of Spherical
Trigonometry for Oblique-angled Triangles, like those we found in Schol. 4.

To find I. The other Angles. From 2 sides given of an angle opposite to one of
them, by inferring As the sine of the side opposite to the given angle to the
sine of the other side, so the sine of the given angle to the sine of the angle
sought.
II. The other Sides. From one side and the angles given, by inferring As the
sine of the angle opposite to the given side to the sine of that side, so the
sine of the angle opposite to the side sought to the sine of the side sought.



And thus we have reduced all the Cases and Rules of Spherical Trigonometry to
their original Fountains (for from 2 Sides given and the interjacent Angle, or
2 Angles and their adjacent side, we may find the rest in Oblique-angled
Triangles, by resolving them into 2 Right-angled ones; and so by the Rules we
have deduced in Schol. 6 and 7) excepting two Cases, viz. when from 3 sides
given, the Angles, or from 3 Angles the Sides are sought; to resolve which, we
are supplied with Rules from the following

Cons. 12. In the given Oblique angled Spherical Triangle ABC ( Fig. 73.) whose
Sides are unequal and each less than a Quadrant, having produced the sides AB
and AC to the Quadrant AD and AE, and effected besides what the Figure directs,
then will

The Arch DE be the Measure of the angle A, AF=AC, and so FB the difference of
the Sides AB and AC.

BC=BG, and so GF the difference of the third side, and the differences of the
rest FB.

But now, 1. As EH or DH to CM or FM so will PH be to NM (by reason of the
Equiangular Triangles EPHESIANS and CNM;) therefore by Prop. 26. so will also DP be
to FN. Make therefore DH= a FM= ea, DP= b FN= eb.

AI the R. Sine of the side AB. GM the Sine of the Side AC GL the Sine of GB,
or of the side BC.

FK the R. Sine of the Arch F B. BY the versed Sine of A B.

BL the verse. Sine of G B or BC. BK the versed Sine of F B. KL or NO the
difference of the versed Sines we have now mentioned.

EP the Right Sine and DP the versed Sine of the arch DE.

CN the R. Sine and FN the versed Sine of the arch FC.

Page 108.
73

74

75

76 n. 1.

76 n. 2.

77 n. 1.

77 n. 2.



2. By reason of the Equiangular FNO and HAI (for FNO is Equiangular to the
FKQ, and that to the HQM, by reason of the Vertical Angles at Q; and that also
to the HAI by reason of the Common Angle at H) and you have also,

As HA,

Or DH to AI, so FN to NO.

^.

Wherefore now, 3. you will have evidently, the DH to FM into AI as DP to NO.

^. DH NO DP.

And Inversly as oea to a so oeb to b.

SCHOLIUM IX.
SInce therefore the Radius DH or a is known, and also NO the Difference of the
versed Sines BL and BK, it is evident, that DP the versed Sine of the angle A
will be known also; supposing that the first Quantity oea is likewise known.
But this may be had by another Antecedent Inference, if you make, as AH to FM
so AI to a fourth oea.

a ea oa

Hence therefore arises, 1. the Rule: Having given the 3 Sides of an
Oblique-angled Triangle, to find any one of the Angles, viz. by inferring,

1. As the Sine of T to the Sine of R, one of the sides comprehending AC; so
the sine of the other side AB to a fourth, ^

2. As this fourth to the sine of T, so the difference of the versed sines of
the third side, BC, and the differences of the others to the versed sine of the
Angle sought, viz.

^.

But since the sides of a Spherical Triangle may be changed into Angles, and
contrariwise the sides being continued [as (...) the side AB of the given
Triangle ABC ( Fig. 47.) be con^nued a Circle, the rest into Semicircles from
the Poles b and (...) and likewise the Semicircle HI from the Pole A, and the
Sem^circle FG from the Pole B, and the Semicircle EA from the Pole C, you will
have a new Triangle a, b, c, the 3 angles o^ which will be equal to the 3 sides
of the former ABC; as the angle a or its measure IG, is equal to the side AB,
by reason each makes a Quadrant joined with the third arch AG; b^ the measure
of the angle b, is the side AC ( viz. in this cas^ wherein the side AC is a
Quadrant, in the other wherein (...) would be greater or less than a Quadrant,
it would be the measure of the angle of the Compl. for then the Semicircle H^^
described from the Pole A, would not pass through C but beyon^ or on one side of
C. See Pitisc. lib. 1. Prop. 61. p. m. 25.) -- the angle c or its measure KL,
is equal to the (...) BC, because with the third KC they make the Quadrants BK
and CL] Therefore, 2. Having given the three Angles (...) the Oblique-angled
Triangle abc, you may find any side, e. g. ac, if there be sought the Angle
ABC, or rather its Complement KBF, or its measure FK= ac, -- from the 3 sides
given of the ABC, by the preceding Rule, by inferring, viz. 1. As S. T. to the
sine R, of one side comprehending the angle of one side AB ( i. e. of one angle
a adjacent to the side sought) so the sine of the other side BC ( i. e. of the
other angle C) to a fourth.

2. As the fourth to the S. T. so the difference of the versed Sines of the
third side AC, and the differences of the others ( i. e. of the 3d angle b, and
the differences of the rest) to the versed Sine of the comprehended angle, or
Complement to a Semicircle ( i. e. of the side sought ac.)

Proposition XXXV.
SImilar Plane Figures (a) are to one another in Duplicate Proportion of their
Homologous Sides.

Demonstration.
For, 1. the Bases of 2 similar Triangles or Parallelograms for which any 2
Homologous Sides, e. g. AB and AB ( Fig. 75.) may be taken) and Perpendiculars
let fall thereon DE and DE, will be by Consect. 1. Prop. 34, as a to ea, b to
eb. Therefore the Parallelograms and Triangles themselves, will be as ba to
eeba, by Consect. 7 and 8. Def. 12. i. e. by Def. 34. in duplicate Reason of
their Perpendiculars or assumed Sides, which is most conspicuous in Squares,
which putting a for the ^ide of one, and ea for the other, are to one another
as aa to ^eaa.

2. Like Polygons are resolved into like Tri^ngles, when the Triangles ABC and
ABC, Eucl. 19 and 20 lib. 6.
and ^lso AED and AED are Equiangular, by Consect. 3. Prop. 34. but CAD and
CAD, are also Equiangular, because each of their angles are the remainder of
^qual ones, after equal ones are taken from them. Wherefore ^he first Triangles
are in duplicate Proportion of the sides BC and BC; the second likewise of the
sides CD and CD the ^hird are also in the same Proportion of the sides DE and
DE, etc. i. e. (since by the Hypoth. BC has the same reason to BC ^s CD to CD,
and DE to DE) each to each is in duplicate Proportion of the sides BC to BC, or
CD to CD, by the first of ^his. Therefore by a Syllepsis, the whole Polygons
are in duplicate Proportion of the same Sides: Which is the second thing ^o be
demonstrated.

3. Circles and their like Sectors, are as the Squares of their Diameters, by
Prop. 32. therefore in duplicate Proportion of them, by the first of this:
Which is the third thing: Therefore simi^ar Plane Figures, etc. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
THerefore 2 similar Plane Figures are one to another, as the first Homologous
Side, to a third Proportional, by virtue of Definition 34.

II. Any two Figures described on 4 Proportional Lines Eucl. prop. 22. lib. 6.
and similar to 2 others, are likewise Proportional, and contrariwise; for if
the simple Reasons or Proportions of Lines be the same, their duplicate
Proportions will be the same also, and reciprocally.

SCHOLIUM.
BUT as this second Consectary confirms Prop. 22 and i^ Scholium, so the first
teaches us a twofold Geometric^ Praxis. 1. A Way to express the Proportion of
similar F^gures by two Right Lines, viz. by finding a third Proportional to
their Homologous Sides. For as the side of the first (...) this third, so will
be the first Figure to the second. 2. A wa^ to augment or diminish any given
Figure in a given Reason or Proportion, viz. by finding a mean Proportional
between a^^ side of the given Figure, and another Line which shall be (...)
that in a given Proportion, and then by describing thereon (...) similar or
like Figure.

Proposition XXXVI.
SImilar or like Solid Figures, are to one another in triplicate Pr^portion of
their Homologous Sides.

Demonstration.
For, 1. The similar Bases of two similar Parallelepipedo^ (and consequently
also of Prisms and Cylinders, by Consect. ^^ and 5. Definit. 16. and also of
Pyramids and Cones, by Consect 3 and 4, of Definit. 17.) are, as ab to eeab, by
(a) the pr^ceding Proposition, and their Altitudes as c to ec, by Consect. ^
Prop. 34.

Therefore Parallelepipeds, Cylinders and Prisms (and so the thi^^ part of
these, Cones and Pyramids) will be as abc to e{powerof3} abc, by Co^sect. 3, 4,
5. Definit. 16. i. e. they will be, by Definit. 34. ^^ Consect. 1 and 2. Prop.
34. in Triplicate Proportion of the^ Perpendiculars or Homologous Sides. Which
is especially Co^^spicuous in Cubes; which, putting a for the Side of one, an^
ea for the side, are to one another as a{powerof3} to e{powerof3} a{powerof3}.

2. Polyedrous or many sided Figures, may be resolved in^ Pyramids of similar
Bases and Altitudes; which is evident (...) Regular ones, from the Consect. of
Definit. 21. and cannot b^ difficult to understand also of Irregular ones;
because the lik^ ^nclination of their Planes every where similar and equal in
number, necessarily require that the whole Altitudes of similar Polyedrous
Solids, as well as similar Parallelepipedons, by Consect. 2. Prop. 34. should
be in subduplicate Proportion of their Bases, and so these being likewise
divided in C and C ( Fig. 76. No 1.) the parts of their heigths GC and GC, will
be in the same Proportion: Whence, e. g. 2 Pyramids standing on simi^ar Bases
ABDEF and ABDEF, and having like Altitudes GC and GC, will necessarily be like
or similar; and the same thing may be likewise judged of others.

Or yet, to show it more evidently, the Polyedrous Solids may be resolved into
like Triangular Prisms; for, e. g. each of the Triangles of their similar Bases
ABDEF and ABDEF (No 2.) are similar, viz. abf and abf, ABF and ABF, by the
preceding Prop. No 2. The Planes ABba and A Bba, also AafF and A af F, are
similar by the Hypoth. and consequently also the Planes BbfF and B bfF ( fb is
to ba as fb to ba, and also in the one ba to bB, as ba to bB in the other;
therefore ex equo as fb to bB so f b to bB, etc.) and so the whole Triangular
Prisms will be similar, by Definit. 35. and so of others. Therefore similar
Polyedrous Solids will be in the same Proportion as similar Pyramids, or
Triangular Prisms, i. e. by the first of this in Triplicate Proportion of their
Sides. Eucl. prop. 12. lib. 12. of Cones and Cylinders.


3. Spheres are as the Cubes of their Diameters Eucl. 18. lib. 12.
by Consect. 3. Prop. 32. Therefore they are by the first of this, as
a{powerof3} to e{powerof3} a{powerof3}. Therefore similar or like Solids are in
Triplicate Proportion of their Homologous Sides. Q. E. D.

CHAP. VI. Of the Proportions of Magnitudes of diverse sorts compared together.
Proposition XXXVII.
THE Parallelogram ABCD (Fig. 77. N. 1.) is to the Triangle BCD upon the same
base DC, and of the same height as 2 (...) 1. This has been already
Demonstrated in Consect. 3. De^^nit. 12. Here we shall give you another

Demonstration.
Suppose, 1. the whole Base CD divided into four equ^^ parts by the transverse
Parallel Lines EG, HK, LN, then w^^ (by reason of the similitude of the DGF,
DKI, DN^ DCB) GF be 1, KI 2, NM 3, CB 4; and having furthermore continually
Bisected the Parts of the Base, the Indivisible or the Portions of the Lines
drawn transversly through the Triangle will be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. ad
infinitum, all along in an Arithmetical Progression, beginning from the Poi^^
D, as 0; to which the like number of Indivisibles always answer in the
Parallelogram equal to the greatest, viz. the Li^^ BC. Wherefore by the 4th
Consect. of Prop. 16. all the In^^visibles of the Triangle, to all those of the
Parallelogram take^^ together, i. e. the Triangle it self to the Parallelogram,
is as (...) to 2. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM.
NOW if any one should doubt whether the Triangle (...) Parallelogram may be
rightly said to consist of an in^^nite number of Indivisible Lines, he may,
with Dr. Wa^^^ Page 115.
78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

instead of Lines, conceive infinitely little Parallelograms of the same
infinitely little Height, and it will do as well. For having cut the Base (No
2) into 4 equal parts by transverse Parallels, there will be circumscribed
about the Triangle so many Parallelograms of equal height, being in the same
Proportion as their Bases, by Prop. 28. i. e. increasing in Arithmetical
Progression. In the following Bisection, there will arise 8 such Parallelograms
approaching nearer to the Triangle, in the next 16, etc. so that at length
infinite such Parallelograms of infinitely less height, and ending in the
Triangle itself, will constitute or make an infinite Series of Arithmetical
Proportionals, beginning not from 0 but 1; to which there will answer in the
Parallelogram infinite little Parallelograms of the same height, equal to the
greatest. Whence it again follows, by Consect. 9. Prop. 21. that the one Series
is to the other, i. e. the Triangle to the Parallelogram as 1 to 2; which being
here thus once explained, may be the more easily applied to Cases of the like
nature hereafter.

CONSECTARYS.
I. SInce in like manner in the Circle ( Fig. 79.) the Peripherys at equal
intervals from one another, as so many Elements of the Circle, increase in
Arithmetical Progression; the Sum of these Elements, i. e. the Circle it self
will be to the Sum of as many Terms equal to the greatest Periphery, i. e. to a
Cylindrical Surface, whose Base is the greatest Periphery, and its Altitude the
Semidiameter, as 1 to 2.

II. Hence the Curve Surface of a Cylinder circumscribed about a Sphere, i. e.
whose Altitude is equal to the Diameter, is Quadruple to its Base.

III. Also the Sector of the Circle bac, to a Cylindrical Surface, whose Base
is the Arch bc, but its Altitude the Semidiameter ac, is as 1 to 2.

IV. And because the Surface of the Cone BCD is to its circular Base, as BC to
CA, i. e. as the 2 to 1. by Schol. Prop. 17. the Cylindrical Surface, the
Conical Surface and the Circular one we have hitherto made use of will be as 2,
2 and 1, and consequently continually Proportional.

SCHOLIUM
ALL which may also abundantly appear this way, viz. by putting for the
Diameter of the Circle a, for the Semidiameter a and for the Circumference ea,
you will have the Area of the Circle eaa by Consect. 1 Definit. 31. and
Multiplying ^he height of the Cylinder AB i. e. a by the Periph^ ea yo^'l have
the Cylindrical Surface eaa by Consect. 6. Definit 1^ as now is evident also by
Consect. 1, 2 and 3. Now if y^^ would also have the Surface of the Cone, since
it is side by the Pythagorick Theorem is ^ and the half of that ^ i. e. (b^ No 2
of Schol. Prop. 22.) ^ and this half being multiplied by the Periphery of the
Base ea, you will have (by virtue o^ Consect. 4. Definit. 1.8.) the Su^f^ce of the
Cone ^ i. e. (b^ the Schol. just now cited) ^: So that now appears also the 4th
Consect. of this; because the Rectangle of those Extreme^^ eaa and eaa is
eaa{powerof4} as well as the square of the mean.

Proposition XXXVIII.
A Parallelepiped Euclid. Prop 7 Coroll. lib. 12.
BF (Fig. 77. No 3.) is to a Pyra^^^ ABCDE upon the same Base BD and of the
same height, (...) 3 to 1. This was D^monstrated in Consect. 3. Definit. 17.
bu^ here we shall give you another.

Demonstration.
Suppose 1 the whole Al^itude BE divided into 3 equal Pa^^ by transverse P^ains
Parallel to the Base, then will (by reason (...) the Similitude of the Pyramids
abcd ACBD^ and AECDE) the Bases abcd ABCD and ABC^ be by Consect. 2. Prop. 34
and Consect. 3. Defi^^^ 17 in duplicate Proportion of the Altitudes i. e. in
duplicate Arithmetical Progression 1, ^ 9, moreover 2, bisecting the parts of
the Altitude, the qu^d^angular Sections now double in Number (as the
Indivisibles o^ Elements of the proposed Pyramid) will be as 1, 4, 9, 16, 2^
36, etc. ad Infinitum, all along in a duplicate Arithmetical Proportion; while
in the mean time there answer to them as many Elements in the Parallelepiped
equal to the greatest ABCD, wherefore by Consect. 10. Prop. 21. all the
Indivisibles of the Pyramid taken together will be to all the Indivisibles of
the Parallelepiped also taken together, i. e. the Pyramid it self to the
Parallelepiped, as 1 to 3. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
THis Demonstration may be easily accommodated to all other Pyramids and
Prisms, and also Cones and Cylinders, Euclid. Prop. 10. lib. 12.
since here also ( Fig. 78.) the circular Planes ba, BA, and BA are as the
squares of the Diameters, and so as 1, 4, 9. and so likewise all the other
Elements of the Cone by continual bisection are in duplicate Arithmetical
Progression; when in the mean time there answer to them in the Cylinder as many
Elements equal to the greatest BA etc.

Proposition XXXIX.
A Cylinder is to a Sphere inscribed in it i. e. of the same Base and Altitude
as 3 to 2.

Demonstration.
Suppose 1 ( Fig. 80.) the half Altitude GH (for the same proportion which will
hold when demonstrated of the half Cylinder AK and Hemisphere AGB, will also
hold the same of the whole Cylinder to the whole Sphere) to be divided into 3
equal parts, then will AH, C1, E2, be mean proportionals between the Segments
of the Diameter by Prop. 34 Schol. 2 No 3, and so by Prop. 17. the Rectangles
LHG, L1 G, L2 G equal to the Squares AH, C1, E2, being in order as 9, 8 and 5.
and also 2dly, having bisected the former parts of the height, the six Squares
cutting the Sphere Cross ways will be found to be as 36, 35, 32, 27, 20, 11.
etc. in the progression we have shown at large in Consect. 12. Prop 21.
Wherefore since all the Indivisibles of the Hemisphere, viz. the circular
Planes answering to the Squares of the said ^aniverse Diameters have the same
proportion of Progression, by Pr^^ 32. and there answer to them the like number
of Elements i^ the Cylinder equal to the greatest AH: All these these taken
together will be to all the other taken together i. e, the whole Cylinder AK to
the whol^ Hemisphere AGB by virtue of the aforesaid Co^sect. 12. as 3 to 2
A^chim. 32 (al. 31.) lib. I de Sphaer.
Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM. I.
HOnora^us Fabri elegantly deduces this Prop. a priori, in a g^netick Method in
his Synopsis Geom. p. 318. (which a^ Carotus Renaldinus performs from the same
common Foundationi^ lib. 1. de Compos. and Resol. p. 301, and the following,
but aft^^ a more obscure way and from a demonstration further fetched Fabri's
is after this Method: The whole Figure (81) AL being turned round about BZ, the
Quadrant ADLBA will describe a Hemisphere, the Square AZ a Cylinder and the
triangle BM^ a Cone all of the same Base and Altitude. Since therefore Circl^
are as the squares of their Diameters by Prop. 32. and the Squa^ of GE=to the
Squares of GD and GF taken together (f^ the Square of GF i. e. GBx GD is = BD
or BA or G^ by the Pythag. Theor.) and so the Circle described by GE ^^ be = to
2 Circles described by GD and GF taken together then taking away the Common
Circle described by GF there w^^ remain the circle described by GF within the
Cone equal t^ the Annulus or Ring described by DE about the Sphere. A^ since
this may be demonstrated after the same way in any other case, viz. that a
circle described by g f, will be equal to an A^nulus described by de; it will
follow, that all Rings or An^^ described by the Lines DE or de (i. e. all that
Solid that conceived to be described by the trilinear Figure ADLM turn round)
will be equal to all the Circles described by GF or gf (i^ to the Cone
generated by the Triangle BLM;) and so as the Cone i^ part of the Cylinder
generated by ALL, by the C^^sect. of Prop. 38. so also the Solid made by the
Triline^ ADLM ( viz. the Excess of the Cylinder above the Sphere will be of the
Cylinder, and consequently the Hemisphere Q. E. D.

CONSECTAYS.
HEnce you have a further Confirmation of Consect. 2. Prop. 32. and Prop. 36.
N. 3.

II. Hence also naturally flows a Confirmation of Consect. 2. Definit. 20. and
consequently the Dimension of the Sphere both as to its solidity and Surface.
For putting a for the Diameter of the Sphere and circumscribed Cylinder, and Ea
for the Circumference, the Basis of the greatest Circle will be eaa, and that
multiplied by the Altitude, gives ea{powerof3} for the Cylinder. Therefore by
the present Proposition, ea{powerof3} gives the Solidity of the Sphere (by
making as 3 to 2 so to) This divided by a, will give, by virtue of Consect. 1.
of the aforesaid Def. 20. and Consect. 3 Definit. 17. the Surface of the Sphere
eaa.

III. Therefore the Archim. lib. I. de Sph. and Cylind. Prop. 31. (al. 30).
Surface of the Sphere eaa, is manifestly Quadruple of the greatest Circle eaa.

IV. The Surface of the Cylinder, without the Bases, made by multiplying the
Altitude a by the Circular Periphery of the Base ea, will be eea, equal to the
Surface of the Sphere.

V. Adding therefore the 2 Bases, each whereof is eaa, the whole Surface of the
Cylinder 1 eaa, will be to the Surface of the Sphere eaa as 3 to 2.

VI. The Square of the Diameter aa to the Area of the Circle eaa, is as a to
ea, i. e. as the Diameter to the 4th part of the circumference.

VII. A Cone of the same Base and Altitude with the Sphere and Cylinder, will
be by Consect. 2. of this, Prop. and the Consect. of Prop. 38. ^ ea{powerof3},
and of the Cylinders or ^ ea{powerof3}. Therefore a Cone, Sphere, and Cylinder,
of the same height and diameter, are as 1, 2, 3. The Cone therefore is equal
to the Excess of the Cylinder above the Sphere; as is otherwise evident in
Scholium 1. of this.

SCHOLIUM II.
AND thus we have briefly and directly demonstrated the chief Propositions of
Archimedes, in his 1. Book de Sphaer^ and Cylind. which he has deduced by a
tedious Apparatus, and (...) ^^directly. And now if you have a mind to Survey
the (...) and more perplexed way of Archimedes, and compare it with this shorter
cut we have given you; take it thus: Archimedes thought it necessary first of
all to premise this Lemma; Th^^ all the Conical Surfaces of the Conical Body
made by Circumvolution of the Polygon, or many angled Figure A, B, C, D, E,
etc. (Fig. 82.) inscribed in a Circle, according to Definit. 19. I say, those
Conical Surfaces taken all together, will be equal to a Circle, whose Radius is
a mean Proportional between the Diameter AE and a transverse Line BE, drawn
from one extremity of the Diameter E to the end of the side AB next to the
other extremity. This we will thus demonstrate by the help of specious
Arithmetic: Since BN, HN are the Right Sines of equal Arches, CK and CK whole
Sines, etc. and the Lines BH, GC, etc. parallel; having drawn obliquely the
transverse Lines HC, GD, all the angles at H, C, G, D, etc. will be equal by
Consect. 1. Definit. 11. and consequently all the Triangles BNA, HNI, ICK, etc.
equiangular, both among themselves, and to the ABE; since the angle at B is a
Right one, by Consect. 1 Prop. 33. and the angle at A common with the BNA.
Wherefore as BN to NA or HN to NI
so CK to CI. and GK to KL.
and so DM to ML FM to ME
so EB to BA; and so by making BN, HN, DM, FM= a CK and GK= b, EB= c, for NA,
NI, ML and ME, you may rightly put ea for KI and KL eb for AB, ec. Which being
done you may easily obtain the Conical Surfaces of the inscribed Solid, and the
Area of a Circle whose Radius shall be a mean Proportional between AE and FB,
and it will be evidently manifest, that these two are equal. For, 1. (for
Conical Surfaces) the Diameter of the Base BH=2 a, and the side of the Cone A
B= ec: Therefore (making here o the name of the Reason between the Diameter and
Circumference) the circumference will be 2 oa which multiplied by half the side
ec, gives the Conical Surface oaec, by Consect. 4. Definit. 18. And since the
Circumference BH is as before 2 oa, and the circumference CG = 2 ob, half of
the sum 2 oa+2 ob, viz. oa+ ob is the equated Circumference: which multiplied
by the Side BC= ec gives the Surface of the truncated Cone BHGC= oaec- obec, by
Consect 5. of the aforesaid Def. since, lastly, the Surface of the truncated
Cone DFGC is equal to one, and likewise the conical Surface EDF to the other,
by adding you will have the Sum of all 40 oaec+2 obec.

2. (for the Area of the Circle) the Diameter AE is =4 ea+2 eb, and BE= c: the
Rectangle of these is =4 eac+2 ebc = (which also is evidently equal to the
Rectangle of all the transverse Lines BH, CG, DF into the side A B, as
Archimedes proposes in the matter) = to the Square of the Radius in the Circle
sought, because the Radius is a mean Proportional between AE and BE, and so
equal to ^, so that the whole Diameter is ^. Therefore, 2. the circumference of
this Circle will be ^, i. e. ^: which multiplied by half the Semidiameter, i.
e. by ^ gives the Area of the Circle sought ^. But this Root extracted is ^,
equal to the superior Sum of the conical Surfaces. Q. E. D.

Having thus demonstrated the Lemma, we will easily demonstrate with Archimedes
(tho not after his way) That the Surface of any Sphere, is Quadruple of the
greatest Circle in it, which is already evident from the 3d Consect. For since
all the conical Surfaces of the inscribed Solid taken together, by the
preceding Lemma, are equal to the Area of a Circle whose Radius is a mean
Proportional between the Diameter AE and the Transverse EB; and this mean
Proportional approaches always so much nearer to the Diameter AE, and those
Surfaces so much nearer to the Surface of the Sphere, by how many the more
sides the inscribed Figure is conceived to have, by Consect. 1 and 2. Def. 18.
if you conceive in your mind the Bisection of the Arches AB, BC, etc. to be
continued in Infinitum, it will necessarily follow, that all those conical
Surfaces will at length end in the Surface of the Sphere it self, and that mean
Proportional in the diameter AE, and so the Surface of the Sphere will be equal
to a Circle, whose Radius is the Diameter AE, But that Circle would be
Quadruple of the greatest Circle in the present Sphere, by Prop. 35. Therefore
the Surface of the Sphere is Quadruple of that Circle also. Q. E. D.

Hence also it would be very easy to deduce with Archimedes (tho again after
another way) that celebrated Proposition, which we have already demonstrated
from another Principle in the Prop. of this Schol. viz. That a Cylinder is to a
Sphere of the same Diameter and Altitude, as 3 to 2. For by putting a for the
Diameter and Altitude, and ea for the Circumference, the Area of the Circle,
will be eaa; and this Area being multiplied by the Altitude a, gives
ea{powerof3} for the Cylinder, by Consect. 5. Definit. 16. and the same
Quadruple, i. e. eaa multiplied by a gives ea{powerof3} for the Sphere, by
Consect. 1. Definit. 20. and Consect. 3. Definit. 17. Wherefore the Cylinder
will be to the Sphere as to, i. e. in the same Denominator as ^ to ^, i. e. as
6 to 4, or 3 to 2. Q.E.D.

Whence it is evident, that the Dimension of the Sphere would be every ways
absolute if the Proportion of the Diameter to the Circumference were known;
which now with Archimedes, we will endeavor to Investigate.

Proposition. XL.
THE Proportion of the Periphery of a Circle Archim. Cyclom. prop. 2
to the Diameter, is less than 3 ^ or ^ to 1. and greater than 3 ^ to 1.

Demonstration.
The whole force of this Proposition consists in these, that, 1. Any Figure
circumscribed about a Circle, has a greater Periphery than the Circle, but any
inscribed one a less. 2. The Periphery of a circumscribed Figure of 96 sides,
has a less Proportion to the Diameter, than 3 ^ to 1.

To demonstrate this second, we will enquire 3. the Proportion of one side of
such a Figure whether circumscribed or inscribed after the following way.

For the first part of the Proposition.

Suppose the Arch BC ( Fig. 84. N. 1.) of 30 degrees, and its Tangent BC making
with the Radius AC a Right Angle, to make the Triangle ABC half of an
Equilateral one, so that AB shall be to BC in double Reason, viz. as 1000 to
500; which being supposed, AC will be the Root of the Difference of the Squares
BC and AB, i. e. a little greater than 866, but not quite ^.

Then continually Bisecting the Angles BAC by AG, GAC by AH, HAC by AK, KAC by ALL, BC is half the side of a circumscribed Hexagon, GC the half side of a
Dodecagon (or 12 sided Figure) HC of a Polygon of 24 sides, KC of one of 48;
lastly, LC of one of 96 sides; and by N. 3. Schol. 3. Prop. 34. GC will be to
AC as BC to BA+AC, and also HC to AC as GC to GA+AC, etc. Wherefore

In the first Bisection, of what parts GC is 500, of the same will AC be 1866
and a little more, and AG (which is the Root of the Sum of the GC and AC) 1931
^+.

In the second Bisection, of what parts HC is 500, of the same will AC be found
to be 3797 ^+and AH 3830 ^+.

In the third Bisection, of what parts KL is 500 of the same will AC be 7628 ^+
and AK 7644 ^+.

In the 4th Bisection, of what parts LC is 500 of the same will AC be 15272 ^+.

Now therefore LC taken 96 times, will give 48000 the Semi-periphery of the
Polygon, which has the same Proportion to the Semi-diameter AC 15272 ^ as the
whole Periphery to the whole Diameter. But 48000 contains 15272 ^, 3 times, and
moreover 2181 ^ remaining parts, which are less than ^ part of the division,
for multiplied by 7 they give only 1526 ^+.

Therefore it is evident, that the Periphery of this Polygon (and much more the
Periphery of a less Circle than that) will have a less Proportion to the
Diameter, than 3 ^ to 1. Which is one thing we were to demonstrate.

For the 2d Part of the Prop.

SUppose the Arch BC to be (No 2.) of 60 Degr, that is the Angle BAC at the
Periphery of 30 Since the Angle at B is a right one by Consect. 1. Prop. 33.
the Triangle ABC will be again half an Equilateral one, and BC the whole side
of an Hexagon, and GC of a Dodecagon, etc. So that putting for BC 1000 (as
before we put 500 for the side of the Hexagon) let AC be 2000 and AB the Root
of the difference of the Squares BC and AC i. e. less than 1732 ^ viz. 1732 and
not quite ^.

Then bisecting continually the Angles BAC, GAC, etc. since the Angles at the
Periphery BAG, GAC, GCB, standing on equal Arches BG and GC, are equal by Prop.
33. and the Angle at C, (common to the Triangles GCF and GCA) and the others at
H, K, L are all right ones by Consect. 1. of the aforesaid Prop. these 2
Triangles CGF and CGA are equiangular and consequently by Prop. 34. the
Perpendicular GC in the one will be to the Perpendicular GA in the other as the
Hypothenuse CF in the one to the Hypoth. AC in the other i. e. (by the
foundation we have laid in the former part of the Demonstration of No 3, Schol.
3. Prop. 34.) as BC to AB+AC; and in like manner in the following HC will be to
HA as GC to AG+AC, etc. Wherefore.

In the first Bisection, of what parts GC is 1000 of the same AG will be a
little less then 3732 ^; and AC (which is the Root of the Sum of the AG and GC)
will be a little less then 3863 ^.

In the second Bifection, of what parts GC is 1000 of the same will AH be a
little less then 7595 ^ and AC a little less then 766 ^.

In the third Bisection, of what parts KC is 1000 of the same will AK be a
little less then 15257 ^ and AC a little less 15290 ^.

In the fourth Bisection, of what parts LC is 1000 of the same will AL be a
little less then 30547 ^; and AC a little less then 30564, and consequently if
LC be put 500, AC will be less then 15282.

Now therefore LC taken 96 times will give 48000 for the Periphery of the
inscribed Polygon, and 15282 and a little less for the Diameter AC. But 48000
contains 15282 thrice, and moreover a remainder of 2154 parts, which are more
then ^ of the Divisor; for ^ of this number makes 215 ^ and so ^ makes 2150 ^
i. e. 2152 ^. Therefore it is evident that the Periphery of this Inscribed
Polygon (and much more the Periphery of a Circle greater then that) will be to
it is Diameter in a greater proportion then 3 ^ to 1, which is the 2d thing.

SCHOLIUM
IF any one had rather make use of the small numbers of Archimedes, which he
chose for this purpose, by putting in the first part of the Demonstration, for
AB 306 and for BC 153, in the second for AC 1560 and for BC 780, by the like
process of Demonstration, he may infer the same with Archimedes. We like our
Numbers best, though somewhat large, because they may be remembered, and are more
proportionate to things, and make also the latter part of our Demonstration
like the former. The Proportion in the mean while of the Diameter to the
Periphery of the Circle by the Archimedean way is included within such narrow
Limits, that they only differ from one another ^ or ^ parts; for ^ Subtracted
from ^ leave ^, as 3 ^ or ^ and 3 ^ or ^ if they are reduced to the same
Denomination make on the one hand ^ on the other ^. Hence it would be easy,
having divided the difference ^ into 2 Parts, to express a middle proportion of
the Periphery to the Diameter between the 2 Archimedean and Extreme ones as in
these Numbers, 1561 to 4970, (or by dividing both sides by 5) as 3123 to 994,
or (dividing both sides by 7) as 446 ^ to 142, or (by dividing again by 2) as
223 ^ to 71, etc.

While these Numbers become as fit for use as those of Archimedes, which we
therefore use before any other, particularly in Dimensions that don't require an
exact Niceness; where they do those may be made use of exhibited by Ptolomey
Vieta, Ludolphus a Ceulea, Metius, Snellius, Lansbergius, Hugeus, etc. as if
The Diameter be The Circumference will be 10,000,000 31, 416, 666. Ptolomey.
10000,000,000 31, 415, 926, 535. Vieta. 100,000,000,000,000,000000 314, 159,
265, 358, 979, 323, 846, etc. Ludolph. a Ceulen.


Proposition XLI.
THe Area of a Circle has the same proportion to the Square of it Diameter, as
the 4th part of the Circumference to the Diameter.

Demonstration.
Though we have before Demonstrated this Truth in Consect. 6. Prop. 39. yet
here we will give it you again after another way. Since therefore the
Circumference is a little less then 3 ^, and ^ little more than 3 ^ Diameters,
for this excess putting z if the Diameter be 1 we will call the Circumference
3+z therefore the 4th Part of it will be ^: And the Area of the Circle (by
Multiplying the half Semidiameter) i. e. by the Circumference, you will have both
^ and the square of the Diameter =^ Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore if the Archim. Prop. 3. Cyclom.
Proportion of Archimedes be near enough truth to be made use of, viz. 22 to 7;
the Ar^^ of the Circle will be to the Square of the Diameter as 11 to 14
because the quarter part of 22, i. e. 5 or ^ to the Diam. 7 ^ is in the same
Proportion.

Proposition XLII.
THE Diameter Eucl. last Prop. lib. 10.
of a Square AC ( Fig. 83.) is incommensurable to the side AB (and consequently
also to the whole Periphery) i. e. it bears a Proportion to (...) that cannot
be exactly expressed by Numbers.

Demonstration.
For, if for AB you put 1, BC will be als^ 1, and by the Pythagorick Theorem AC
will be = 2. Therefore by Consect. 4. Definit. 30. AC is incommensurable to the
side AB, etc. Q.E.D.

CONSECTARY I.
IT is notwithstanding Commensurable in Power; for its Square is to the Square
of the Side as 2 to 1.

CONSECTARY II.
NOW if the Proportion of the side or whole Periphery ABCDA, to the Diam. AC is
to be expressed by Numbers somewhat near, as we have done in the Diameter and
Circumference of a Circle; then making the side AB=100, the Diameter is greater
than 141 ^, less than 141 ^.

Proposition XLIII.
THE Area of a Circle is Incommensurable to the Square of the Diameter.

Demonstration.
For dividing the Semidiameter CD ( Fig. 85.) into two equal Parts (and
consequently the Diameter DF into 4) AC will be 2. viz. 4 and AC 3. by Schol.
2. Prop. 34. N. 3. the sum 4+3, and the sum of as many equal to the greatest AC
4. Having moreover Bisected the Parts of the Semidiameter, AC will =4 or the
16, ac=15, AC=12, AC=7; the sum ^; and the sum of as many equal to the greatest
AC is =16, etc. And thus the last sums will be the Square Numbers increasing in
Quadruple Proportion; but the former Sums will be always composed of the
Rational Root of every such Square, and of several other irrational Roots of
Numbers unevenly decreasing; so that it will be impossible to express those
former Sums by any Rational Number, by what we have said in Schol. 2. Definit.
30. Wherefore all the Indivisibles of the Quadrant ADC are to as many of the
Square ACDE equal to the greatest, i. e. the Quadrant it self ADC to the Square
ACDE (and consequently the whole Area of the Circle to this circumscribed
Square) will be as a Surd Quantity to a true and truly Square Number, i. e. the
Area of the Circle will be Incommensurable to the Square of the Diameter, by
Consect. 4. of the said Definit. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
AND because the fourth part of the Circumference ha^^ the same Proportion to
the Diameter, as the Area of the Circle to the Square of the Diameter, by Prop.
41. Therefore also that will be Incommensurable to this, and consequently the
whole Circumference will be so to the Diameter.

SCHOLIUM.
WHerefore it is somewhat Wonderful, which G. G. Leibnitius Acta Erudit. Ann.
82. p. 44 and the following.
tells us, that the Square of the Diameter being 1, the Area of the Circle will
be ^, etc. ad Infinitum. i. e. by adding 1 ^ and ^, etc.) to ^, etc. i. e. to
the Sum of infinite Fractions whose common Numerator is 2. But their
Denominators Squares lessened by Unity, and taken out of the Series of the
Squares of Natural Numbers by every fourth, omitting the Intermediate ones:
Which Sum might seem expressible in Numbers, since all its parts are Fractions
reducible to a common Denominaton; while notwithstanding Leibnitius himself
confesses, that the Circle is not Commensurable to the Square, nor expressible
by any Number.

CHAP. VII. Of the Powers of the Sides of Triangles, and other Regular Figures,
etc.
Proposition XLIV.
IN Right-angled Triangles Euc. 47. Lib. 1.
(ABC, Fig. 86.) the Square of the Side (BC) that subtends the Right-angle, is
equal to the Squares of the other Sides (AB and AC) taken together.

Demonstration.
Though we have demonstrated this Truth more than once in the foregoing
Proposition; yet here we will confirm it again as follows. Having described on
each side of the Square BE a Semicircle, which will all necessarily touch one
another in one point, and be equal to the Semicircle, BAC, if you conceive as
many Triangles inscribed also equal to BAC; it will be evident that the Square
BE will contain the said 4 Triangles; and besides the little Square FGHI, whose
side FI, v. g. is the difference between the greater side of the Triangle CI,
and the less CF, (for because the less side CF=BA, lying in the first
Semicircle, if it be continued to I in the second Semicircle makes CI=CA the
greater side of the other Triangle, and so in the others. From thence it is
evident, That as the Angles ABC, and ACB together make one right one; so
likewise BCF (= CBA) and ECF make also one right one; and consequently ECF is
=ACB, and the Arch and the Line EI= to the Arch and the Line AB, etc.)
Wherefore, if the greatest side of the given Triangle BC or BD, etc. be called
a, and AC, b and the least AC, or CF, etc. be called c; the (...) of the side
BC, will be = aa, and the Area of each Triangle bc: and so the 4 Triangles
together 2 bc: but the side of the middle little Square will be b- c, and its
Square bb+ cc=2 bc: Wherefore if you add to this the 4 Triangles*

The Sum of all, i. e. the whole Square BE will be bb+ cc= aa. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. HEnce having the sides that comprehend the Right-ang^^ given, AC= b and AB=
c, the Hypothenuse or Ba^ that subtends the Right-angle BC will be = bb+ cc.

II. But if BC be given = a and AC= b, and you are (...) find AB= x; because
xx+ bb= aa; you will have (taking awa^ from both sides bb) xx= aa- bb: therefore
x, i. e. AB= aa- bb.

III. If 2 Right-angled Triangles have their Hypothenus^ and one Leg equal, the
other will also be equal.

Proposition XLV.
IN Obtuse-angled Triangles (Fig. 87. N. 1. the Square of the Ba^ or greatest
Side BC that subtends the Obtuse-angle BAC, is eq^^ to the Squares of Eucl.
prop. 12. lib. 2.
the other 2 Sides (AB and AC) taken togethe^ and also to 2 Rectangles (CAD)
made by one of (...) Sides which contain the Obtuse-angle (AC) and (...)
continuation AD to the Perpendicular BD let fall fr^^ the other side.

Demonstration.
If BC be called a, AB= c, AC= b, AD= x, CD will b^ = b+ x. Therefore BD= cc-
xx, by Consect. 2. of the pr^ceding Prop. In like manner if CD= ^ be subtracted
from the BC= aa, you will have ^ to the same BD. Therefore ^, i. e. (adding on
both sides xx) ^. i. e. (adding on both sides bb and 2 bx) ^. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
IF in this last Equation you subtract from both Sides cc+ bb then will ^ and
(if you moreover divide both Sides by 2 b) you will have ^: Which is the Rule,
when you have the Sides of an Obtuse-angled Triangle given, to find the Segment
AD, and consequently the Perpendicular BD.

Proposition XLVI.
IN Acute-angled Triangles Eucl. Prop. 13. l. 2.
the Square of any side ( e. g. B. C, Fig. 87. N. 2.) subtending any of the
Angles, as A is equal to the Squares of the other 2 sides (AB and AC) taken
together, less 2 Rectangles (CAD) made by one side, containing the Acute-angle
(CA) and its Segment AD reaching from the Acute-angle (A) to the Perpendicular
(BE) let fall from the other side.

Demonstration.
Make again BC= a, AC= b, AB= c, AD= x; then will CD= b- x. Therefore cc- xx=
BD, and ^ ( i. e. BC-CD) will also be = BD.

Therefore ^.

i. e. (adding to both sides xx)

^,

i. e. (adding on both sides bb, and subtracting 2 bx)

^. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. IF in the last Equation, except one, you add on both sides bb, and subtract
aa, you will have ^, and, if moreover you divide hoth sides by 2 b, you will have ^:
Which is the Rule, having 3 sides given in an Acute-angled Triangle, to find
the Segment AD, and consequently the Perpendicular BD.

Knowing therefore the Segments AD and CD, and also the Perpendicular BD in
Oblique-angled Triangles, whether Obtuse-angled or Acute-angled, when moreover
the sides BC an^ AB are likewise given, the Angles of either Right-angled
Triangles or Oblique-angled ones, will be known; so that the la^^ Case of Plane
Trigonometry, which we deferred from Prop. 34 to this place, may hence receive
its solution.

Proposition XLVII.
THE Square of the Tangent of a Eucl. 36. Lib. 3.
Circle, is equal to a Rectangle contained under the whole Secant DA, and that
part of it whi^^ is without the Circle DE, whether the Secant pass through the
Center o^ not.

Demonstration.
For in the first Case, if CB and CE are = b, DE= x, then will CD= b+ x, and
AD=2 b+ x: therefore

ADE=2 ^. therefore, if from the CD you substract CB= bb the remainde^ will be
^ = BD= ADE. Q.E.D.

In the second Case, the lines remaining as before, make D^= y, FE or FA=Z:
therefore the ADE will be = ^, but the FC equal to the EC-FE= ^ i. e. ^. But
the same Square FD is = ^. Wherefore taking away from these equal Square^ the
common one ZZ you will have 2 ^ i. e. pr. 1st Case = BD. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. THerefore the Rectangles of diverse secants (as of AD^ and ade in Fig. 88,
n. 1.) which are equal to the sam^ Square. BD, are equal also to one another;
which the la^^ Equation in our Demonstration (^ is an ocular proof of.

Page 133.
89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96



II. Therefore by Prop. 19. as a D to AD so is reciprocally DE to D e in the
Fig. of the 2 Case.

III. Tangents to the same Circle from the same Point, as DB and D b (n. 3.)
are equal; because the Square of each is equal to the same Rectangle.

IV. Nor can there be more Tangents drawn from the same point then two: For if
besides DB and D b, D c could also touch the Circle, then it would be equal to
them. By Cons. 2. but that is absurd by Cons. 3. Def. 7.

SCHOLIUM I.
HEnce is evident, the Original of the Geometrical Constructions, which Carts
makes use of, p. 6, and 7. in resolving these 3 Equations, ^, and ^. For in the
First case, since he makes NO or NL ( Fig. 89. 11. 1.) or NP a, and the Tangent
ZMb, make MNO through the Center xx will =Z the quantity sought; which thus
appears: Making MO=Z, NM will =Z a, and its ^. But the OMP (which is by the
present Prop. = LM, i. e. bb) together with the NL or NP i. e. aa is = NM by
the Pathagor. Theor. Therefore ^. i e. (taking away from both sides aa) ZZ- a
Z= bb i. e. (by adding on both sides aZ) ZZ= aZ+ bb: Which is the Equation
proposed. In the Second Case, if you make PM=Z (as Carts makes it) you will have
^, and to this again as before you will have = bb+ aa. Therefore ZZ+ aZ= bb:
Therefore ZZ=- aZ+ bb: Which is the very Equation of the second Case. In the
third Case, whether you make the w ole Secant RM (N. 2) or that part of it
without the Circle QM=Z, the Root sought, there will come out on both sides the
same Equation of the third Case; and so it is manifest, that this Equation has
those 2 Roots. For if RM be =Z (adding + to the Fig. of Carts the Line NO
which shall bisect QR, and makes OM=LN) OR or OQ will be =Z- a, and so the
OQ=ZZ- aZ+ aa, and this together with the RMQ (which is by virtue of the pres.
Prop. = LM) = NQ. i. e. OM, i. e. ZZ- ^, i. e. (by adding aZ and taking away
aa) ^; i. e. (taking away bb) ZZ=aZ- bb: Which is the the very Equation of the
third Case. But if QM be made =Z, OQ or OR will = -Z, and its = ^, as well as
the former, and so all the rest. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM. II.
NOW if you would immediately deduce these Rules by the present Proposition,
without the Pythagorick Theorem. It may ( e. g. in the first Case) be done much
shorter thus: If MO=Z and NO or NP= a, then will PM=Za: Therefore OMP= ^, or
the LM, by the pres. Proposition; by adding therefore to both sides aZ, you will
have ZZ=aZ+ bb, which is the very Equation of the first Case. In the second
Case, if MR be Z, QM or PR will = a-Z: Therefore RMP ^ = bb, i. e. aZ= bb+ZZ,
i. e. aZ- bb=ZZ; but if QM=Z, RM will = a-Z. Therefore RMP aZ-ZZ= bb, as
before, etc.

SCHOLIUM III.
FRom the 2 Consect. of the present Proposition, flows another Rule for solving
the last Case of Plain Trigonometry, which we solved in the Consect. of the
foregoing Prop. viz. If you have all the three sides of the Oblique-angled
Triangle BCD ( Fig. 90) given, if from the Center C, at the distance of the
lesser side CB you describe a Circle, then will, by Consect. 2. of the present
Proposition, BD the Base of the Triangle (here we call the greatest side of the
Triangle the Base, or in an Equicrural Triangle, one of the greatest) will be
to AD, (the sum of the Sides DC+CB) as DE the difference of the Sides, to DF
the Segment of the Base without the Ciecle; which being found, if the remainder
of the Base within the Circle be divided into two equal parts, you will have both
FG and GB, as also DG; which being given, by help of the Right-angled GBC and
GDC all the Angles required may be found.

Proposition XLVIII.
IN any Quadrilateral Figure Ptol. lib. I. Almagesh.
ABCD (Fig. 91. N. 1.) inscribed in a Circle, the of the Diagonals AC and BD is
equal to the two Rectangles of the opposite sides AB into CD, and AD into BC.

Demonstration.
Having drawn AE so that the Angle BAE shall be equal to the Angle CAD, the
Triangles thereby formed (for they have the other Angles EBA and ACD in the
same Segment equal, by virtue of Consect. 1. Prop. 33.) will be Equiangular one
to another and consequently (by Prop. 34) as AC to AD so AB to BE. Wherefore by
making AC= a and CD= ea, and AB= b, BE will be = eb. In like manner when in the
BAC and EAD, the respective Angles are equal ( viz. adding the common part EAF
to BAE and CAD, equal by Constr.) and besides the angles BCA and EDA in the
same Segment are also equal; those Triangles will also be Equiangular, and AD
will be to DE as AC to CB; wherefore by putting, as before, a for AC, and oa
for CB, and c for AD, DE will = oc. Therefore the whole BD= eb+ oc. The
Rectangle therefore of AC into BD will = eba+ oca=; the Rectangle of AB into
CD= eba+ of AD into BC= oac. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIUM
IN Squares and Rectangles ( N. 2.) the thing is self-evident. For in Squares
if the side be a, the Diagonals AC and BD will be 2 aa, and so their Rectangle
=2 aa will be manifestly equal to the two Rectangles of the opposite sides. In
Oblongs, if the two opposite sides are a and the others b. the Diagonals will
be ^, and their Rectangle aa+ bb manifestly equal to the two Rectangles of the
opposite Sides.

Proposition XLIX.
THe side (AB) of an Equilateral Triangle (ABC, Fig. 92. N. 1.) inscribed in a
Ptol. lib. I. Almagesh.
Circle, is in Power triple of the Radius (AD) i. e. of the of AD.

Demonstration.
MAke AD or FD= a, and so its Square aa. Since Therefore, having drawn DF through
the middle of AB, or the middle of the Arch AFB let DE be = a; for the angles
at E are right ones, by Consect. 5. Definit. 8. and the Hypothenuses AD, AF,
are equal, by Schol. of Definition 15. but the side AE is common. Therrefore
the other Sides FE and ED are equal by, by Consect. 3. Prop. 43.) and the of
the latter is aa, which subtracted from aa leaves aa for the of AE. Therefore
the line AE is ^, and consequently AB ^, i. e. ^, i. e. ^: therefore AB=3 aa. Q
E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. IF the Radius of a Circle be = a, the side of an Inscribed Regular Triangle
will be ^, e. g. if AD be 10, A B will be ^; and if AD be 10,000,000, A B will
be ^, i. e. 17320508, and the Perpendicular DE 5000,000.

II. Hence it is evident, that in the genesis of a Tetraedrum proposed in Def.
22, that the elevation CE ( Fig. 44, N. 1.) is to the remaining part of the
Diameter of the Sphere CF as 2 to 1; for making the Radius C B= a and its aa,
the of A B or BE will =3 aa, by the present Proposition. Therefore the of CB
being subtracted from the of BD or BE, there remains the of CE=2 aa. But since
CE, C B, CF, are continual Proportionals, by N. 3. Schol. 2. Prop. 34. CE will
be to CF as the of CE to the Square of C B, by virtue of Prop. 35. i. e. as 2
to 1.

SCHOLIUM.
HEnce you have the Euclidean way of generating Eucl. 12 lib. 12.
a Tetraedrum, and inscribing it in a given Sphere, when he bids you divide the
Diameter OF of a given Sphere so that EC shall be 2 and CF 1, and then at OF to
erect the Perpendicular CA, and by means thereof to describe the Circle A BD,
and to inscribe therein an Equilateral Triangle, etc.

Proposition L.
THE Side (AB) of a Regular Tetragon (or Square) (ABCD, Fig. 92. N. 2.) is
double in Power of the Radius (AD).

Demonstration.
For having drawn the Diameter AC and BD, the Triangle AO B is Right-angled,
and consequently, by the Pythagorick Theorem, if the of AO and BO be made equal
to aa, then will the of A B=2 aa, Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore when the Radius of the Circle AO is made = a, the side of the A B
will =2 aa, e. g. if AO be 10, A B will be 200; and if AO be 10,000,000, A B
will be 200,000,000,000,000, i. e. 14142136.

Proposition LI.
THE side AB of a Regular Pentagon Eucl. Prop. 13. lib. 13.
(ABCDE) (Fig. 93. N. 1.) is equal in Power to the side of an Hexagon and
Decagon inscribed in the same Circle, i. e. the of AB is equal to the Squares
AF and AO taken together.

Demonstration.
Make AO= a and AF= b, A B= x: We are to demonstrate that xx= aa+ bb: which may
be done by finding the side A B by the parts BH and HA, Eucl. Prop. 10. lib. 13.
after the following way: First of all the angle AO B is 72, and the others in
that Triangle at A and B 54. But BGG is also 54, as subtending the Decagonal
Arch BF of 36, and also one half of it FG of 18. Therefore the A BO and H BO
are Equiangular, and you will have As A B to BO so BO to BH ^

Secondly, in the Triangle BFA the Angles at B and A are equal by N. 3.
Consect. 5. Def. 8. and by virtue of the same also the Angles at F and A in the
FHA are so too. Wherefore the BFA and FFA are Equiangular, and you will have

As BA to AF so AF to AH ^

Therefore the whole line A B (because the part AH is found =^ and BH=^) will
be ^, which was first made = x; so that now ^ is = x, and multiplying both
sides by x, aa+ bb= xx. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
THerefore if the Radius of a Circle be (a) the side of a Pentagon A B will be
^.

CONSECTARY II.
THerefore the AI= ^ and OI= ^ i. e. ^. Therefore OI= ^. Which yet may be
expressed otherwise, viz. OI= ^.

Demonstration.
Make Eucl. Prop. 1. lib. 14.
OA or OF ( N. 2.) as before = a, AF= b, and FI now = x; then will OI= a- x and
having drawn the Arch FK at the Interval AF, so that AK may be equal to this,
and FI= IK= x; then will the angle IKA=F72. Therefore the angle AKO=108; and
since KOA is 36, KAO will be also 36, and so KA=KO=AF= b. Wherefore OI is = b+
x, which was above a- x. Therefore 2OI= ^, i. e. a+ b. Therefore OI= ^.

CONSECTARY III.
THerefore the difference between the Perpendicular of the Triangle DE ( Fig.
92 and 93. N. 1.) and the Perpendicular of the Pentagon OI is = b, by virtue of
Consect. 2. of this and of the Demonstrat. of Prop. 49.

CONSECTARY IV.
HEnce is also evident, by the present Proposition, that which in Fabri's
Genesis of an Icosaedr. Def. 22. we said, viz. that (See Fig. 46.) B a is equal
to the side of a Pentagon BA, because, viz. Fa is =to the Semidiameter OB, and
BF is the side of a Decagon.

Proposition LII.
THE side of an Hexagon is in Power equal to the Radius, as being it self equal
to it by N. 1. Schol. Def. 15.

Proposition LIII.
THE side of a Regular Octagon (ABCD, etc. Fig. 94.) is equal in Power to half
the side of the Square, and the difference (PB) of that half side from the
Radius, taken together.

Demonstration.
For that the of AB is = to the of AP+ BP, is evident from the Pythag. Theor.
But that PO is =PA half the side of the Square, is evident from the equality of
the Angles PAO and POA, since each is a half right one or 45. Wherefore the
side of the Octagon is equal in Power to half the side of the Square, etc. Q.
E. D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore, if the Radius be = a, AP will be, by virtue of the Pythag. Theor.
=^ and P B= ^ of that aa; and of this ^. Therefore the Sum of AB= ^. Therefore
the side of the Octagon = ^. e. g. If AO be 10, AB will be ^, and if the Radius
AO 10000000, AB will be ^, by virtue of the present Cons. or from the Prop. it
self, if AO be 10000000, AP will be virtue of the Cons. of Prop. 50.=7071068,
and consequently BP=2928932 The Squares of these added together give the AB,
and the Root thence extracted A B=7653 668.

Proposition LIVE.
THE side of a Regular Decagon Eucl. 9. lib. 13. Corol.
is equal in Power to the greatest part of the side of an Hexagon cut in mean
and extreme Reason.

Demonstration.
Suppose BD ( Fig. 95.) divided in mean and extreme Reason in E, and BA to be
joined to it long ways = to the side of a Decagon inscribed in the same Circle,
whose Radius is BC or AC= BD. Now we are to demonstrate that DE the greatest
part of the de of the Hexagon BD divided in mean and extreme Reason, is equal
to the side of a Decagon BA, and the Power of the one equal to the Power of the
other. Because the Angle AC B is 36, A BC and A72, and consequently C BD 108,
BCD and D will be each 36, and so the whole ACD 72. (that so CD may pass
precisely through the other end of the side of the Pentagon AF.) Wherefore the
ABC and ADC are Equiangular, and AD to AC i. e. BD as AC i. e. BD

to AB. Therefore the whole line AD is divided in mean and extreme Reason. But
BD is also divided in the same Reason by Hyp. Wherefore As AD to D B and D B to
BA, So DB to DE and DE to E B.


Therefore D B is in the same Proportion to DE as D B to BA. Therefore DE is =
BA, and the Power of the one to the Power of the other. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
THerefore, if the Radius of the side of the Hexagon is a the side of the
Decagon will be ^, by Schol. 2. Prop. 27. e. g. if the Radius be 10, the side
of the Decagon will be ^, and if the Radius be put 10000000, the side of the
Decagon will be = ^, viz. by adding the Square of the Radius and the Square of
half the Radius into one Sum; whence you will have the side of the Decagon
=6180340; the half whereof 3090170 gives the difference between the
Perpendiculars of the Triangle and the Pentagon, by Cons. 3. Prop. 51.

II. The side therefore of the Pentagon is by Prop. ^; for the Square of the
Hexagon is aa or ^ aa, the of the Decagon ^: the Root extracted out of the Sum
of these is the side of the Pentagon, viz. ^ e. g. if the Radius be 10, the
side of the Pentagon will be ^, and if the Radius be put 10000000, since the
side of the Hexagon is equal to it, and the side of the Decagon 6180340, their
Squares being added into one Sum, the Root extracted out of that Sum will give
the side of the Pentagon, 1755704 nearly; and the sides being collected into
one sum, the half of it 8090170 will give the Perpendicular in the Pentagon OI,
by Consect. 2. Prop. 51.

SCHOLIUM I.
TO illustrate what we have deduced in the Consectarys of Prop. 51, you may
take the following Notes. If a be put =10 or ^, the side of the Decagon will be
= ^, i. e. ^ nearly = b; therefore the aa=^ and the bb=^: therefore aa+ bb or
the AB=^, the Perpendicular OI=^ divided by 2, that is, ^. Now the of AI is of
the A B=^ the OI=^ =^. Now if you add the AI and the OI, the sum will be = AO=
^, i. e. ^, or near 100. Thus likewise, since the Perpendicular above found OI,
in Consect. 1. may be also determined by ^, since aa is = ^, and 3 aa ^,
subtracting from it bb=^ the Remainder will be ^, and this being divided by 4,
you will have the OI=^. and the Root of it extracted ^ nearly; so that those two
different quantities in Consect. 1. will rightly express the same Perpendicular
OI.

SCHOLIVM II.
NOW therefore as we have Practical Rules to determine Arithmetically the sides
of the Pentagon and Decagon, so also they may be found Geometrically by what we
have demonstrated. For if the Semidiameter C B ( Fig. 96. N. 1.) be divided
into 2 parts, EC will = a; and erecting perpendicularly the Radius CD= aDE will
= ^. Moreover if you cut of OF equal to it, FC will be = ^= to the side of the
Decagon, by Consect. 1. Having therefore drawn DF, which is equal in Power to
the Radius or Side of the Hexagon DC, and the side of the Decagon FC together,
by the Pythag. Theorem it will be the side of the Pentagon sought. Much to the
same purpose is also this other new Construction of the same Problem, wherein
BG ( Numb. 2.) is the side of the Hexagon B D the side of the Square, to which
GF is made equal, so that FC is that side of the Decagon, and DF of the
Pentagon; which we thus demonstrate after our way: Having bisected GH the side
of an Equil. Triangle, the Square of GE will be ^, by Prop. 48. which being
subtracted from the Square of GF=2 aa, viz. ^ aa, by Prop. 49. there will
remain for the Square of OF ^ aa, and for the line OF ^, and for FC ^, which is
the side of the Decagon, as DF of the Pentagon, after the same way as before.

Proposition LV.
THE side of a Quindecagon (or 15 sided Figure) is equal in Power to the half
Difference between the side of the Equil. Triangle and the side of the
Pentagon, and moreover to the Difference of the Perpendiculars let fall on both
sides taken together.

Demonstration.
For if AB ( Fig. 97.) be the side of an Inscribed Triangle, and De the side of
a Pentagon parallel to it; AD will be the side of the Quindecagon to be
inscribed, by Consect. 4. Def. 15. But this side AD in the little Right-angled
Triangle, is equal in Power to the side AH (which is the half Difference
between AB and DE) and the side HD (which is the difference between the
Perpendiculars CF and CG) taken together by the Pythag. Theor. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce if we call the Side A B of the Equil. c, and mak^ the side of the
Pentagon DE= d, AH will = ^ HD is = b, by Consect. 3. of Prop. 51. Since
therefore the AH is = ^ and the HD=^ the AD w^^^ ^

Therefore the side of the Quindecagon = ^that is, Collecting the Square of the
half difference of the side of the Triangle and Pentagon, and the Square of the
difference of the Perpendiculars into one Sum, and then Extracting the Square
Root of that Sum, you will have the side of the Quindecagon sought. E. 9. if the
Radius CI be made 10000000 the difference of the sides of the Triangle
17320508, and of the side of the Pentagon 11757704 will be 5564804, and the
half of this 2782402; but the difference of the Perpendicular CF from the
Perpendicular CG, is 3090170.

The Squares therefore of these Two last Numbers being Collected into one Sum,
nnd the Root Extracted will give the side of the Quindecagon 4158234 nearly.

SCHOLIUM.
HEre we will show the Excellent use of these last Proposition^ in making the
Tables of Signs. For having found above, supposing the Radius of 10000000
parts, the sides of the chief Regular Figures, if they are Bisected, you will
have so many Primary Sines; viz. from the side of the Triangle the side of 60
Degrees 8660754, from the Side of the Square, the Sine of 45 7071068; from the
Side of the Pentagon, the Sine of 36 5877853; from the Side of the Hexagon, the
Sine of 30 5000000; from the Side of the Octagon, the Sine of 22 30 3826843;
from the Side of the Decagon the sine of 18=3090170; from the side of the
quindecagon lastly the sine of 12=2079117. From these seven primary sines you
may find afterward the rest, and consequently all the Tangents and Secants
according to the Rule we have deduced, n. 3. Schol. 5. Prop. 34. and which Ph.
Lansbergius illustrates in a prolix Example in his Geom. of Triangles Lib. 2.
p. 7. and the following. But after what way, having found these greater numbers
of sines, Tangents, etc. Logarithms have been of late accommodated to them,
remains now to be shown, which in brief is thus; viz. the Logarithms of sines,
etc. might immediately be had from the Logarithms of vulgar numbers, if the
tables of vulgar numbers were extended so far, as to contain such large
numbers; and thus the sine e. g. of o gr. 34. which is 98900 the Logarithm in
the Chiliads of Vlacquus is 49951962916. But because the other sines which are
greater than this are not to be found among vulgar numbers (for they ascend not
beyond 100000, others only reaching to 10000 or 20000) there is a way found of
finding the Logarithms of greater numbers, than what are contained in the
Tables. E g. If the Logarithm of the sine of 45 which is 7071068 is to be
found, now this whole number is not to be found in any vulgar Tables, yet its
first four notes 7071 are to be found in the vulgar Tables of Strauchius with
the correspondent Logarithm 3. 8494808, and the five first 70710 in the Tables
of Vlacquus with the Log. 4. 8494808372. One of these Logarithms, e g. the
latter, is taken out, only by augmenting the Characteristick with so many
units, as there remain notes out of the number proposed, which are not found in
the Tables, so that the Log. taken thus out will be 6. 8494808372. Then
multiply the remaining notes of the proposed number by the difference of this
Logarithm from the next following, (which for that purpose is every where added
in the Vlacquian Chiliads, and is in this case 61419) and from the Product
4176492 cast away as many notes as adhere to the proposed number beyond the
tabular ones, in this case 2; for of the remainder 41764, if they are added to
the Logarithm before taken out, there will come the Logarithm required 6.
8494850136, viz. according to the Tables of Vlacq^us, wherein for the Log of 10
you have 10,000,000, 000; but according to those of Strauchius which have for
the Logarithm of 10 only 10,000,000, you must cut off the three last notes,
that the Logarithm of the given sine may be 6.8494850; as is found in the
Strauchian and other tables of sines, except that instead of the
Characteristick 6 there precedes the Characteristick 9, whereof we will add
this reason: If the Characteristicks had been kept, as they were found by the
rule just now given, the Logarithm of the whole sine (which is in the
Strauchian Tables 10,000,000) would have come out 70,000,000, incongruous
enough in Trigonometrical Operations. Wherefore that Log. of the whole sine
might begin from 1, for the easiness of Multiplication and Division they have
assumed 100,000,000; the Characteristick being augmented by three, wherewith it
was consequently necessary to augment also all the antecedent ones; and hence
e. g. the Logarithm of the least sine 2909 begins from the Characteristick 6,
which otherwise according to the Tables of vulgar numbers would have been 3.

Having found after this way the Logarithms of all the sines (although here also
if you have found the Logarithms of the signs of 45 and moreover the Logarithm
of 30, the Logarithms of all the rest may be compendiously found by addition
and substraction from a new principle which now we shall omit) the Logarithms of
the Tangents and Secants may easily be found also, only by working, but now
Logarithmically, according to the Rules of Schol. 5. Prop. 34. n. 5. and 6.

Proposition LVI.
THE side of a Tetraedrum Eucl. 13. lib. 13.
or equ^ Pyramid is in power to the Diameter of a circumscribed Sphere, as 2 to
3.

Demonstration.
For because by the genesis of the Tetraedrum Def. 22 (see its Fig. 44 n. 1.)
and Schol. Prop. 49. OC is of the semidiameter OB, which we will call a the of
CB will be =^ aa by the Pythag. Theor. and so the power (or Sq.) of the side of
the Tetraedrum = ^ aa by Prop. 49. but the power of the Diam. 2 a or ^ a is ^
aa. Therefore the power of the side of the Tetraedrum is to the power of the
Diam. as 24 to 36. i. e. (dividing each side by 12) as 2 to 3. Q. E. D.

Or more short.
The of CB is =2 by Schol of Prop. 49. and the of EC=4. Therefore the EB=6. But
the OF is =9. Therefore the of EB is to the of OF as 6 to 9, i. e. as 2 to 3.
Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore if the Diam. OF be made = a, the side EB will be =^.

Proposition LVII.
THE side of the Octaedrum Eucl. 14. lib. 13.
is in power one half of the Diameter of the circumscribed Sphere.

Demonstration.
For since by the genesis of the Octaedrum Def 22. (see Fig. 44. n. 2.) CA, CB,
CF, etc. are so many radii of great circles, if for Radius you put a, the
square of AF will be =2 aa by the Pythag. Theor. But the square of the Diam.
FG=2 a is 4 aa. Therefore the power of the side is to the power of the Diam as
2 to 4, i. e. as 1 to 2. Q. E. D.

More short.
Because AF is also the side of a square inscribed in the greatest circle by
the genesis of the Octaedrum; the of AF will be by Prop. 50. to the of FC as 2 to
1: Therefore to the square of FG as 2 to 4, by Prop. 35. Q. E D.

CONSECTARY.
THerefore if the Diam. of the sphere be made (a) the side of the Octaedrum AF
will be ^.

Proposition LVIII.
THE side of the Hexaedrum or Cube Eucl. 15. lib. 13.
(...) in Power subtriple of the diameter of the circumscribed sphere.

Demonstration.
Making a the side of the inscribed cube GF or FE ( Fig. 98.) the square of the
diagonal GE of the base of the cube will be 2 aa by the Pythag. Theor. and by
the same Reason the square of the diam. of the cube and the circumscribed
sphere GD will be = to the square of GE+ DE=3 aa. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARYS.
I. THerefore if the diameter of the sphere be made = a, the side of the cube
AB will be ^.

II. The diameter of the sphere is equal in power to the side of the Tetraedrum
and cube taken together. For if the power of the diam. of the sphere be made aa
the power of the side of the Tetraedrum will be aa by Consect. Prop. 56. and
the power of the side of the cube aa by the pres. Consect. 1. Wherefore these
two powers jointly make aa. Q. E. D.

Proposition LIX.
THE side of the Dodecaedrum Eucl. Consect. 1. Prop. 17. lib. 13.
is equal in power to the greater part of the side of the cube divided in mean
and extreme reason.

Page 150.
97

98

99

100

101

102

103



Demonstration.
For if to the side of the cube AB ( vid. Fig. 45. n. 1.) and to its upper base
ABCD you conceive to be accommodated or fitted a regular Pentagon according to
the genesis of a Dodecaedrum laid down in Def. 22, and at the interval B e you
make the arch of, the AB e and A of will be equiangular; (for the angles at A
and B being 36, and A eB 108, having drawn of, the angles B of and B fe are
each 72; therefore A of the remaining angle will be 36) wherefore as AB to B e
( i. e. B f) so A e ( i. e. B e or B f) to A f. Therefore the side of the cube
AB is divided in mean and extreme reason in f, and B e the side of the
Dodecaedrum is = to the greater part B f. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM.
HEnce would arise a new method of dividing a given line in mean and extreme
reason, viz. if you apply to the given line a part of the equilateral Pentagon
by means of the angles A and B 36, and at the interval B e you cut off B f.
This angle may be had geometrically, if another regular Pentagon be inscribed
in a circle, and having drawn also a like subtense, if the angles at the
subtense are made at A and B equal, by Eucl. 23. lib. 1.

Proposition LX.
THE side of an Icosaedrum Eucl. Prop. 16. Coroll. lib. 13.
is equal in power to the side of a Pentagon in a circle containing only five
sides of the Icosaedrum; and the semi diameter of this circle is in power
subquintuple of the Diam. of the sphere of the circumscribed Icosaedrum.

Demonstration.
Both these are evident from the genesis of the Icosaedrum in Def. 22. The
first immediately hence, because all the other sides of the triangles ( Fig.
99.) A a, B a, etc. are made equal to the side of the Pentagon AB by Consect.
4. Prop. 51. The latter from this inference; if for OA the radius of the circle
you put a (since the side of the Pentagon, which here is also the side of the
Icosaedrum, it will be equal in power to the radius and side of the Decagon
taken together by the aforesaid Prop.) the altitude OG will be the side of the
Decagon = ^ by Consect. 1. Prop. 54. to which the equal inferior part oH being
added, and the intermediate altitude O o = a, you will have the whole diameter of
the circumscribed sphere GH= ^ i. e. ^ i e. ^ i. e. ^ and so the square of the
diameter of the sphere will be 5 aa: Therefore the square of the diameter of
the sphere is to the square of the semi-diam. of the circle containing the five
sides of the Icosaedrum as 5 to 1. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM.
IT is also evident that a sphere described on the diameter GH will pass through
the other angles of this Icosaedrum; for assuming the center between O and o
the radius FG will be = ^. But FA is also = ^; for the of FO is = aa, and the
AO= aa: Therefore the sum is =^ aa = FA. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
THerefore, if the radius of the circle ABCDE remain a, you will have the altitude
OG ^, and the side of the Icosaedrum ^, by Cons. 1. and 2. Prop. 54. and the
diam of the circumscribed Sphere 2 ^, as is evident from the Demonstration.

CONSECTARY II. Being a general one of the five last Propositions.
IF AB ( Fig. 100) be the diameter of a sphere Eucl. Prop. 18. and los^, lib.
13.
divided in D so that AD shall be AB, then (having erected the perpendicular
DF) BF will be the side of the Tetraedrum by Prop. 56. and AF the side of the
Hexaedrum by Prop. 58. Cons. 2. and BE or AE (erecting from the center the
perpendicular CE) will be the side of the Octaedrum by Prop. 57. Now if AF be
cut in mean and extreme reason in O, you will have AO the side of the Dodecaedrum
by Prop. 59. Lastly, if you erect BG double of CB, HI will be double of CI, and
the of HI=4 of CI; consequently the CH or CB=5 CI. Therefore the of AB (double
of CH) is also=to 5 of HI (which is double of CI) therefore HI is the radius of
the circle circumscribing the Pentagon of the Icosaedrum, and IB the side of
the Decagon inscribed in the same circle, and HB the side of the Pentagon, and
also the side of the Icosaedrum, by Prop. 60.

The End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
SECTION I. Containing DEFINITIONS.
Definition I.
IF a Cone ABC ( Fig. 101.) be conceived to be cut by a plane at right angles
to the side of the cone, e. g. BA; the Plane EFGHE arising by this section, and
terminated on the external surface of the cone by the curve line HEG, etc. was
anciently by Euclid, Archimedes, etc. called the Conick Section; and if the
sides of the cone AB and BC made a right angle at B, as n. 1. the section was
particularly called the Section of a right-angled Cone; but if it made an
obtuse angle, as n. 2. it was called the Section of an obtuse-angled Cone; if,
lastly, it made an acute one, as number. 3. it was called (3) the Section of an
acute-angled Cone.

Definition II.
BUT afterward their Successors, particularly Apollonius Pergaeus, found from
the properties of these Curves, which their Predecessors had happily
discovered, that the same (all of them) might be generated in one and the same
cone whether right-angled, obtuse-angled, or acute-angled, if the section OF (
Fig. 102.) is made in the first case parallel to the opposite side BC; in the
second case, if it meet that side produced upwards; for the third, when it
meets downwards with the diameter of the base AC produced to D. And to give new
names (for the old ones would do no more now) to these Sections, to distinguish
them one from another, nominating them from their Properties hereafter
demonstrated, they called the first a Parabola, the second an Hyperbola, the
third an Ellipsis.

Definition III.
BUT it is evident, that only the plane making the section of the second case,
being according to the line FED produced or carried on, ( Fig. 103.) will fall
upon the vertical Cone aBc comprehended under the sides AB, CB, etc. continued
onwards, and there produce another Section opposite to the former; whence
these, viz. GEHG and gehg are called opposite Sections.

Definition IV.
BEsides these names of the sections, there are several others made use of to
denote various lines drawn and considered both within and without those
sections, the chief whereof we shall here explain. And first of all, in general
the line OF so let fall through the middle of the section from its top E (which
is called the Vertex of the section) to the diameter of the base of the Cone AC
(produced if occasion be) that it shall bisect the line GH and all others
parallel to it, is called the Diameter of that Section; and particularly it is
called the Axis of the Section if it cuts them at right angles or
perpendicularly; as also they name those lines GH, KN, etc. which are cut
indifferently by the diameters, but at right angles by the Axis, those, I say,
they call Ordinates, or Ordinate Applicates, and their halves, FG, IK, etc.
Semiordinates, (or some also call the latter Ordinates, and the former double
Ordinates) and the parts of the Ax or Diameter OF, EI, etc. are called
Abscissa's (by some intercepted axes and diameters)

Definition V.
PArticularly in the hyperbola they call the continuation of the ax or diameter
ED 'till it meet the opposite side cB, i. e. to the vertex of the opposite
section, the Latus transversum of the Hyperbola, to which there answers in the
Ellipsis the axis or longest diameter, and so by latter Authors is called by
the same name, but by Apollonius the transverse Ax or the transverse Diameter,
as also the shortest ax or diameter is called the Conjugate, and its middle
point O is called the Center of the Section or of the opposite Sections.

Definition VI.
THey called also a certain line EL ( Fig. 101.) by the name of Latus Rectum,
which is particularly to be found in all the sections, as we shall hereafter
show: And because this Latus Rectum is a sort of a Rule or Measure, according
to which the squares or powers of the ordinates used to be estimated or valued
(as we will show in its proper place) therefore the Ancients used to call it by
a Periphrasis Linea secundum quam possunt Ordinatim applicatae, or the measure
of the powers of the Ordinates; by some latter Authors it is called the
Parameter. Now a mean proportional PQ found between this Latus Rectum and the
Latus Transversum (Fig. 104 n. 1. and 2) (see also hereafter Consect. 2. Prop.
8.) and drawn through the center O parallel to the Ordinates is called the second
Axis or Diameter, or the Conjugate of the Hyperbola.

Definition. VII.
NOW if we conceive the diameter or conjugate ax PQ brought down to the
Hyperbola so that its middle point O shall touch its vertex in E, and from the
center O you draw the right lines OR, OS, through the ends of this tangent line p
and q, these are the lines which Apollonius, Prop. 1. lib. 2. demonstrates,
that though by being continued, they always approach nearer and nearer to the
curve GEH, and come so Page 156.
104

105

106

107

much the nearer by how much the farther they are continued, yet they will
never concur with it or touch it, for which reason they are called Asymptotes
or non-coincident lines; and by some the Intactae. Which non-coincidency
appears most manifestly where the hyperbolical section of the cone is made
parallel to the triangular section through the axis of the cone ABC ( n. 3.)
along the line e. f. parallel to the ax BF. For if we conceive the hyperbola
geh to move forwards always parallel to it self, according to the direction of
the equal and parallel lines gG, fF, and hH, 'till it stands in the position
GEH; it is manifest that the curve line GEH is distant on both sides from the
right lines BC, BA, the length of the versed sine of the equal arches hC and gA
in the circumference of the circular base, while in the mean time it is evident
that they approach nearer and nearer to them. So that hence there flow the
following

CONSECTARYS.
I. IN this case the sides of the cone are the Asymptotes of the hyperbola,
while it is manifest, that the point B is its center, and EB half the
transverse diameter; which appears from n 1. and 2. of the pres. Fig. for the
section of being made parallel to the the ax of the cone DF by def. 5. de
(which in the case n. 3. would coincide with dq) is the transverse diameter,
but the triangles dpq and O pE are equiangular, and consequently as pE is to
pq, so is OE to dq.

II. The lines AG and HG ( number. 3.) are equal, as being the versed sines of
equal arches; and in like manner ( n. 1. and 2.) RG and HS are equal, since FR
and FS as well as E p and E q are so also (for as OE to E p, -E q so OF to FR
-FS
and the semiordinates FG and FH are also equal.

III. Consequently of RG into GS and of HS into HR are equal, etc. all which
hereafter we will more universally demonstrate.

Definition VIII.
IF a Parabolick plane Archim. de Conoid. and Spher. Def. 1.
HEGFH ( Fig. 105. n. 1.) together with a triangle HEG inscribed in it, and a
rectangle HL circumscribed about it, be conceived to be moved round about the
ax OF on the point F; it will be evident that by the triangle there will be
generated a cone, by the rectangle a cylinder, and by the parabola a parabolick
solid, which with the comprehended cone, and the comprehending cylinder, will
have the common base HIGK and the same altitude OF, and was by Archimedes named
a Parabolick Conoid.

Definition IX.
IF moreover an Archim. de Conoid. and Spher. Def. 3.
hyperbolick plane HEGFH ( n. 2.) with the inscribed triangle HEG, and another
circumscribed one ROS made by the Asymptotes OR, OS, be conceived to be turned
about the common ax OEF on the point F; it will be evident that there will be
described by the inscribed triangle a cone comprehended within side, and by the
hyperbola an Hyperbolical Conoid upon the same base HIGK and of the same
height OF; and by the ROS another cone which Archimedes calls the
comprehending cone, whose base is RTSV, and its altitude composed of the axis
of the hyperbola OF and half the transverse ax OE (which Archimedes called the
additament of the ax of the hyperbola) and which we may commodiously divide
into two parts, viz into the cone OPMQL, whose base has for its diameter the
conjugate ax PQ, and its altitude equal to half the transverse ax; and into a
Curti-cone or detruncated cone terminated by the two bases PMQL and RTSV, but
answering in altitude to the conoid and inscribed cone: From which, as
comprehending it, if you take away the included conoid, there will remain the
hollow curticone terminated below by the Annulus or ring RGIVHSKT and above by
the circular base PMQL, and generated in the circumvolution by the intermediate
lines EP, GR, etc. or the mixtilinear plane EGRP. Now if we suppose instead of
this comprehending cone a circumscribed cylinder on the same base and of the
same altitude with the conoid and included cone, you will have every thing like as
in Def. 8.

CONSECTARYS.
NOW if we suppose the 1. case of Def. 9. to be expressed by the Fig. of Def.
7. n. 3. and conceive the present figure brought thence to be turned round
about the ax BEF ( Fig. 106.) we may deduce these following things in the room
of Consectarys for the foundation of our future demonstrations.

I. The lines EQ, RS, HC, etc. of the mixtilinear space comprehended between
the hyperbola and the Asymptotes ( viz. the excess of the ordinates) although
they are unequal, and by descending always grow less, yet in this
circumvolution they will describe equal circular spaces, viz. EQ a whole
circle, (or circular plane) but RS and HC, etc. circular Annuli or rings all of
the same bigness; which will thus appear to any one who compares this figure
with the former: Since the spaces generated by the lines EQ, FC, etc. are as
the squares of those lines, and the of F h or FC exceeds the square of fh or FH
by the excess of the square F f or E e or EQ, consequently the quantity
generated by FC will exceed that generated by FH the excess of that generated
by EQ; and also that generated by FH by the excess of that generated by HC; it
is manifest that the circle generated by EQ will be equal to the annular space
generated by HC; and the same will in like manner be evident of any spaces
produced by RS.

II. Therefore the hollow detruncated cone generated by the space EHCQ
according to Def. 9. will be equal to a cylinder generated by the rectangle
FIQE; for all the indivisibles of the one, are equal to all the indivisibles of
the other by Consect. 1.

Definition X.
IF, lastly, Archim. de Conoid. and Spher. Def. 6.
an elliptical plane be turned about either of the axes, viz. either the
longest DE ( Fig. 107. n. 1) or the shorter AB ( n. 2.) there will be thence
formed an elliptical solid, called by Archimedes a spheroid; which in the first
case will be an oblong or erect one, in the other a flat or depressed one: And
it is self evident, that if before this circumvolution of the ellipsis, there
be inscribed in one of its halves a triangle, and also a rectangle
circumscribed about it, having the same altitudes and bases with the semi
ellipse, there will afterward in the circumvolution be described by the
triangle a cone, by the rectangle a cylinder, to which afterward we will also
compare the half spheroid; as also both the conoids with their inscribed and
circumscribed cones and cylinders.

Definition XI.
IF upon the right line AE ( Fig. 18.) you conceive a wheel or circle to roll,
until its point A, with which it touches the said line, come to touch it again
in E; the circle will measure out the line AE equal to its periphery; but the
point A by its motion will describe the curve line AFE, which is called a
Trochoid or Cycloid; and the area which this curve with the subtense AE
comprehends, is named the Cycloidal Space; and the circle by whose motion they
are determined is called the generating Circle.

CONSECTARY.
IT is evident from the genesis of this curve that the describing point a will
always be as much distant in the circle from the point of contact d or c, as
the point A in the right line passed over AE, is from the same point of
contact, i. e. if the point d is distant from A the fourth part of the line AE,
the arch da will also be the fourth part of the circle considered in this
second station; and the point c being distant from A half of the interval AE,
the arch ca will be also half of the Page 160.
108

109

110

111

circle, and so the point a coincide in the curve with F: And when the point e
is distant from E only an eighth part of the whole line AE, the arch ea will
also be the eighth part of the whole circle.

Definition XII.
IF the right line BA ( number. 1. 109.) one end at B remaining fixed, be moved
round at the other end with an equal motion from A through C, D, E to A back
again, and in the mean while, there be conceived another moveable point in it
to move with an equal motion along the line BA from B to A, so that in the same
moment wherein the moveable point A absolves one revolution, the other moveable
point shall also have passed through its right lined way, coinciding with the
point A returned to its first situation; this extremity A by its revolution
will describe the circle ACDEA, and that other moveable point another curve B,
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. which with Archimedes we will call a Helix or spiral Line, and
the plane space comprehended under this spiral line and the right line BA in
the first station is called a spiral space. Now if we suppose, e. g. the right
lined motion of the point moving along BA to be twice slower than in the former
case, so that (see number. 2.) in the same time that the point A makes one whole
Revolution, the other moveable point shall come to F, making half the way BA,
and then at length shall concur or meet with the extremity, when that shall
have performed the other revolution; and so there will be described a double
spiral line, whose parts with Archimedes we will so distinguish, that as he
calls the part of the right line BF, passed over in the first revolution,
simply the first line, and the circle made by the right line BF the first
Circle; so we will call that part of the curve which is described in that time
or revolution B 136912 the first Helix or the first Spiral, and the area
comprehended under it the first spiral space: And, as the other part of the
right line FA passed over in the other revolution is called the second line,
and the circle marked out by the whole line BA the second Circle; so the curve
described in the mean while 12, 15, 18, 24, may be called the second spiral
line, and the space comprehended under it the second spiral space, and so
onwards From these Definitions there flow the following

CONSECTARYS.
I. THE lines B 12, B 11, B 10, etc. drawn out, and making equal angles to the
first or second spiral (and after the same manner Archim. Prop. 2. of Spirals.
B 12, B 10, B 8, etc. or B 12, B 9, B 6, etc.) are arithmetically
proportional, as is evident.

II. The lines drawn out to the first spiral as B 7, B 10, etc. are one among
another as the arches of the circles intercepted between BA and the said lines
Archim. Prop. 4.
B 7, B 10, etc. which is also evident to any one who considers what we did
suppose; for in the same time as the end A passes over seven parts of the
circle, the other moveable point will also run over seven parts of the right
line BA, etc.

III. Lastly, The right lines drawn from the initial point Archim. Prop. 15.
B to the second spiral e. g. B 19 and B 22 ( number. 2.) will be one to another
as the aforesaid arches together with the whole periphery added to both sides:
for at the same time the extremity A runs through the whole circle or 12 parts
and moreover 7 parts ( i. e. in all 19 parts) in the same time the other
moveable point passes through 12 parts of the right line BA (in this case
divided into 24 parts) and moreover 7 parts, that is, in all 19; and so in the
others.

Definition XIII.
IF a right line BAF be conceived so to move within the right angles ADC, CDE,
that on the one hand a certain point C fixed in one leg of the Norma or ruler
may always glide along, and on the other hand a certain moveable point A may
always run along the other side of the Norma (which complicated motion of the
describing rule BAF, after what way it may be organically procured, may be seen
by Page 163.
112

113

114

115

116

117

118

the 110th. Figure;) by the extreme point of the moveable line B there will be
described a curve called by its Inventor Nicomedes the first Conchoid, whereof
this is a property, that the right lines CB, C b, drawn from its center C to
its Ambitus or curvity are not themselves, as in the circle, equal, but yet
have all the parts, AB, ab, intercepted between the curve, and the directrix AE
are equal; as is evident from its genesis.

Definition XIV.
IF, the diameters of a circle being AB and CD ( Fig. 111. n. 1.) cutting one
another at right angles, you take BE or B e and BF or B f equal arches, and
from E or e you draw the perpendiculars EG or Eg, and through these from D to F
or f you draw the transverse lines DF or D f; the several points of
intersection H, h, etc. decently connected together will exhibit the curve line
D h, H hB (which may be continued also without the circle if you please, and)
which is commonly attributed to Diocles, and called a Cissoid.

Definition XV.
IF, having divided the right line AE ( Fig. 112.) into the equal parts AB, BC,
etc. from the points of the division A, B, C, etc. you draw the parallel lines
A a, B b, C c, etc. in geometrical progression (as e. g. let A a be 1, B b 4, C
c 16, D d, 64, etc. or B b 10, C c 100, D d 1000, E e 10000, etc.) and further
bisecting AB, BC, etc, F, G, H, I, you let fall mean proportionals between the
next Collaterals Ff, Gg, Hh, Ii, etc. and continue to do so till the parallels
are brought near to one another; the curve line drawn through the extremities of
these lines a f, b g, c h, d ie, will be the logarithmical line of the moderns,
whose properties and uses are very excellent.

SCHOLIVM.
AMong those uses, that is none of the least, from which this curve borrows its
name, viz. in showing the nature and invention of Logarithms. For, e g. 1. If
this line was accurately delineated in a large space, the parts AB, BC, etc.
being taken so big, that they might be subdivided not only into 100 or 1000 but
into 10000 or 100000 parts; making AB 100000 (and so A 00000) AC would be
200000, AD 300000, etc. while in the mean while there answer to these as
primary Logarithms in arithmetical progression the geometrical proportional
numbers, A a 1, B b 10, C c 100, D d 1000, E e 10000, etc. Whence, 2. Its
Logarithm may be assigned to any given intermediate number, e. g. to the number
982, for having cut off this number from Dd by a geometrical scale on the line
DM, if you draw Mn parallel to AD, and nN parallel to DM, it will give AN on
the same scale, viz. the Logarithm sought, and reciprocally. But if, 3. it seem
difficult to delineate a Figure so large, yet at least the clear conception of
such a delineation evidently shows the arithmetical method, which those
ingenious Men have made use of, who have made the tables of Logarithms with a
great expense of Labor and pains, viz. by finding continual mean
proportionals, arithmetical ones between any two Logarithms already known, and
geometrical ones between two vulgar numbers answering to them, etc. by
comparing what we have noted in Schol. 2. Prop. 20. Lib. 1. And we will note, 4
out of Pardies, that, since the Logarithms of numbers distant from one another
by a decuple proportion, differ by the number 100000, having found the
Logarithms of all the numbers from 1000 to 10000 you will at the same time have
all the Logarithms of all the other numbers that are between 100 and 1000,
between 10 and 100, and between 1 and 10, only changing the characteristick,
and lessening it in the first case by unity, in the second by 2, in the third
by 3; as e. g. if of the number 9, 900 you had found the Logarithm 399, 563,
the Logarithm of the subdecuple number 990 would be ( viz. substracting from
the former 100000) 299, 563. and the Logarithm again of this subdecuple of this
99 would be 199, 563, etc. Thus in the Chiliads of Briggs to the number 99000
Answ. 4,99563,51946 9900 -- 3,99563,51946 990 -- 2,99563,51946 99 lastly --
1,99563,51946.

But there will not arise such advantage for making Logarithms by this
observation as it may at first sight seem to promise, because there are 9000
numbers between 1000 and 10000 whose Logarithms must be found also, and but 900
between 100 and 1000, and but 90 between 10 and 100, and but 9 between 1 and
10, and so in all 999, which is not the ninth part of the former.

Definition XVI.
IF the radius AD ( Fig. 113.) be conceived to move equally about the point A
through the periphery of the quadrant DB, while in the mean time the side of
the square DC remaining always parallel to it self, descends also with an equal
motion through DA, so that in the same moment the radius AD and the aforesaid
side DC shall fall upon the base AB; or (if any one should think that this way
the proportion of a right line to a circular one is supposed by a sort of
Petitio Principii or begging the question) the right line DA as well as the
quadrant DB being divided into as many equal parts as you please ( e. g. here
both of them into 8) and drawing through these from the center A so many Radii
and through them parallel lines; the points of intersection being orderly
connected together will exhibit a curve line, whose invention is attributed to
Dinostratus and Nicomedes in the fourth Book of Pappus Alexandrinus, and which
from its use is called a Quadratrix, it having among the rest this property,
that from AB it cuts off a part AE, which is a third proportional to the
quadrant DB and its radius DA; which hereafter we will demonstrate. In the mean
while from this description of it, you have these

CONSECTARYS.
I. IF through any point H assumed in the Quadratrix you draw the radius AHI, and
from the same point the perpendiculars H h and H e, the whole arch DB will
always be to the part IB cut off, as the whole line DA to the part hA cut off,
or H e equal to it.

II. Consequently therefore any given arch or angle of the quadrant e. g. IB or
IAB may by help of the quadratrix be divided into three equal parts or as many
as you please, or in what proportion soever you will; while having drawn the
radius AI, the perpendicular H a let fall from the point of the quadratrix H,
may be divided into three or as many equal parts as you please, or in any
proportion whatsoever, and through these sections radius's drawn to divide the
arch.

BOOK II.
SECTION II.
CHAP. I. Of the chief Properties of the Conick Sections.
Proposition I.
IN the Parabola (GKEH Fig. 114) the I. Property of the Parab. Apoll. Prop. 11.
Lib. 1.
square of the semi-ordinate (IK) is equal to the rectangle IL made by the
Latus Rectum EL and the abscissa EI.

Demonstration.
MAke the sides of the cone that is supposed to be cut, AB = a, BC= b, and
moreover EB= oa, and EI= eb, and AC= c; therefore NI will be = ec, by reason of
the similitude of the BCA and EIN; and EP or IO= oc, by reason of the
similitude of the ABC and EBP. Therefore NIO= oecc= IK by the Schol. of Prop.
34 ( n. 3) and Prop 17. Lib. 1. Now if a line be sought which with the abscissa
EI shall make the IL= IK you will have it by dividing the said square by the
Abscissa EI. viz. ^ i. e. ^ = EL. And this is called the Latus Rectum, viz. in
relation to the Abscissa EI with which it makes that rectangle, which, it is
evident, is = IK, and from this equality the section has the name of Parabola,
in Apollonius.

CONSECTARYS.
I. THis Latus Rectum, expressed by the quantity ^, may be found out after a
shorter way, if you make as b to c (the side of the cone parallel to the
section BC at the Diameter of the base AC) so oc (the side EP called by some
the Latus Primarium) to a fourth.

II. But if any one, with Apollonius, had rather express this by mere data in
the cone it self as cut (because oc or that Latus Primarium EP is not a line
belonging to the cone it self) he may easily perceive, if the quantity of the
Latus Rectum found above, be multiplied by the other side of the cone a, there
will be produced the equivalent ^ which instead of the proportion above will
furnish us with this other, as ab- to cc- so oa of AB into BC- AC-EB
to a fourth; which is the very proportion of Apollonius in Prop. 9. Lib. 1.
and confirms our former.

SCHOLIVM I.
HEnce you have an easy and plain way of describing a Parabola, having the top
of the ax and the Latus Rectum given, viz. by drawing several semiordinates
whose extreme points connected together will exhibit the curvity of the
Parabola. But you may find as many semiordinates as you please, if having cut
off as many parts of the Ax as you please, you find as many mean proportionals
between the Latus Rectum and each of those parts or Abscissa's. See n. 2. and
3. Fig. 47. Introduct. to Specious Analysis.

SCHOLIVM II.
HEnce also we have a new genesis of the parabola in Plan^ from the spculations
of De Wit, viz. if the rectilinear angle HBG ( Fig. 115.) conceived to be
moveable about the fixed point B be conceived so to move out of its first
situation with its other leg BH along the immovable rule OF, that it may at
the same time move also the ruler HG, from its first situation DK, all along
parallel to it self, and with the other leg BG let it all along cut the said
ruler HG, and with this point of its intersection continually moving from B
toward G it will describe a curve. That this curve will be the parabola of the
ancients is hence manifest, because it will have this same first property of
the parabola. For, 1. if the angle HBG ( n. 1.) be supposed to be a right one,
and BD or HI= a, BY or KG= b (viz. in that station of the angle and rule HG by
which they denote the point G in the intersection) you will have by reason of the
right angle at B, BY, i. e. b a mean proportional Between HI i. e. a, and IG or
BK, and so this as an abscissa = ^. Wherefore if BK i. e. ^ be multiplied by
BD= a, the rectangle DBK will be = bb =KG; which is the first property of the
parabola: So that it follows, since the same inference may be made of any other
point in this curve, that this curve will be the parabola, BD or HI its Latus
Rectum, KG a semiordinate, and BK its axis, etc. 2. If the angle HBG be an
oblique one ( number. 2) it may be easily shown from what we have supposed that
the DBH and BKG will be equiangular: Therefore as BD (i. e. a) to DH sc. BY (i.
e. b) so KG sc BY (i. e. b) to BK (i. e. ^) Therefore again the DBK= bbKG. QED.

Consect. 3. It is also evident in this second case, that BK drawn parallel to
the ax, but not through the middle of the parabola, will be a diameter which will
have for its vertex B, its Latus Rectum BD, and semiordinate GK, etc.

Consect. 4. Therefore you may find the Latus Rectum in a given parabola
geometrically, if you draw any semiordinate whatsoever IK ( Fig. 116.) and make
the abscissa OF equal to it, and from F draw a parallel to the semiordinate IK,
and from E draw the right line EK through K cutting off FH the Latus Rectum
sought; since as EI to IK so is OF ( i. e. IK) to FH by Prop 34. lib. 1.
wherefore having the abscissa and semiordinate given arithmetically, the Latus
Rectum will be a third proportional.

Consect. 5. Since therefore the Latus Rectum found above is ^, if you conceive
it to be applied to the parabola in LM, so that N shall be that point which is
called the Focus, LN will be ^ and its square ^ and this divided by the Latus
Rectum ^ will give occ^ for the abscissa EN: So that the distance of the Focus
from the Vertex will be of the Latus Rectum.

Consect. 6. Since therefore EN is = ^ if for OF you put ib, NF will be = ^,
whose square will be found to be ^, to which if there be added GF= oicc, by
Prop. 1. the square of NG will be = ^ whose root (as the extraction of it and,
without that, the analogy of the square NF with the square NG manifestly shows)
will be ^; so that a right line drawn from the Focus to the end of the
ordinate, will always be equal to the abscissa OF +EN i. e. (if EO be made
equal to EN) to the compounded line FO.

SCHOLIVM III.
HEnce you have an easier way of describing the parabola in Plano from the
given Focus and Vertex, viz. (Fig: 117.) the axis being prolonged through the
vertex E to O, so that EO shall = EN, if a ruler HI be so moved by the hand G,
according to PQ, from OF to HI, that putting in a style or pin, it shall always
keep the part of the Thread NGI (which must be of the same length with the rule
HI) as fast as if it were glued to it (which perhaps might also be done with
the Compasses by an artifice which we will hereafter also accommodate to the
hyperbola) and at the same time it will describe in Plano the part of the line
EGR. That this will be a parabola is evident from the foregoing Consect.
because as the whole thread is always = to the ruler IH; so the part GN is
always necessarily equal to the part GH, i. e. to the line FO. Moreover from
the same sixth Consect. and Fig. 116. may be drawn another easy way of
describing the parabola in Plano from the Focus and Vertex given through
innumerable points G to be found after the same way: viz. If from any assumed
point in the ax F you draw to the ax a perpendicular, and at the interval FO
from the Focus N you make an intersection in G. Which innumerable points G will
be determined with the same facility, having given only, or assumed the axis
and Latus Rectum, by virtue of the present Proposition. For if, having assumed
at pleasure the point F in the axis, you find a mean proportional between the
Latus Rectum and the abscissa OF, a semiordinate FG made equal to it, will
denote or mark the point G in the parabola sought.

Proposition II.
IN the hyperbola (GKEH Fig 118) I. Property of the Hyperb. Apoll. Prop. 12.
Lib. 1.
the square of the semiordinate (IK) is equal to the rectangle (IL) made of the
Latus Rectum (EL) and the abscissa (EI) together with another rectangle LS of
the said abscissa (EI or LR) and RS a fourth proportional to DE the Latus
Transversum, (EL) the Latus Rectum, and EI the Abscissa.

Demonstration.
Suppose the side of the cone AB here also = a, and BM parallel to the section
= b, and the intercepted line AM= c, and EI= eb; all according to the analogy
we have observed in the parabola; and NI will be as there = ec. Making moreover
MC= d and the Latus Transversum DE= ob, so that DI shall be = ob+ eb; then will
(by reason of the similitude of the BMC, DEP, and DIO) EP be = od, and IO= od+
ed, and so QO= ed. Therefore NIO will be = oecd+ eecd=IK But this square
divided by the Abscissa EI= eb gives ^ or ^ for the line IS which with the
abscissa would make the rectangle ES = to the said square ^K. Now therefore, if
here also we call a Line the Latus Rectum found after the same way as in the
parabola, viz by making as b- to c- so od to a fourth ^ (as a line parallel to
the section -- to the intercepted diam. so the Latus Primarium, but that the
other part ^ will be a fourth proportional to bc and ed or to eb, ec* and ed,
or (to speak with Apollonius as we have done in the Prop.) to ob, ^ and eb (for
in these three cases you I have the same fourth ^) Wherefore now it is evident
that the square of the semiordinate oecd+ eecd is equal to the rectangle IL
(made by the Latus Rectum ^ into the abscissa eb= oecd) together with LS of
this fourth proportional ^ into the same abscissa Eb, which is = eecd. Which
was to be found and demonstrated.

CONSECTARYS.
I. HEnce you have in the first place the reason why Apollonius called this
Section an Hyperbola; viz. because the square of the ordinate IK exceeds or is
greater than the rectangle of the Latus Rectum and the Abscissa.

II. Since therefore the Latus Rectum here also as well as in the parabola is
found by making as b to c so od to ^ ( i. e. as the parallel to the section BM
is to the intercepted Diam. AM so is the Latus Primarium EP to a fourth EL.) If
any one had rather express this Latus Rectum after Apollonius's way, he will
easily perceive, this quantity being found and multiplied both Numerator and
Denominator by b the parallel to the section, there will come out the
equivalent quantity ^ which gives us instead of the former proportion this
other, as bb- to cd- so ob to a fourth; BM-AMC -- Latus Transversum to a fourth;
which is that of Apollonius in Prop. 12. Lib. 1. and consequently herein
confirms our former.

III. You may also have this Latus Rectum geometrically, by finding a third
proportional (as we have done in the parabola Consect. 4. Prop. 1.) to the
abscissa EI ( Fig. 119.) and the semiordinate IK (= OF;) and then find a fourth
proportional EL to DI (the sum of the Latus Transversum and abscissa) and FH
already found, or IS equal to it, and DE (the Latus Transversum) and that will
be the Latus Rectum sought.

Page 172.
119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

126

127

128



SHCOLIVM.
FRom this third Consectary, we may reciprocally from the Latus Rectum and
transverse given, find out and apply as many semiordinates to the ax as you
please, and so describe the hyperbola through their (ends or) infinite points:
viz. if assuming any part of the abscissa EI, you make as DE to EL so DI to IS;
and then find a mean proportional IK between IS and the abscissa EI, and that
will be the semiordinate sought: And both this praxis and the Consect. may be
abundantly proved by setting it down in, and making use of, the literal
Calculus.

Proposition III.
IN the Ellipsis (KDEK, Fig. 120.) the I. Propert. of the Ellipse of Apoll.
Prop. 13. Lib. 1.
square of the semiordinate (IK) is equal to the rectangle (IL) of the Latus
Rectum (EL) and the abscissa (EI) (less or) taking first out another rectangle
(LS) of the same abscissa (EI or LR) and RS a fourth proportional to (DE) the
Latus Transversum (EL) the Latus Rectum and (EI) the abscissa.

Demonstration.
Suppose the side of the cone to be AB here also = a and BM parallel to the
section = b and the intercepted AM= c, and EI= eb; and NI will be again = ec,
all as in the hyperbola. And mak^ng also here as in the hyperbola MC= d, and
the Latus Transversum DE= ob, so that DI will be ob- eb; then will (by reason
of the similitude of the BMC, DEP and DIO) EP be= od, and IO= od- ed. Therefore
of NIO will be = oecd- eecd=IK. But this square divided by the abscissa EI= eb
gives ^ or ^ for that line IS which with the abscissa would make the rectangle
ES= to the said square IK. Now therefore if we call the Latus Rectum a right
line found after the same way as in the parabola, by making according to Cons.
1. Prop. 1. as b to c- so od- to a fourth ^ i. e. as the line parallel to the
section -- to the intercepted diameter -- so the Latus Primarium, etc. It is
manifest that the Latus Rectum is one part of the line just now found; and the
other part ^ is a fourth proportional to b, c and ed, or (to speak with
Apollonius as we have done in the Prop.) to ^ and eb (for there will come out
the same quantity ^) wherefore now it is evident that the of the semiordinate
IK is equal to the IL (of the Latus Rectum ^ and the abscissa eb= oecd) having
first taken out thence the LS, or eecd out of that fourth proportional ^ by the
same abscissa eb; which was to be found and demonstrated.

CONSECTARYS.
I. HEnce you have first of all the reason of the name of the Ellipse, which
Apollonius gave to this section; viz. because the square of the semiordinate IK
is defective of, or less than the rectangle of the Latus Rectum and the
abscissa.

II. Since therefore the Latus Rectum here also as well as in the parabola and
hyperbola, is found by making as b to c so od to ^ ( i. e. as BM parallel to
the section is to the intercept. diam. AM so the Latus Primarium EP to a fourth
EL) now if any one had rather express this Latus Rectum after Apollonius's way,
he will easily see that the quantity above found being multiplied both
Numerator and Denominator by b, that there will come out an equivalent one ^,
which instead of the former proportion will give this other, as bb- to cd- so
ob to a fourth; BM-AMC -- Latus Transvers. to a fourth;
which is the same with that we have also found in the hyperbola, and which
also Apollonius has Prop. 13. Lib. 1.

III. This Latus Rectum may also be had geometrically, if you find, 1. in the
hyperbola a third proportional FH to the abscissa EI ( Fig. 121.) and
semiordinate IK (= OF.) 2. But EL a fourth proportional to DI (the difference
of the Latus Transversum and the abscissa) and the found FH, or IS equal to it,
and the Latus Transversum DE, is the Latus Rectum sought.

SCHOLIVM.
FRom this third Consect. we may reciprocally, having the Latus Rectum and
Transversum given, apply as many semiordinates to the ax as you please, and so
draw the ellipsis through as many points given as you please, viz. if, taking any
abscissa EI, you make as DE to EL so DI to a fourth IS; then between this IS
and the abscissa EI find a mean proportional IK, and that will be the
semiordinate sought: And this Praxis also and the third Consect. may be
abundantly proved by making use of a literal Calculus. For e. g. here a fourth
proportional to ob, ^ and ob- eb will be ^ and a mean proportional between this
fourth and eb will be ^, etc.

Proposition IV.
IN a Parabola 2. Property of the ^arab. 20. Prop. Apoll. Lib. 1. Con.
the squares of the ordinates are to one another as the abscissa's.

Demonstration.
For if OF ( Fig. 122.) be called ib, as above EI was called eb, since the
Latus Rectum is ^ the square of FG will be = oicc. Therefore IK will be to FG as
oecc -- oicc e to i or eb to ib.
Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
HEence having drawn LO parallel to the ax or diameter OF, if it be cut by the
transverse line EG in M and by the curve of the parabola in K; then will OL,
ML, and KL be continual proportionals. For OF is to EN as FG to NM or IK, by
reason of the similitude of the EFG and ENM. But the squares FG and IK are in
duplicate proportion of OF to EN by Prop. 35. Lib. 1. and are also in the same
proportion as the abscissa's OF and EI by the pres. Therefore OF to EI is also
in duplicate proportion of OF to EN i. e. OF is to EN as EN to EI Q. E. D. OL
is to ML as ML to KL Q. E. D.


Proposition V.
IN the hyperbola and Ellipsis Property of the Hyperbola and Ellips. Apol. 21.
Lib. I.
the squares of the Ordinates are as the rectangles contained under the lines
which are intercepted between them, and the Vertex's of the Latus Transversum's.

Demonstration.
For, if OF ( Fig. 118. and 120.) be called ib, as EI was above called eb, then
will according to Prop. 2. and the 3d. deduction.

GF= oicd+ eicd in the Hyperb.

oicd- eicd in the Ellips.

and the DFE= oibb+ iibb in the Hyperb.

oibb- iibb in the Ellips.

Therefore the KI is to the square GF as oecd+/- eecd to oicd +/- iicd i. e. as
oe+/- ee to oi+/- ii.

and DIE is to the DFE, as oebb+/- eebb to oibb+/- iibb i. e. in like manner as

oe+/- ee to oi+/- ii. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
IN the Ellipsis this may be more commodiously expressed apart thus; the
squares of the ordinates (KI and GF) are as the rectangles contained under the
segments of the Diameter ( viz. DIE and DFE) in which sense this property is
also common to the circle, as in which the squares of the ordinates are always
equal to the rectangles of the segments.

CONSECTARY II.
THerefore, if the Latus Rectum be conceived to be applied in the hyperbola, so
that N shall be the Focus; (see Fig. 123.) then will LN=^, and its square be ^.
But as the KI to the square LN, so is the DIE to the DNE i. e. oecd+ eecd to ^
so is oebb+ eebb to ^. But now the of the whole DE and the part added EN into
the part added EN, i. e. DNE (=^ together with the square of half CE (=^) is =
compounded of half and the part added CN= ^ by Prop. 9. lib. 1. Wherefore CN
the distance of the Focus from the center is = ^. But ^ is the fourth part of
the of the Latus Transversum ob and the Latus Rectum ^ (or the fourth part of
the figure, as Apollonius calls it) and ^ is the of ^ i. e. of half the Latus
Transversum. Wherefore we have found the following Rule of determining the
Focus in an hyperbola: If a fourth part of the figure (or the rectangle of the
Latus Rectum into the Transversum) be added to the square of half the Latus
Transversum, and from the sum you extract the square root; that will be the
distance of the Focus from the center CN: And hence substracting half the Latus
Transversum CE, you will have distance of the Focus from the Vertex EN.

CONSECTARY III.
IN like manner in the Ellipsis having drawn the ordinate LM ( Fig. 124.) that
the Focus may be in N, the LN would be ^ as above, and by a like inference
DNE=^. But now DNE together with the square of the difference CN is equal to
the of half CE by Propos. 8. lib. 1. and consequently the CN is = CE-DNE, that
is, ^. Wherefore CN the distance of the Focus from the center is = ^. Wherefore
we have found the following Rule to determine the Focus in the Ellipse. If the
fourth part of the figure (or the rectangle of the Latus Rectum into the Latus
Transversum) be subtracted from the square of half the Latus Transversum, and
from the remainder you substract the square root; that will be the distance of
the Focus from the Center CN: And taking hence half the Latus Transversum CE,
you will have the distance of the Focus from the Vertex EN.

SCHOLIVM I.
BOth the Rules are easy in the practice, for since ^ is nothing but the
square of CE, and ^ nothing but the rectangle of DE into LM; if between LM and
DE or MO ( Fig. 125.) you find a mean proportional MN, (and so whose is equal
to that) and in the hyperbola join to it at right angles MC=CE, the hypothenusa
CN will be the distance sought of the Focus from the center: And the same may
be had in the Ellipsis, if ( n. 2.) having described a semicircle upon CM=CE
you draw or apply the mean found MN, and draw CN.

SCHOLIVM II.
HEnce also we have De Wit Elem. Curv. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Prop. 13.
a new genesis of the Ellipse in Plano about the diameters given, from the
speculations of Monsieur de Wit; viz. If about the rectilinear angle DCB (
Fig. 126. n. 1. and 2.) considered as immovable, the rule NLK (which all of it
will equal the greater semidiameter CB, and with the prominent part LK the
lesser CD) be so moved that N going from C to D, and L from B to C may
perpetually glide along the sides of the angle, the extreme point in the K in
the mean while describing the curve BKE (and in a like application the other
quadrants) and that this curve thus described will be the ellipsis of the
ancients is hence manifest, because it has the second property of the ellipse
just now described. For, 1. if the angle DCB or NCB be supposed to be a right
one (as in Fig. 126. number. 1.) and the rule KN in the same station, it marked
out the point K, and having applied the semiordinate KI, and drawn the
perpendicular LM, from the square KL and the square CE (as being equal)
substract mentally the equal squares LM and CI, and there will remain by virtue
of the Pythagorick Theor. on the one hand KM and on the other by Prop. 8. lib.
1. DIE equal among themselves. But now the square of KI is to the square of KM
( i e. to the DIE) as the square of KN to the square of KL ( i. e. as the
square of CB to the square of CE) by reason of the similitude of the KLM and
KNI; and since the same may be demonstrated after the same manner of any other
semiordinate K i viz. that its K i is to the D iE as the square CB to the
square CE. It also follows, that the KI is to the DIE as K i to the D iE, and
alternatively, the square KI will be to the square K i as the DIE to the D iE;
which is the second property of the ellipse. 2. If the angle NCE be not a right
one (as in Fig. 126. n. 2. and the like cases) having drawn NO and KP parallel
to the rule nlB in the first station, [in which station the angle NCE, to which
the flexible ruler is to be made, is determined, viz. by letting fall the
perpendicular B l from the extremity of one diameter upon the other, and
moreover by adding or substracting the difference of the semi-diameters ln]
having also drawn the Ordinate KIM, and PI parallel to CN; which being done the
CB l and IKF, and also CB n and IKP will be similar. Wherefore having joined
NP, from the parallelism of the lines IP and NC and the similitude of the
aforesoid, as also of NCO and nC l, it will be easy to conclude that NCIP is a
parallelogram. Wherefore since KN is = CE and KN = CE, having subtracted the
squares of the equal lines NP and CI, there will remain on the one hand KP on
the other the DIE equal among themselves as above. Therefore the square of KI
will be to the square of KP ( i. e. to the DIE) as the square of BC to the
square of B n (i. e. to the square of CE) as in the former case: And since here
also the same may be demonstrated after the same manner of any other
semiordinate K i; we may infer as above, that the KI and K i are to one another
as the rectangles DIE and D iE, etc.

But after what way the same ellipses may be described by these right lined
angles without any of these rulers through infinite points given, will be be
manifest from the same figures to any attentive Person. For having once
determined the angle NCE or nCD ( number. 2. e. g.) if NL or nl be applied where
you please by help of a pair of compasses, and continued to K, so that LK or lk
shall be equal to lB, you will have every where the point K, etc.

CONSECTARY IV.
SInce in the hyperbola ( Fig. 123.) the CN-CE=DNE, and in the ellipsis ( Fig.
124.) CE-CN=DNE, by virtue of Prop. 9 and 8. lib. 1 if for CN you put on both
sides for brevity's sake m, then will the DNE in the hyperbola be rightly
expressed in these terms ^, and in the ellipsis in these ^.

Proposition VI.
IN the parabola 3. Property of the Parab.
the Latus Rectum is to the sum of two semiordinates (e. g. IK+FG i. e. HO in
Fig. 122.) as their difference (OG) to the difference of the abscissa's (IF or
(KO.)

Demonstration.
For if the greater abscissa OF be made = ib, and the less EI= eb, the
semiordinates answering to them FG and IK will be ooic and oecc as is deduced
from Prop. 1. Wherefore if you set in the same series 1 2 3 The Latus R. -sum
of the semiord. -their diff. ^ - oicc+ oecc - oicc- oecc 4 -diff. of the
absciss. - ib- eb and multiply the extremes and means, you will have on both sides
the same product oicc- oecc, which will prove by virtue of Prop. 19. lib. 1.
the proportionality of the said quantities. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM.
THis is that property of the parabola, whereon the Clavis Geometrica Catholica
of Mr. Thomas Baker is founded, which as unknown to the ancients, nor yet taken
notice of by Des Carts, he thinks was the reason why that incomparable Wit
could not hit upon those universal rules for solving all Equations howsoever
affected. Concerning which we shall speak further in its place. We will only
further here note, that Baker was not the first Inventor of this property, but
had it, as he himself ingeniously confesses, out of a Manuscript communicated
to him by Tho. Strode of Maperton, Esquire.

Proposition VII.
IN the hyperbola and ellipsis The 3. Property of the Hyperb. and Ellips.
Apollon. lib. I. Prop. 21. pars prior.
the Latus Rectum is to the Latus Transversum, (...) the square of any
semiordinate (e. g. IK in Fig. 118* and 120.) to the rectangle (DIE) contained
under the lines intercepted between it and the Vertex's of the Latus
Transversum.

Demonstration.
For the Latus Rectum is on both sides ^, the Latus Transversum ob, etc.
Wherefore if you make in the same series as the Latus R. to the Lat. Transv. so
the IK to DIE ^ in hyperb. ^ in ellips. ^


The rectangles of the extremes and means will both be ooebcd+/- oeebcd, and so
will prove the proportionality of the said quantities, by Prop. 19. lib. 1. Q.
E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
HEnce having given in the ellipsis (see Fig. 124) the Latus Rectum and the
transverse ax, you may easily obtain the second ax or diameter, if you make as
the Lat. Transv. to the Lat. Rect. so the DCE to AC ^.

CONSECTARY II.
THerefore the of the whole AB will be = oocd= of the Latus Rectum into the
Lat. Transv. (which Apllonius calls the Figure) so that the second Ax (and any
second Diameter) will be a mean proportional between the Latus Rectum and the
Latus Transversum. Hence in the hyperbola also the second or conjugate diameter
may be called a mean proportional between the Latus Rectum and Transversum, i.
e. oocd or a line which is equal in power to the Figure, as Apollonius speaks.

SCHOLIVM I.
HEnce may be derived another and more simple way of delineating organically
the ellipsis in Plano about the given axes AB, DE ( Fig 127.) which Schooten
has given us* viz. by the help of two equal rulers CG and GK moveable about the
points G and G: If, viz. the portions CF and HK are equal to half the lesser ax
AC, but taken with both the augments ( viz. CF+FG+GH) may = the greater ax CD
or CI; and the point K moving along the produced line DE the point H may
describe the curve EHAD. That this will be an ellipsis will be evident by
virtue of this seventh Prop. from a property that agrees to this curve in all
its points H. For having drawn circles about each diameter, and the lines IHN,
FO perpendicular to CE; and having made the Latus Rectum EL, which is a third
proportional to DE and AB by the second Consect. of this Prop. etc. by reason
of the similitude of the triangles CFO, CIN, FO will be to FC as IN to IC, and
alternatively FO to IN as FC to IC i. e. as AC to CE or AB to DE. Therefore
also the square of FO (or HN) will be to the square of IN, as the square of AB
to the square of DE, by Prop. 22. lib. 1. i. e. as EL the Latus Rectum to ED
the Latus Transversum, by Prop. 35. lib. 1. But the IN is = DNE from the
proporty of the circle. Therefore FO (or of the semiordinate HN) is to the DNE
as EL the Latus Rectum to ED the Latus Transv. therefore by virtue of the pres.
Prop. the point H is in the Ellipsis, and so any other, etc. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY III.
NOW if in the ellipsis the of AC the second Ax (= ^ by Consect. 1.) and CN the
distance of the Focus from the center (= ^ by Censect 3. Prop. 5. the figure
whereof you may see n. 124.) be joined in one sum; the AN will be = ^, and so
the line AN=^ i. e. to half the Latus Transversum: So that hence having the
axes given you may find the Foci, if from A at the interval CD you cut the
transverse ax in N and N.

CONSECTARY IV.
NOW if, on the contrary, in an hyperbola ( Fig. 123.) the AC or OF=^ be
subtracted from the CF or CN=^ by virtue of Consect. 2. Prop. 5. there will
remain ^ and its root ^, i. e. half the Latus Transversum CD: So that here
also, the axes being given, you may find the Focus's, if from the vertex E you
make OF a perpendicular to the ax = to the second Ax AC, and at the interval CF
from the center C you cut the Latus Transversum continued in N and N.

SCHOLIVM II.
BUT now, that the right lines KN and KN drawn from any other point ( e. g. K)
to the Foci, when taken together in the ellipsis, but when subtracted the one
from the other in the hyperbola, are equal to the Latus Transversum DE, we will
a little after demonstrate more universally, and also show an easy and plain
Praxis of delineating the ellipsis and hyperbola in Plano, having the axes and
consequently the Foci given.

CONSECTARY V.
SInce we have before demonstrated Consect. 2. and 3. Prop. 5. that the DNE in
the hyperbola and also in the ellipsis is = ^; and here in Consect. 1. the of
the second semi-diameter AC is also = ^; it is evident that this AC is equal to
the DNE.

CONSECTARY VI.
IT is hence moreover evident, if the square of half the transverse diameter
GE=^ be compared with the square of half the second diameter AC or OF=^,
multiplying both sides by 4 and dividing by o; they will be to one another as
obb to ocd i. e. further dividing both sides by b, as ob to ^ the Latus
Transversum to the Latus Rectum.

CONSECTARY VII.
BUT since also the DIE is to the IK as the Latus Transversum to the Latus
Rectum, by virtue of the present 7. Prop. the square of CE the transverse
semidiam. will be to the square of AC the second semidiam. (or by the 5th.
Consect. of this, to the DNE) as the DIE to the square of IK.

CONSECTARY VIII.
YOU may also now have the IK (which otherwise in the hyperb. is eocd+ eecd, in
the ellipse oecd- eecd, by virtue of Prop. 2. and 3.) in other terms, if you
make as CE to the DNE so the DIE to a fourth; i. e.

as ^ to ^ by virtue of Consect. 4. Prop. 5.

(so oebb+ eebb in the hyperb.

as ^ to ^ so oebb- eebb in the ellipsis.

For hence by the Golden Rule the square IK may be inferred as a fourth
proportional.

In the hyperbola ^;

In the ellipsis ^:

The use of which quantities will presently appear.

Proposition VIII.
THE Aggregate in the ellipse Difference in the hyperb.
of the right lines Apollon. Lib. 3. Prop. 51. and 52.
KN and Kn (Fig. 128.) drawn from the same point K to both the Focus's is equal
to the transverse ax DE.

An Ocular Demonstration.
WHich consists wholly in this to find the lines KN and K n by help of the
right-angled triangles IKN and IK n (sc. the hypothenuses having the sides
given) and afterward see if the sum of both in the ellipse, and difference in
the hyperbola be = ob, i. e. to the transverse ax DE.

I. In the Ellipsis.
Putting for CN (which above Prop. 5. Cons. 3. was found to be ^) I say putting
for it m, you will have

IN=CI+CN= ob- eb+ m

I n=C n-CI= m- ob+ eb

Therefore IN= ^ I n= ^

Add to each IK which was found in Prop. 7. Consect. 8. in the ellipsis = ^ and
you will have KN= ^ and by extracting the roots (which is easy) you will have ^ and
^; Sum ob. Q. E. D.

II. In the Hyperbola.
Putting again m for CN (which above Cons. 2. Prop. 5. was found to be ^) and
you will have

IN =CI+CN= ob+ eb+ m

I n=CI-C n= ob+ eb- m. Therefore IN= ^ and I n= ^

Add to both the IK which was found in Prop. 7. Consect. 8. in the hyperbola ^
and you will have KN= ^ K n= ^ and extracting the roots out of these (which is
easy) you will have KN= ^.

K n= ^ (which is a false or impossible root, for it would be CE-CN and
moreover -- another quantity.

Or K n= ^; which is a true and possible root.

The difference therefore of the true roots is = ob. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM I.
WE first of all tried to make a literal Demonstration by using the quantity of
the square IK as you have it expressed Prop. 2. and 3. and the quantity IN as
it was compounded of CI= ob+ eb+CN= ^, etc. but we found it very tedious in
making only the squares of IN and I n. Then for the surd quantity CN we
substituted another, viz. m, and we produced the squares of IN and I n as
above, but we added the square of IK in its first value; and thus we obtained
the squares KN and K n, but in such terms, that the exact roots could not be
extracted, but must be exhibited as surd quantities, and consequently we must
make use of the rules belonging to them to find their sum or difference, which
we laid down Cons. 3. Prop. 7. and Consect. Prop. 10. Lib. 1. which though it
would succeed, yet would be full of trouble and tediousness. Therefore at
length when we came to use those other terms which express the square IK, the
business succeeded as easy as we could wish, and that in a plain and easy way
and no less pleasant, which I doubt not but will also be the opinion of the
Reader, who shall compare this with other demonstrations of the same thing,
which only lead indirectly to this truth, or with them, which de Wit has
given us in Elem* Curvar. lin. p. m. 293. and 302. and which he thinks easy
and short enough in respect of others both of the ancients and moderns, and
which we have reduced into this yet more distinct form, and accommodated to our
schemes.

Preparation for the Hyperbola.

Make as CD to CN EE-CN
so CI to CM so that the of DCM MCE
will be = NCI nCI.


Because therefore it will be by Consect. 7. Prop. 7. as CD to DNE, so the DIE
to the IK.

And also by composition, as CD to CD+DNE i. e. CN per 9. lib I.
so DIE to DIE + IK.

Therefore by a Syllepsis, as CD to the CN so CD + DIE i. e. CI
to CN + DIE + IK.

But also by the Hypothesis. as the CD to the CN so CI to CM. Therefore CM is =
CN + DIE + IK.

Demonstration.
Since therefore it is certain that the difference between DM and EM is the
transverse ax DE; if it be demonstrated that DM is = KN and EM = K n, the
business will be done, because the difference between KN and K n is also the
transverse ax DE.

Resolve the KN.

It is certain that NI q + IK q=KN q.

Substitute for NI q, by the 7. Lib. 1. CI q+CN q+2NCI.

Preparation for the Ellipsis.

Make as CD to CN so CI to CM.

So that the DCM is = NCI.

Because therefore by Consect. 7. Prop. 7. as CD to DNE so DIE to the IK;

Then also by dividing, as CD to CD-DNE i. e. CN, by 8. l. 1.
so DIE to DIE-IK.

Therefore by a Dialepsis, as CD to CN, so CD-DIE i. e. CI by 8. cit.
to CN-DIE+IK.

But also by the Hypothesis, as CD to CN, so CI to CM: Therefore CM is = CN-DIE
+ IK.

Demonstration.
Since therefore it is certain that the sum of DM and EM is the transverse ax
DE; if it be demonstrated that DM is = KN and EM = K n, the business will be
done, because the sum of KN and K n is also equal to the transverse ax DE.

Resolve the KN.

It is certain that NI q+^K q=KN q.

Substitute for NI q, by the 7. lib. 1. CI q+CN q+2NC^

Then will CI q+CN q+2NC^+IK q=KN q.

Substitute for C^ q, by the 9. lib. 1. CD q+DIE; then will CD q+DIE+CN
q+2NC^+K q=KN q.

Resolve also DM.

It is certain that CM q+CD q+ 2DCM 2NCI
= DM, by the 7. lib. 1.

Substitute for CM q its value by the Preparation, and you will have CN q-D^E+^K
q+CD q+2NCI=DM q:

Which were before = KN q.

Therefore KN=DM; which is one.

In like manner resolve Kn.

It is certain that nl q+^K q=K nq.

Substitute for nI q, by Consect. 1. Prop. 10. Lib. 1. C^ q+CN q-2 nCI, and
you will have

CI q+CN q-2 nCI+IK q=K nq.

Substitute for CI q, by the 9. lib. 1. CD q+D^E, and you will have ^=K nq.

Resolve also the EM.

It is certain that 2CD q+2CM q-DM q=EM q per 13. lib. 1.

Then will CI q+CN q+2NCI+IK q=KN q.

Substitute for CI q by the 8. lib. 1. CD q-DIE; then will ^.

Resolve also the DM.

It is certain that CM q 2DCM 2NCI
= DM q per 7. lib. 1.

Substitute for CM q its value from the preparation, and you will have CN q-DIE+IK
q+CD q+2NCI=DM q:

Which before were = KN q.

Therefore KN = DM; which is one.

In like manner resolve the Kn.

It is certain that nI q+IK q=K nq.

Substitute for nI q by Consect. 1. Prop. 10. lib. 1.

CI q+CN q-2NCI, and you will have CI q+CN q-2NCI+IK q=K nq.

Substitute for CI q per 8. lib. 1. CD q-DIE, and you will have CD q-DIE + CN
q-2NCI+IK q=K nq.

Resolve also EM.

It is certain that 2CD q+2CM q-DM q=EM q per 13.1.

Substitute the value of DM q first found above, and you will have CD q+CM q-2
nCI=EM q.

Substiute for CM q the value as in the preparation, and you will have CD q+CN
q+DIE-2 nCI+IK q=EM q: Which were before = K nq.

Therefore K n=EM; which is the other.

SHCOLIVM II.
HEnce you have the common mechanical ways of describing the ellipsis and
hyperbola about their given axes; and the ellipsis, if the Foci N, N, ( Fig.
129. n. 1.) are given, or found according to Consect. 3. Prop. 7. and having
therein stuck or fixed two pins, put over them a thread NF n tied both ends
together precisely of the length you design the greater ax DE to be of, and
having put your pencil or pen in that -string draw it round, always keeping it
equally extended or tight. Now because the parts or portions of the thread
remain always equal to the whole ax DE, what we proposed is evident by the
present Prop. which may also be very elegantly described by a certain sort of
Compasses, a description whereof Swenterus gives us in his Delic. Physico-Math.
Part. 2. Prop. 20. which may be also done by a sort of organical Mechanism, by
the help of two rulers moveable in the Foci GN and H n (n 2.) and equal to the
transverse ax DE, and fastened above by a transverse ruler GH equal to the
distance of the Foci, as may appear from the Figure. For if the style F be
moved round within the fissures of the cross rulers H n and GN the curve
thereby described will be an ellipsis from the property we have just now
demonstrated of it, which it has in every point F. For the triangles HGN and
NH n, which have one common side HN, and the others equal by construction, are
equal one to another, and consequently the angles FHN and FNH equal, so also
the legs HF and FN, and so likewise FN and F n together are equal to H n = DE;
which is the very property of the ellipse we are now treating of. But Van
Schooten, who taught us this delineation, hints, that, if through the middle
point ^ of the line HN you draw the line IFL, it will touch the ellipsis in the
point F; for since the angles IFH and IFN are equal, by what we have just now
said, the vertical angle LF n of the one IFH, will be necessarily equal to the
other IFN: But this equality of the angles, made by the line KL drawn through F,
with both those drawn from the centres, is here a sign of contact, as is in the
circle the equality of the angles with a line drawn from its one center. So
that after this way you may draw a tangent through any given point F of Page 192.
129

130

131

132

133

134

the ellipsis without this organical apparatus of Rulers; viz. if, having drawn
from both the Focus's through the given point F the right lines nH, NG equal to
the Latus Transversum DE, you bisect HN in I and draw IFL: Or if the line that
connects the extremes GH be produced to K, and you draw thence KFL, viz. in
that case where GH and N n are not parallel; otherwise a line drawn through the
point F parallel to them would be the tangent sought.

As to the hyperbola, there is a mechanic method of drawing that also, not
unlike the others, from a like property in that, communicated by the same Van
Schooten, viz. If having found the Focus's N and n (Fig. 129. n. 3.) you tie a
thread NFO in the Focus N and at the end of the ruler nO of the length of the
transverse ax DE; then putting in a pen or the moveable leg of a pair of
compasses (nor would it be difficult to accommodate the practice we before made
use of to this also) draw or move it within the thread NFO from O to E, so that
the part of the thread NO may always keep close to the ruler as if it were
glued to it. For if we call the length of the thread X, and the transverse ax
ob as above, the ruler nO will be, by the Hypoth. = X + ob. Make now the part
of the thread OF = X, the remainder or other part will be NF = X and nF = X +
ob, and the difference between FN and F n, = ob. Make OF = X, then will FN be X
and F n X + ob, the difference still remaining ob and so ad infinitum. In
short, since the difference of the whole thread and of the whole ruler is ob,
and in drawing them, the same OF is taken from both, there will always be the
same difference of the remainders. Hence also assuming at pleasure the points N
and n you may describe hyperbola's so, the thread NFO be shorter than the ruler
nFO: For if it were equal there would be described a right line perpendicular
to N n, through the middle point C.

There yet remains one method of describing hyperbola's and ellipses in Plano,
by finding the several points without the help or Apparatus of any threads or
instruments, viz. in the ellipsis, having given or assumed the transverse axis
DE and the Foci N and n (Fig. 130. n. 1.) if from N at any arbitrary distance,
but not greater than half the transverse ax NF, you make an arch, and keeping
the same opening of the compasses you cut off, from the transverse ax, EG, and
then, taking the remaining interval GD, from n you make another arch^ cutting
the former in F, and so you will have one point of the ellipse, and after the
same way you may have innumerable others, f, f, f, etc.

In like manner to delineate the hyperbola, having given o^ assumed the
transverse ax DE and the Focus's N and n (n. 2.) if from N at any arbitrary
distance NF you strike an arch, and keeping the same aperture of the compasses
from the diameter continued, you cut off EG, and then at the interval GD from n
make another arch cutting the former in F, you will have one point of the
hyperbola, and after the same way innumerable others, f, f, etc.

Proposition IX.
IF the secondary ax, or conjugate diameter of the hyperbola AB (Fig. 131.) be
applied parallel to the vertex E, so that it may touch the hyperbola, and OE,
EP are equal like BC and AC, and from the center C you draw through O and P right
lines running on ad insinitum, and lastly QR parallel to the Tangent OP; you will
have the following

CONSECTARYS.
I. THE parts QG and HR intercepted between the curve and those right lines CQ,
CR will be equal; for by reason of the similitude of the CEP and CFR as also
CEO, CFQ as CE is to EO (and EP) so will CF be to FQ and FR, and consequently
these will be equal; and so taking away the semiordinates FG and FH which are
also equal, the remainders GQ and HR will be also equal, and consequently the
QGR, GRH, etc. all equal among themselves: Which we had already deduced before
in Consect. 2. and 3. Def. 7.

II. The rectangle QGR will be = EO or EP = ^ i. e. (as Apollonius speaks) to
the fourth part of the figure: For by reason of the similitude of the CEO, CFQ,
CE will be to EO as CF to FQ: i. e. as the CE to the EO i. e. as (by Cons 2.
7.) the Lat. Transv. to the Lat. Rect. so the CF to th FQ
i. e. as (by the 7. Prop.) as the DFE to the FG

But now if from the CF you take the DFE, there will remain the CE, by Prop. 9.
lib. 1. and if from the FQ you take the FG there will remain the QGR, by Prop.
8. lib. 1. wherefore that remaining CE to this remaining QGR will be, as was
the whole square CF to the whole square FQ, by Prop. 26. lib. 1. i. e. as was
the CE to the EO; consequently the QGR and the square EO (to which the same
square CE bears the same proportion) will be equal among themselves.

III. Since this is also after the same manner certain of any other rectangle
ggr or grh, etc. it follows that all such rectangles are equal among themselves.

IV. Wherefore it is most evident, since the lines FR, fr, etc. and so GR and
gr grow so much the longer, by how much the more remote they are from the
vertex E; that on the contrary the lines QG and qg must necessarily so much the
more decrease and grow shorter, and consequently the right line CQ approach so
much nearer and nearer to the curve EG.

V. But that they can never meet or coincide although produced ad infinitum will
thus appear; if it were possible there could be any concourse or meeting, so
that the point G and Q or g and q could any where coincide, it would follow
from Consect. 2. that as the DFE to the square FG so the square CF to the
square FQ i e* to the same square FG; and so that the DFE would be = CF; which
is absurd by Prop. 9 lib. 1. so that now it is evident that the lines COQ and
CPR drawn according to Consect. 1. are really Asymptotes ( i. e. they will
never Apoll. Prop. 1. lib. 2.
coincide ( viz. with the curve of the hyperbola) as Apollonius has named them.

VI. Having drawn the right lines from G and g parallel to both the asymptotes,
viz. GS and gs and likewise GT and gt, the rectangles TGS and tgs will be
Apollon. Prop. 12. lib. 2.
equal among themselves. For by reason of the similitude of the TQG and tqg,
first, TG will be to QG as tg to qg; and, by reason of the equality of the QGR
and qgr, secondly, QG will be to gr reciprocally as qg to GR, by Prop 19* lib.
1. and by reason of the similitude of the SGR and sgr, thirdly, as gr to gs so
GR to GS, wherefore (since in two series

1. 2. 3. as TG to QG to gr to gs so tg to qg to GR to GS) you will have ex aequo
or by proportion of equality as TG to gs so tg to GS, by Prop. 24 lib. 1.
Therefore, by Prop. 17. of the same, the of TG into GS= of tg into gs. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM.
HEnce, lastly, we have a new genesis of the hyperbola in Plano about its given
diameters from the speculations of De Wit Elem. Curv. lib. I. cap. 2. prop. 3.
De Wit; if, viz. having drawn the lines AB and OF cross one another at
pleasure (Fig. 132) to the angle BCF you conform the moveable angle BCD ( acd
being to be delineated in the opposite hyperbola equal to the contiguous ACD)
one of whose legs is conceived to be indefinitely extended, but the other CD of
any arbitrary length; and to the end of it D apply the slit of a moveable ruler
GD about the point G at any arbitrary interval GD (but yet parallel to the leg
CB in this first station) and so carrying together along with it the moveable
angle BCD about the line ECF, but so that the leg CD may always remain fast to
it, and the other CB be intersected in its progress by the ruler GDH, e. g. in
b or b This point of intersection, thus continually moved on, will describe the
curve bGb, which we thus prove to be an hyperbola: Because the ruler GDH
turning about the pole G, and carried from D e. g. to d or d cuts the leg of
the moveable angle CB brought to the situation cb or gb, and in the mean while
remaining always parallel to it self; and having drawn from the points of
intersection b and b and G the lines GI, bK and be parallel to the ruler CF,
because e. g. in the second station, having taken the common quantity cD from
the equal ones CD and cd, the remainders C c and D d are equal, and by reason
of the similitude of the dcb and dDG, as D d i. e. C c or bK
to DG, so dc i. e. DC or GI
to cb; the rectangle of K b into bc will be = of DG into GI, by Prop. 18. lib.
1. and in like manner, when in the third station having added the common line
Dg to the equal ones CD and gd, the whole lines Dd and Cg are equal, and, by
reason of the similitude of the bgd and GDd as Dd i. e. Cg or be
is to DG so is gd i. e. DC or GI
to gb; the of eb into bg= of DG into GI, by the same 18. Prop. Wherefore the
three points b, G, b, (and so all the others that may be determined the same
way) are in the hyperbola, whose asymptotes are CB and CF and its center C,
etc. by the present Prop. Consect. 6. Q. E. D.

You may also determine innumerable points of this curve separately without the
motion we have now prescribed, viz. as the point a in the opposite hyperbola,
if through any assumed point c in the asymptote CE you draw a parallel to the
other asymptote CA, and having made cd equal to CD, from G through d draw G da,
and so in others.

CHAP. II. Of Parabolical, Hyperbolical and Elliptical Spaces.
Proposition X.
THE Archim. de Quadratur. Parab. Prop. 17. and 24.
Parabolick Space ( i. e. in Fig. 133. that comprehended under the right line
GH and the parabola GEH) is to a circumscribing Parallelogram GK, as 4 to 6 (or
2 to 3) but to an inscribed GEH as 4 to 3.

Demonstration.
Suppose FH divided first into two then into four equal parts, and draw
parallel to the ax OF the lines of, of, etc. dividing also OF into four parts,
the first fg will be 3, the second 2, the third 1, by Prop. 34. lib. 1. but as
of is to ge so is ge to he, by Consect. 1. Prop. 4. Therefore he in the
diameter OF is = o, in the first of it is = (for as of, 4, to ge, 1, so ge, 1,
to he,) in the second of a portion of he is = ^, in the third to ^, and so the
portions eh in the trilinear figure E hHK make a series in a duplicate
arithmetical progression, viz. 1, 4, 9, 16: After the same manner, if the parts
F f, etc. are bisected, you will find the portions eh in the external trilinear
figure to make this series of numbers, ^, ^, ^, ^, ^, ^, ^, and so onwards.
Wherefore since the portions eh or the indivisibles of the trilinear space
circumscribed about the parabola are always in a duplicate arithmetical
progression: the sum of them all will be to the sum of as many indivisibles of
the parallelogram FK, ^qual to the line KH, i. e. the trilinear space it self
to this para^lelogram as 1 to 3, by Consect. 10. Prop. 21. lib. 1. Wherefore
the semi-parabola ^E hH will be as 2, and the FEH as 1; therefore the whole
parabola as 4, and the whole GEH as 3, and the whole parallelogram GK as 6. Q
E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
IT is evident Archim. Prop. 19. with the Coroll.
that in the first division, the second line fh (i. e. that drawn from the
middle of the base FH) is three such parts whereof FE is 4; for eh is ^ i. e.
1, therefore fh is 3.

CONSECTARY II.
IT is also evident, that this demonstration will hold of any parabolick
segment.

Proposition XI.
THE Elliptical Space Archim. lib. de Conoid. etc. Prop. 5.
comprehended by the Ellipsis DAEB (Fig. 127.) is to a circle described on the
transverse ax DE, as the Axis Rectus or conjugate diameter AB to the transverse
ax DE.

Demonstration.
THis is in the first place evident from the genesis of the ellipse we deduced
in Schol. 1. Prop. 7. for in that deduction we showed that FO, i. e. HN was to
NI as AB to DE: Which since it is true of all the other indivisibles or
ordinates HN and IN ad infinitum; it is manifest that the planes themselves
constituted of these indivisibles will have the same reason among themselves,
as the Axis Rectus AB to the transverse DE. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
THerefore the quadrature of the ellipse will be evident, if that of the circle
be demonstrated.

CONSECTARY II.
SInce a circle described on the least diameter AB will be to one described on
the greater diameter DE, as AB to a third proportional by Prop. 35. lib. 1. it
follows by virtue of the present Prop. that the ellipse is a mean proportional
between the greater and lesser circle, i e. as the ellipse is to the greater
circle so is the lesser circle to it, viz. as AB to DE.

CONSECTARY III.
HEnce you may have a double method of determining the area of an ellipse. 1.
If having found the area of the greater circle, you should infer, as the
greater diameter of the ellipsis to the less, so the area of the circle found
to the area of the ellipse sought. 2. If having also found the area of the
lesser circle, you find a mean proportional between that and the area of the
greater.

SCHOLIVM.
WE may also show the last part of the second Consect. thus, 1. If having
described the circle E adbE ( Fig. 134.) about the least axis of the ellipse we
conceive a regular hexagon to be inscribed, and an ellipse coinciding with one
end E of its transverse ax, and with the other or opposite one D to be so
elevated, that with the point d it may perpendicularly hang over the circle,
and further from all the angles of the figure inscribed in the circle you
erect* the perpendiculars gG, bB, etc. it is certain that the sides ED and E d
of the triangle DE d will be cut by the parallel planes FG gf, etc. into
proportional parts, and that those by reason of the similitude of the FDG and
fdg, and so also the other rectangles will be among themselves as the
intercepted parts of the lines ID and id, CI and ci, and in infinitum, (viz. of
how many sides soever the inscribed figure consists:) Wherefore also all the
parts of the ellipse taken together will be to all the parts of the circle
taken together, i. e. the whole ellipse to the whole Page 201.
135

136

137

138

139

140

141

circle as all the parts of the diameter ED or ab, i. e. as DE it self to AB.
Q. E D.

CONSECTARY IV.
IT is also evident that both these demonstrations of the present Prop. will be
also the same in any segments of the ellipsis or circle.

Proposition XII.
ANY Hyperbolical space GEHG (Fig. 135) is to any Hyperbolick figure of equal
height gEhg [whose Latus Rectum and Transversum are equal (as in the circle)
and also equal to the Latus Transversum of the former DE, as the Axis Rectus
(or conjugate) AB is to the Latus Transversum DE (as in the ellipsis.)

Demonstration.
By the Hypoth. and Prop. 7. and its second Consect. the F g is = DFE.
Wherefore this DFE i e. the F g is to the FG as the Latus Transversam to the
Latus Rectum of the hyperbola GEHG, by the same seventh Prop. i. e. (by
Consect. 2 of the same) as the square of the Latus Transvers. DE to the square
of the conjugate AB: Therefore the roots of these squares will be also
proportional, viz. F g to FG as DE to AB; and consequently (since the same is
true of any other ordinates ad infinitum) the whole hyperbola gE hg will be to
the whole one GEHG as DE to AB. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
THerefore having found the quadrature of such an hyperbola, whose Latus Rectum
and Transversum are equal, you may have also the quadrature of any other
hyperbola.

CONSECTARY II.
IT is evident that the same demonstration will hold in any other hyperbola's.

Proposition XIII.
ANY Parabolick segments upon the same base, and hyperbolical and elliptical
ones described about the same conjugate (one whereof shall be a right one, the
other a scalene) and constitued between the same parallels, are equal.

Demonstration.
I. It is evident of Parabola's; for both the right one GEHG, and the scalene
one G EHG ( Fig. 136. n. 1.) (for the demonstration of Prop. 10. will hold in
both) is to a inscribed in them as 4 to 3. But the triangles GEH and G EH are
equal, by Consect. 5. Def. 12. or Prop. 28. lib. 1. Therefore the Parabola's
also.

Or thus, in the right parabola GEHG every thing is the same as in 1. and 4.
Prop. of this Book, viz. EI= eb, OF= ib, the square IK= oecc, the FG= oicc. And
because therefore in the scalene Parabola also the square FG remains = oicc,
make F E= n, and find both the abscissa EI, and the answering to it IK.

1. For the abscissa; as FE to EI so F E to EI, per ^ Consect. 4 Prop. 34 lib.
1.

2. For the IK; as F E to EI so FG to IK, ^. per Prop. 4. of this.

Therefore the IK=IK and IK=IK, and this in any case ad infinitum: Therefore
the one parabola is = to the other. Q. E. D.

II. The business is much after the same way evident of ellipses and
hyperbolas. For making all things in the ellipsis and right hyperbola ( n. 2.
and 3. Fig. 136.) as in Prop. 2, 3, 5, 7. viz. the IK oecd- eecd in the
ellipsis, oecd+ eecd in the hyperbola, the AB oocd by Consect. 2. Prop. 7. EI=
eb, DE= ob, etc. if in oblique ones for the Latus Transversum DE you put n, and
seek the Latus Rectum and abscissa EI, you may by means of these also have the
square IK, by Prop. 2. and 3.

1. For the Latus Rectum. As n to oocd so oocd to ^ by Cons. 2.7*

2. For EI the abscissa. As ob to eb so n to ^= EI.

3. For the side RS deficient or exceeding, from Prop. 2. and 3. As n to ^ so ^
to ^=RS.

Now the abscissa multiplied by the Lat. Rect. The abscissa multiplied by RS. ^
by ^ gives oecd. ^ by ^ gives eecd. The sum of these oecd + eecd in the hyperb.
= IK by Prop. 2. evidently = IK The difference of these oecd- eecd gives in the
ellipsis IK by Prop. 3. evidently = IK.

Wherefore the lines IK and IK, and the whole KL and KL will be equal; and
since the same thing is evident after the same way of all other lines of this
kind ad infinitum, the elliptical and hyperbolical segments will be so also. Q.
E. D.

CHAP. III. Of Conoids and Spheroids.
Proposition XIV.
A Parablick Conoid Archimed. Prop 23. and 24. (al. 26. and 27.)
is subduple of a Cylinder, and in sesquialteran reason (or as 1) of a cone of
the same base and altitude.

Demonstration.
Because in the parabola the AD ( Fig. 137.) is to the SH, as BD to BH, i. e.
as 3 to 1, and so to the TI as BD to BY, i. e. as 3 to 2, by Prop. 4. of this;
it is evident that these squares of SH and TI and AD and consequently of the
whole lines also S h, T i, AC, and the circles answering to them will be in
arithmetical progression, 1, 2, 3; and moreover if there are new Bisections in
infinitum, as the abscissa's so also the squares and circles of the ordinates,
by virtue of the aforesaid fourth Prop. will always be in arithmetical
Progression 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. It is evident that an infinite series of
circles in the conoid, considered as its indivisibles, will be to a series of
as many circles equal to the greatest AC, i. e. the conoid to the cylinder AF
as 1 to 2, or as 1 to 3, by Consect. 9. Prop. 21. or Consect. 4. Prop. 16. lib.
1. but to the same cylinder AF the inscribed cone ABC is as 1 to 3, by Prop.
38. lib. 1. therefore the cylinder, conoid and cone are as 3, 1 ^ and 1. Q.E.D.

Proposition XV.
THE half of Archim. 29. and 30. ( al. 32. and 33.)
any Spheroid, or any other segment of it is in subsesquialteran proportion to
the cylinder, and double of the cone having the same base and altitude.

Demonstration.
Having divided the altitude BD ( Fig. 138.) e. g. into three equal parts,
because in the ellipse as well as in the circle the square of AD is to the
square of SH as the GDB to the GHB, i. e. as 9 to 5, and so to the square TI as
9 to 8, by Consect. 1. Prop. 5. of this; and in like manner if you make new
bisections, the squares (and consequently the circles) of the ordinates go on
or decrease by a progression of odd numbers, as 36, 35, 32, 27, 20, 11, and so
ad infinitum, the bisections being continued on; as we have shown in the sphere
and circumscribed cylinder Prop. 39. lib. 1. and it will necessarily follow
here also (by virtue of Consect. 12. Prop. 21.) that the whole cylinder will be
to the inscribed segment of the spheroid, as 3 to 2; and since the same
cylinder is to the cone ABC as 3 to 1, also the segment of the spheroid will be
to the cone as 2 to 1. Q. E. D.

Proposition XVI.
AN hyperbolical Conoid Archi^. Prop. 27. and 28. (al. 30. and 31.)
is to a cone of the same base and altitude, as the aggregate of the ax of the
hyperbola that forms it and half the Latus Transversum, to the aggregate of the
said axis and Latus Transversum.

Demonstration, containing also the Invention of this Proportion.

Make (in Fig. 139.) CE= a, OF= b, OE= c; then will CF= a+ b. Since therefore
as CE to OE so CF to FQ ^ the EO will = cc and FQ= ^.

But as these squares so also are the circles of the lines EO and FQ to one
another, by Prop. 32. lib. 1. and so the cone COP will be as ^, and the cone
CQR as ^ ( viz. by multiplying the third part of the altitude CF by the base
FQ:) Having therefore subtracted the cone COP from the cone CQR, there will
remain the truncated cone QOPR ^, and from this solid truncated cone having
further subtracted the hollow truncated cone, which the space EHRP produced in
the genesis of the conoid (and which according to Consect. 2. Definit. 9. is as
bcc) there will remain the hyperbolical conoid ^ i. e. (by substituting now the
values of the ax or abscissa OF, and of half the Lat. Transv. EC, and of the
conjugate diam. OP, etc. found in the demonstrations of the preceding Chapter,
viz. ^ for a, eb for b, and oocd for c or oocd for cc) the hyperbolical conoid
will come out ^ i. e. ^. But the cone GEH (multiplying the third part of OF
into the GH, i. e. eb into 4 oecd+4 eecd) is as ^. Therefore the conoid is to
the cone as 6 eebocd+4 e{powerof3} bcd to 4 eebocd+4 e{powerof3} bcd, i. e.
(dividing on both sides by 4 eecd) as ob+ eb to ob+ eb. Which was to be found
and demonstrated.

SCHOLIVM.
IF any one had rather proceed herein by indivisibles, as in the precedent
Prop. having divided the ax OF ( Fig. 140.) again into three equal parts, and
assuming the values of the lines determined in the hyperbola, viz. eb for the
abscissa OF, ob for the transverse ax, ^ for the Latus Rectum, oecd+ eecd for
the square of the semiordinate FG, etc. the lowest and greatest circle of the
diameter HG will be as oecd+ eecd, and, if you make as the Latus Transv. to the
Latus Rectum, so the D fE ob-^ made of ob+ eb into eb (i. e. oebb+^ eebb) to a
fourth; there will come out oecd+^ eecd for the second circle of the diam. hg;
and by the same inference (as ob to ^ so ob+ eb into eb to a fourth) for the
third circle of the diameter HG oecd+^ eecd; so that these indivisibles [for
which here and in the precedent also the partial circumscribed cylinders may be
assumed] proceed in a double series of numbers, the first in a simple
arithmetical progression 3, 2, 1, the latter in a duplicate Arithmetical
progression of squares 9, 4, 1; and the same if you make further new
bisections, will necessarily happen ad Infinitum, (the former numbers e. g. in
the first bisection will be ^ ^ oecd the latter ^ eecd, etc) it is manifest
from the consectaries of Prop. 21. lib. 1. that the whole cylinder HK will in
like manner be expressed by a double series of parts answering, in numbers to
the indivisibles of the conoid made by any bisection, but in magnitude to the
greatest of them all, and in the sum of its first series of parts will be to
the sum of the first in the conoid, both being infinite, as 2 to 1 or 3 to 1
oecd, by Consect. 9. of the said Prop. 21. and the sum of its latter to the sum
of the former in the conoid will be as 3 to 1 eecd and so the whole cylinder to
the whole conoid as 3 oecd+3 eecd to 1 oecd + eecd i. e. (dividing by ecd) as 3
o+3 e to 1 o+ e i. e. multiplying both sides by b) as 3 ob+3 eb to 1 ob+ eb;
and consequently the cone (which is of the cylinder) to the conoid as ob+ eb to
1 ob+ eb. Q.E.D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce also appears the proportion of the hyperbolick conoid to a cylinder of
the same base and altitude, which we did not express in the Prop. viz. as the
aggregate of the ax and half the Latus Transversum to triple the aggregate of
the said ax and Latus Transversum.

CHAP. IV. Of Spiral Lines and Spaces.
Proposition XVII.
THE Archim. Prop. 24. de Spiral.
first spiral space is subtriple of the first circle, i. e. as 1 to 3.

Demonstration.
Having divided the circumference of the circle into ( Fig. 141. n. 1.) three
equal parts by lines drawn from the initial point, beginning from the first
line BA, the line BC will be as 1, BD as 2, BA as 3, by Consect. 1. Def. 12. of
this book, and consequently the sectors circumscribed about the spiral will be
CB c as 1, DB d as 4, AB a as 9, by Prop. 32. lib. 1. and in like manner, if
you make new bisections, the lines drawn from the point B to the spiral, will
be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; but the circumscribed sectors, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36; and so
the circumscribed partial sectors ad infinitum will proceed in an order of
squares, there being always as many sectors in the circle equal to the greatest
of them. Therefore all the sectors that can be circumscribed ad infinitum about
the spiral space, i. e. the spiral space it self (in which at last they end) to
so many equal to the greatest, i. e. to the circle, is as 1 to 3, by Consect.
10. Prop. 21. lib. 1. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
SInce the first circle is to the second as 1 to 4 ( i. e. as 3 to 12) by Def.
12. of this, and Prop. 31. lib. 1. and the first spiral space to the first
circle as 1 to 3 by the present Prop. the same spiral space will be to the
second circle as 1 to 12; and to the third by a like inference as 1 to 27, to
the fourth as 1 to 48, etc.

CONSECTARY II.
THE first spiral line is equal to half the circumference of the first circle.
For the lines or radii of the sectors, and consequently their peripheries or
arches proceed in a simple arithmetical reason, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. while
in the mean time the whole periphery of the circle contains so many arches
equal to the greatest. Therefore the whole periphery of the circle is to an
infinite series of circumscribed arches, i. e. to the spiral line it self, as 2
to 1, by Consect. 9. Prop. 21. lib. 1.

Proposition XVIII.
THE whole spiral Archim. Prop. 25.
space comprehended under the second right line EA and the second spiral EGIA
(see Fig. 141. n. 2.) is to the second circle as 7. to 12.

Demonstration.
For having divided the circumference of the circle first into three equal
parts, there will be drawn to the second spiral four right lines BE, BG, BY and
BA being as 3, 4, 5, 6, and but only three sectors circumscribed, viz GB g, IB
i and AB a, which proceed according to the squares of the three latter lines,
viz. 16, 25, 36, so that the sum is 77, while the sum of three equal to the
greatest is 108, and so the one to the other (dividing both sides by 9) as 12
to 8 ^* Having moreover bisected the arches and parts of the line BE, so that
that shall be 6, the second BF will be 7, and so the other five 8, 9, 10, 11,
12; and the sectors answering to them (excepting the first) 49, 64, 81, 100,
121, 144, so that their sum shall be 559, while the sum of six equal to the
greatest, i. e. the whole circle is 864, and so one to the other (dividing both
by 72) as 12 to 7 ^. In the other bisection of the arches and the parts of the
line BE, so that the one shall be 12, the second 13, etc. to the thirteenth BA
which will be 24, the sum of twelve sectors will be found to be 4250; and the
sum of as many equal to the greatest 6912, and so the one to the other
(dividing both sides by 576) as 12 to 7 ^ s. ^. Therefore the proportion will
be I. In the first case 12 to 7+1++^ viz. ^. II. In the second case 12 to 7+++^
viz. ^. III. In the third case 12 to 7+++^, etc.
The first and second fractions thus decreasing by the latter by. Wherefore the
proportion of the second circle to the second spiral space will be as 12 to
7+1++^ -- -^ - etc.- etc.-^ etc.

By virtue of Consect. 3. and 8.=0=0 Prop. 21. lib. 1. i. e. as 12 to 7. Q. E.
D.

CONSECTARY I.
BEcause the second circle is to the first spiral space as 12 to 1, by Consect.
1. of the preceding Prop. and to the second spiral space as 12 to 7, by the
present. it will be to the second space without the first ( viz. BCDEAIGE) as
12 to 6 i. e. as 2 to 1.

CONSECTARY II.
THerefore the second space separately to the first is as 6 to 1.

CONSECTARY III.
SInce in the trisection of both these circles, first and second, there arise
six lines, and as many sectors, viz. three lines BC, BD, BE, i. e. 1, 2, 3, to
which there answer three arches in the same progression within the second
circle, and also as many equal to its greatest; therefore the sum of all the
unequal arches will be 21, but the sum of the equal ones of both circles (each
of which in the first are equivalent to 3, in the second to 6) will be 27.
Wherefore the sum of both the Peripheries to the sum of all the circumscribed
arches will be as 27 to 21, i. e. (dividing both sides by 9) as 3 to 2.
Moreover bisecting the arches of the circles and the parts of the line BA,
there will arise six circumscribed unequal arches within the first circle,
which are as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and as many within the second 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12; the sum of all which is 78, while the sum of as many equal ones on both
sides is 108. Wherefore the one will be to the other, i. e. the sum of both the
peripheries to twelve circumscribed arches taken together, is now as 108 to 78,
i. e. (dividing both sides by 36) as 3 to 2. And making yet another bisection,
the proportion will be found to be as 3 to 2 ^, etc. and hence at length may be
evidently inferred; that the sum of both the peripheries will be to the sum of
all the arches circumscribible ad infinitum, i. e. to the whole helix as 3 to
2+ - -^ etc.=0. that is, as 3 to 2. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY IV.
THerefore, since the periphery of the second circle is double of the first,
that alone will be equal to the whole spiral.

CONSECTARY V.
THerefore, if the periphery of the second circle be 2, the periphery of the
first will be 1, and the first spiral line by Consect. 2. of the anteced. Prop.
wherefore the second spiral alone will be 1, and so the periphery of the second
circle alone will be to the second spiral alone as 2 to 1 i. e. as 4 to 3; and
to the first alone as 4 to 1.

SCHOLIVM I.
BUT as Consect. 4. may be also deduced after another way, viz. by comparing
only the arches of the second circle with the correspondent circumscripts, but
considering them as taken twice (because that circle is twice turned round
while the whole helix or spiral is described) and finding in the first
trisection the proportion of double the second periphery to all the
circumscripts as 12 to 7; and in the succeeding bisection as 12 to 6; in the
second bisection as 12 to 6, etc. and at length by inferring, that the second
periphery is double of all the arches circumscribible about the whole helix ad
infinitum, that is to the helix it self.

as 12 to 6+1 - - etc.=0. i. e. as 12 to 6;

and consequently the simple second periphery will be to the whole helix as 6
to 6: Thus the 5. Consect. may be separately had after the same manner, if
instead of the first trisection, you only bisect; ( vid. Fig. 141. n. 3.) for
so in the first bisection the arches circumscribed about the second spiral line
would be separately two semi-circles D d, 3 and A a, 4, (for as the line BC is
one, BE, 2, BD, 3, BA, 4; so the arch described by the radius BD is 3 and
described by the radius BA=4,) and their sum 7; while the sum of two equal to
the greatest is 8. In the second bisection (when BE is 4) BF and its arch is
made 5, the arch BD 6, the arch BG 7, the arch BA 8, the sum 26; while the sum
of so many quadrants equal to the greatest is 32. Thus in the third bisection
the sum of eight Octants circumscribed about the second helix will be found to
be 100, the sum of so many = to the greatest 128, etc. Wherefore the periphery
of the second circle in the first case will be to the arches circumscribed
about the second helix as 4 to 3+; in the second as 4 to 3+; in the third as 4
to 3+, etc. and so to all the arches circumscribible in infinitum, i. e. to the
second helix it self as 4 to 3+ - - etc. = 0. i. e. as 4 to 3. Q. E. D.

By the same method you may easily find the proportion of the third circle to
the third spiral space, and of that periphery either to the whole spiral, or
separately to the third, as will be evident to any one who trys.

I. For the third spiral space.

( Fig. 142) BC 1 BF 4 BY 7 49 BD 2 BG 5 BK 8 64 BE 3 BH 6 BA 9 81 are the
three first sectors circumscribed about the parts of the third helix. The sum
of these three sectors is 194; and the sum of so many equal to the greatest
243. Therefore the first proportion of the one sum to the other will be as 243
to 194, i. e. (dividing both sides by 9) as 27 to 21 ^.

In the first bisection there will be seven lines: BH 12, BL 13 169 Sectors
circumscribed about the parts of the third helix. BY 14 196 BM 15 225 BK 16 256
BN 17 289 BA 18 324 Sum 1459; while in the mean time the sum of as many equal
to the greatest is 944, and so the second proportion as 1944 to 1459 i. e.
(dividing both sides by 72) as 27 to 20 ^.

In the second Bisection there will be thirteen lines, viz. BH 24, the rest 25,
26, etc. but the sum of the sectors, i. e. of the square numbers answering to
the twelve latter will be found to be 11306; while in the mean time the sum of
as many equal to the greatest will be 15552, so that you will have the third
proportion of this sum to the other, viz. as 15552 to 11306, i. e. (dividing
both sides by 576) as 27 to 19 ^.

Therefore the I. proportion will be as 27 to 19+2+^ i. e. to 19+2++^ II. -- as
27 to 19+1+^ i. e. to 19+1++^ III. -- as 27 to 19+^ -- i. e. to 19+++^.

Therefore the proportion of the third circle to the third spiral space will be
as 27 to 19+2++^ -1 -- ^ i. e. as 27 to 19. - etc. - etc. -^ etc. = 0. = 0. =
0. Q. E. D.

II. For the third spiral line.

If instead of the first trisection (as less commodious for the end proposed)
you make use here also, as before, of bisection in the same figure, there will
come out six lines from the point B to the helix, viz. B m, 1, BE, 2, B n, 3,
BH, 4, B o, 5, BA, 6; to which there answer as many semicircular arches in the
same progression, and to the greatest of the two as many equal to 2, 4, 6; so
that the sum of the unequal ones is 21, and of the equal ones 24, and so the
proportion of three peripheries together to all the circumscripts together will
be as 24 to 21 (and dividing both by 6) as 4 to 3. In the second bisection the
twelve unequal lines and arches make the sum 78, and as many equal to the
greatest of the four will give the sum 96; so that the second proportion will
be 96 to 78, i. e. (dividing both sides by 24) 4 to 3. In the third bisection
the proportion will come out as 384 to 300, i. e. (dividing both sides by 96)
as 4 to 3, etc. Therefore the proportion of the three circles together to the
whole Helix will be as 4 to 3+ - - etc.=0. i. e. as 4 to 3 or 12 to 9. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY VI.
NOW, if the periphery of the first circle be made 2, the second will be 4,
the th^rd 6, and consequently the sum 12; it will be manifest that the third
periphery separately will be to the whole helix as 6 to 9, i. e. as 2 to 3.

CONSECTARY VII.
AND because the second periphery (which is 4) is equal to the first and second
helix together, by the above Consect. 4. the remaining third spiral will be 5,
and so the proportion of the third periphery to it as 6 to 5.

CONSECTARY VIII.
WHerefore the proportions of each of the peripheries to their correspondent
spirals will be in a progression of ordinal numbers, viz. so that the latter of
every two will denote the periphery of a circle, and the former an inscribed
spiral; and consequently the spiral lines will be in an arithmetical
progression of odd numbers, and the peripheries of the circles in a progression
of even ones.

1 -- The first Spiral, 2 -- The first Periphery, 3 -- The second Spiral, 4 --
The second Periphery, 5 -- The third Spiral, 6 etc. -- The third Periphery,
etc.
SHCOLIVM II.
THE seventh Consectary may also be easily deduced separately this way: In the
first bisection the line BA and its periphery is 6, the line B o and its
periphery 5, the sum of the circumscribed Peripheries 11; the sum of as many
equal to the greatest 12. Therefore the periphery of the third circle will be
to the two circumscripts as 12 to 11, i. e. as 6 to 5. In the second bisection
the four circumscribed quadrants will be 12, 11, 10, 9, their sum 42; and the
sum of four equal to the greatest, i. e. the periphery of the third circle 48.
Therefore the proportion is now as 48 to 42, i. e. (dividing both sides by 8)
as 6 to 5. Thus you will have the third proportion as 192 to 164, i. e.
(dividing both sides by 32) as 6 to 5. Wherefore the proportion of the third
periphery to the third helix or spiral is as 6 to 5+ - - etc. =0. i. e. as 6 to
5. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY IX.
AS Consect. 8. supplies us with a rule to determine the proportion of every
spiral of every order to the periphery of the correspondent circle, viz. if the
number of the order be doubled for the periphery of the circle, and the next
antecedent odd number be taken for the spiral line; so what we have hitherto
demonstrated supplys also another rule, to define the proportion of the spiral
space in any order to its circle. For since the circles are in a progression of
Squares 1, 4, 9, 16, etc. but the first circle is to the first space as 3 to 1
( i. e. a, 1 to) by Prop. 17. and the second to the second as 12 to 7 ( i. e.
as 4 to 2) by Prop. 18. the third to the third as 27 to 19 ( i. e. as 9 to 6)
by Schol. 1. of this. And contemplating both these series one by another, Of
the circles, 1, 4, 9. Of the spaces,, 2, 6.
We see the numbers of the spaces are produced, if from the spuare numbers of
the circles you substract their roots, and add to the remainder. Wherefore, if,
e. g. we were to determine the proportion of the fourth circle to the fourth
spiral space; the square of 4 viz. 16 would give the circle; hence substracting
the root 4, there wiill remain 12, and adding you would have the fourth spiral
space 12; and in like manner the spiral space 20 would answer to the circle 25,
etc. And that this is certain is hence evident, that if we multiply these
numbers 16 and 12, also 25 and 20 by 3, that we may have those proportions in
whole numbers, 48 and 37, 75 and 61, these are those very numbers Archimedes
had hinted at in the Coroll. of Prop. 25.

Page 217.
142

143

144

145

146



CONSECTARY X.
NAY what we have now said, is that very Coroll. comprehending also that 25th.
Proposition, viz. that a spiral space of any order is to its correspondent
circle, as the rectangle of the semidiameters of this and the preceding circle
together with a third part of the square of the difference between both
semi-diameters to the square of the greatest semidiameter. For, if e. g. the
proportion of the third spiral space to the third circle be required, since the
semidiameter of this third circle is as 3, and the semidiameter of the second
precedent one is 2, and so the difference 1; the rectangle of 2 into 3 i. e. 6,
together with of the square of the difference will define the third spiral
space 6; since the third circle may be defined by the square of the
semidiameter of the greater, viz. by 9, and so in the rest; as the numbers we
have found show, or further that may be found according to given Rules which
may be here seen in the following Table.

Orders. I II III IV V VI VII VIII XI X Circles. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100
The whole spaces, the preced. ones being included. 2 6 12 20 30 42 56 72 90
Separate spaces the preced. ones being excluded. 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18

CONSECTARY XI.
OUT of which table it is obvious to sight, that the second space excluding the
first is sextuple of the first, as we have already deduced in Consect. 2. Prop.
18. and the third separate space double of the second, and the fourth triple of
the same second, and the fifth quadruple, and so onwards.

SCHOLIVM III.
AND this shall suffice for spirals, which comprehends not only the chief
Theorems of Archimedes of spiral spaces, but also the chief of spiral lines
(whereof Archimedes has left nothing.) If any should have a mind to carry on
our method further, he may easily demonstrate after the same way what remains
in Archimedes, and what Dr. Wallis in his Arithmetic of Infinites from Prop.
5. to the 38, and what others have done on this Argument.

CHAP. V. Of the Conchoid, Cissoid, Cycloid, Quadratrix, etc.
Proposition XIX.
THE first conchoid of Nicomedes Bbb (Fig. 110) on both sides of the
perpendicular cDb approaches nearer always to the directrix or horizontal line
AE, and yet will never coincide with it, although it be conceived to be produced
on both sides ad infinitum.

Demonstration.
For since only D b is perpendicular to AE, and all the rest ab are so much the
more inclined to it by how much the more remote they are from the middle one D
b, and all in the mean while are equal both to it and to one another, by Def.
13. it is evident that the points b and B will come so much the nearer to AE,
by how much the farther they recede from the middle line D b. And yet because
the lines BAC and bac are all right ones, whose points A, a, are in a right
line AE it is equally as impossible that the point b or B, which is always in
the conchoid should ever touch this right line, as it is impossible that the
point C should be in it, by virtue of the aforecited Def. Q. E. D.

Proposition XX.
YET no other right line can be drawn between the directrix AE and the
conchoid, but what will cut it if produced.

Demonstration.
For if such a right line be made parallel to AE, as GH, and you make, as DI to
IC so D b to a fourth, which will be greater than IC, as D b is greater than
DI, and consequently, if making that an interval you draw the circular arch
from C, it will necessarily cut the line GH e. g. in G. Drawing therefore C aG.
you will have as DI to IC so aG to GC, i. e. to that fourth proportional before
found, by virtue of Prop. 34. lib. 1. but as DI to IC, so was also D b to the
same fourth by Construc. Therefore aG and D b, which have both the same
proportion to the same quantity, are equal; and consequently the point G is in
the conchoid by virtue of Def. 13. and consequently the right line GH being
produced will cut that produced also, on both sides, by the same reason. Much
more will it cut it on either side if it be not parallel to the directrix AE,
which is very obvious. Therefore no right line can be drawn between the
conchoid, etc. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce, besides orher Problems, that may be very easily solved, which requires,
having any rectilinear angle given ABC ( Fig 143.) and a point without it, from
that point to draw a right line DEF, so that part of it OF, which is
intercepted between the legs of the angle, shall be equal to a given line Z.
For if you draw the perpendicular DGH from the given point D through the
nearest leg of the angle BC, and make GH equal to the given line Z, and from
the center C at the interval GH describe the conchoid IHK, which will be
necessarily cut by the other leg of the angle by virtue of the present Prop. e.
g. in F, the line DF being drawn will give the intercepted part = GH by the
nature of the conchoid, and consequently = to the given line Z.

SCHOLIVM.
BY means of this Consectary Nicomedes solves that noble Problem of finding two
mean proportionals, after this way, which we will here show from Eutocius, but
drawn into a compendium, and somewhat changed as to the order. Let two given
lines AB and BC ( Fig. 144.) between which you are to find two mean
proportionals, be joined together at right angles, and divide both into two
parts in D and E, and having completed the rectangle ABCL, from L through D draw
LG to BC prolonged; so that after this way GB may become = AL or BC: Having let
fall a perpendicular from E cut off from C at the interval CF=AD the part OF,
and having drawn FG make CH parallel to it; and lastly through the legs of the
angle KCH draw the right line FHK, so that the part HK shall be equal to the
line CF, by the preceding Consect. and also draw the right line KM from K through
L to the continued line BA: All which being done, CK and AM will be two mean
proportionals between AB and BC; which after our way we thus demonstrate: By
reason of the similitude of the MAL and LCK

MA is to LC or AB as AL or BC to CK

b- eb- c- ec and moreover,

as MA to AD so GC to CK i. e. FH to HK

b- eb-2 c- ec by reason of GF and CH being parallel, by Consect. 4. Prop. 34.
lib. 1. therefore since HK is = AD= eb, FH will be = A= b, and consequently
MD=FK, viz. both b+ eb, and the square of both = bb+ eb+ eebb=OF+EK by virtue
of the Pythag. Theor. Now if to these equal quantities you add the equal DX and
EC= cc, their sum, viz. MD+DX i. e. MX will be bb+ ebb+ eebb+ cc, equal to the
sum of these, viz. OF+EC i. e. CF (by the Pythag. Theor. or EX by Construct.)
+KX; whence these two things now follow: 1. That the lines MX and KX are equal.
2. If from those equal sums you take away the common quantities eebb+ cc, the
remainders will be equal, viz. bb+ ebb = ecc+ eecc; and (since the part taken
away, viz. bb is manifestly to the other part taken away, viz. ecc as the
remainder ebb to the remainder eecc, and the whole with the parts taken away
and the remainders are in the same proportion by Prop. 26. lib. 1.) separately
also bb will = ecc and ebb= eecc. But from the latter equation it follows that

as eb to ec so ec to b by virtue of the 19. Prop. lib. 1. AB to CK so CK to MA

and by the same reason it follows from the former Equation as ec to b so b to c

CK to MA so MA to BC i. e. CK and MA are two mean Proportionals between AB and
BC. Q. E. D.

From which deduction you have also manifest the foundation of that mechanical
way, which Hiero Alexandrinus makes use of in Eutocius, lib. 2. of the Sphere
and Cylinder, and which Swenterus has put into his practical Geometry lib. 1.
Tract. 1. Prop. 23. when, viz having joined in the form of a rectangle the
given right lines AB and BC ( Fig. 145.) and continued them at the other ends,
he so long moves the ruler in L, having a moveable center, backwards and
forwards, 'till XK and XM by help of a pair of compasses are found equal. To
which, another way of Philo's is not unlike, and flows from the same fountain,
wherein, having made on AC a semicircle, the moveable ruler in L is so long
moved backwarks and forwards, until LM and NK are found equal: Which seems to
Eutocius to be more accommodated to practice, and easier to be performed by
help of a ruler divided into small equal particles.

Proposition XXI.
IF from any point of the other diameter in the generating circle e. g. from G
(Fig. 111. n. 1.) you draw a perpendicular GE through the cissoid of Diocles. the
lines CG, GE, GD, and GH will be continual proportionals.

Demonstration.
For since GE and IF, as right sines, and also GD and IC as versed sines of
equal arches by the Hypoth. are equal; you will have as ID to IF ( i. e. CG to GE)
so IF to IC ( i. e. GE to GD) per n. 3. Schol. 2. Prop. 34. lib. 1. But GD is
to GH as ID to IF ( i. e. as GE to GD) by the forecited Prop. 34. lib. 1.
Therefore CG to GE, GE to GD, and GD to GH, are all in the same continual
proportion. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY.
HEnce it was easy for Diocles to find two mean proportionals x and y between
two given right lines V and Z; ( Fig. 146) for he made (having first described
his curve DHB) as V to Z so CL to LK, and having drawn CKH to the curve, and
through H the perpendicular GE, he had between CG and GH two mean proportionals
GE and GD by virtue of the present Prop. when in the mean while CG the first
would be to GH the last, as CL to LK, i. e. as the first V to the last Z given
by virtue of the Constr. Therefore nothing remained but to make, 1. as CG to GE
so V to X; and lastly, as GE to GD so x to y.

SCHOLIVM.
IT may not be amiss to mention here another way of finding two mean
proportionals between any two given lines by the help of two Parabola's, which
Menechmus formerly made use of, viz. by joining at right angles the given lines
AB and BC ( Fig. 147.) and prolonging them as occasion shall require through E
and D; and then describing a Parabola about BE as its axis, so made that BC
shall be its Latus Rectum, and in like manner describing another Parabola about
BD as its ax, that shall have AB for its Latus Rectum, and that shall cut the
former in F: Which being done, the semiordinate FE (or BD which is equal to it)
being drawn to the point of Intersection F, will be the two mean proportionals
sought. For by virtue of the fourth Consectary of Prop. 1. of this Book, DF or
BE is a mean proportional between AB and BD, and in like manner OF or BD is a
mean proportional between BE and BC, and consequently as AB to BE so BE to BD,
and as BE to BD so BD to BC; Q. E. D.

To this way of Menechmus that of Des Carts is not unlike, which he gives us
p. m. 91. except only that instead of two Parabola's, he makes use only of one
and a circle in room of the other: In imitation of whom Renatus Franciscus
Slusius has since shown infinite methods of doing the same thing by help of a
circle, and either infinite Ellipse's or Hyperbola's, in his ingenious Treatise
which he thence names his Mesolabium.

Proposition XXII.
ANY semiordinate of the Cycloid as BF (Fig. 148.) or bf is equal to its
corresponding Sine in the generating circle as BD, bd, together with the arch
of that sine AD or Ad.

Demonstration.
For the motion of the point A describing the semi-cycloid AFE, by Def. 11. is
compounded of the motion of the orb (or wheel) B along the semicircle ADC, and
of the motion of the center along the right line BC equal to CE, and
consequently to the semi circle it self, or motion of the orb, Therefore as the
point A moving to E by the motion of the orb (or wheel) moved or was carried
from the diameter AC through the whole semi circle ADC 'till it came to AC again,
and by the motion of the Center passes through the whole space BG or CE, which is
equal to the semicircular arch; thus the same A, when come to F, will have
described the quadrant AD, by moving from the diameter AC the quantity of the
sine BD, and moreover by the motion of its center (which is equal to the motion
of the Orb) moves from AC the space of DF: And so the semiordinate BF will be
equal to the arch AD and to its sine BD taken together; and in like manner the
semiordinate bf will be equal to the arch A d and its sine bd, etc. Q E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
HEnce may be easily assigned by help of the cycloid a right line equal to the
semi-periphery or any given arch AD or A d; viz. CE double, or taken twice for
the whole circumference, and single for the semi-periphery or half
circumference, DF for the quadrant A d, df for the arch AD, etc.

CONSECTARY II.
WHerefore the quadrature of the circle may be geometrically obtained according
to Consect. 2. of Def. 15. lib. 1.

CONSECTARY III.
IF you take B e, be, double of the sines BD, bd, etc. so that all the
indivisibles bd taken together, may be to all the indivisibles be taken
together as BD to B e, a curve described through the points e will be an ellipsis
by Prop. 11. and the curvilinear space ADC eA will be equal to the semicircle
ACDA.

CONSECTARY IV.
AND since DF ( i. e. D e+ Of) is equal to the quadrant DA, by virtue of the
present Prop. BD+FG will be also equal to the quadrant (because the whole BG or
CE is = to a semicircle) and consequently Of and FG will be equal; in like
manner since df both above and below is equal to the arch dA, below bd+ fg will
be = to the remaining Arch dC: and above bd+ of (i. e. df) will be equal to the
equal arch dA. Therefore of above and fg below are equal, and (since the same
may be shown of all the indivisibles of the same sort throughout) the trilinear
figure FGE will be equal to the trilinear eFA.

Proposition XXIII.
THE cycloidal space is triple of the generating circle i. e. the
semi-cycloidal space AECA is triple of the semicircle ADCA.

Demonstration.
Since the parallelogram BCEG is equal to the whole circle by Consect. 2. of
Def. 15. lib. 1. i. e. to the semi-ellipse A eCA, by the present construction
the Trapezium C eGE will be equal to the quadrant of the ellipse or the
semicircle. But the trilinear space FEG is = to the trilinear space FA e, by
the fourth Consect. of the preced. therefore also the trilinear space A eCEA is
equal to the semicircle. Therefore the whole cycloidal space is equal to the
three semi-circles. Q. E. D.

Or thus.

Since the whole parallelogram AE is equal to two circles and the semi ellipsis
A eCA to one; the remaining space A eCEC to one circle, and its half A eGC to a
semicircle. But the trilinear space A Of is equal to the trilinear space FGE
by Consect. 4. of the preced. Therefore the one being substituted in the
other's place the trilinear space AFEC will be equal to the semicircle:
Therefore the remainder of the Parallelogram, i. e. the cycloidal space AFECA
will be equal to three semi-circles. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM.
TO these short Demonstrations, which we confess we owe for the most part to
Hon. Faber, we will subjoin another somewhat more prolix, but yet not
unpleasant, which we find in Carolus Renaldinus, lib. 1. de Resol. and Compos.
Math. p. 299. But here we will give it the Reader more plain, and free from all
Scruples, and likewise much easier. It is performed in these inferences, 1.
That the right lined Parallelogram A baB ( Fig. 149 n. 1) is equal to the
curvilinear space A bdaBDA. 2. That as that is divided into two equal parts by
its right lined diagonal A a, so likewise is this by the semi-cycloid A aa, so
that the right lined triangle A aB is equal to the curvilinear space A aaBDA.
3. Therefore the one as well as the other is equal to the generating circle;
and consequently, 4 If to this curvilinear space there be added the semicircle
ADBA the semi-cycloidal space A aaBA will be equal to three semi-circles. The
first is evident, while if you take from the right lined parallelogram the
semicircle ADBA on the one side, and on the other add the semicircle abda,
there will arise the curvilinear Parallelogram. The third is evident from
Consect. 2. Def. 15. lib. 1. Because the line B a is equal to the
semi-periphery, which multiplied by the diameter BC gives the area of the
circle. The fourth is self evident; and so there remains only the second to be
demonstrated, viz. That the curvilinear parallelogram is divided into two equal
parts by the cycloid, i. e. that the external trilinear Figure A adbA is eqaal
to the internal one A aaBDA; which may be thus shown: Having divided the base B
a into three equal parts, and drawn through them three semi-circles, and moreover
the transverse right lines D d and E e through the intersections of the
sem-icircles and the cycloid; it is certain from the genesis of the cycloid, by
virtue of the Cons. of Def. 11. that as the right line a1 is a third part of
the whole aB, so the arch 1 a is a third part of the generating periphery, and
by the same reason the arch 2 a two thirds, and so the remaining arch a11 also;
insomuch that the first arch 1 a, and the last a11, and consequently their
right sines af, ag, and likewise their versed ones f1, g11, are equal, and so
the curvilined partial Parallelograms, both above and below, all upon equal
bases, and of the same height ( viz. the two linear ones ae21 and da 11. 1.)
are equal among themselves, and so likewise the two pricked or pointed ones D a
2B and aeb1. Wherefore if now the base B a (n. 2) be conceived to be divided
into six equal parts, and having drawn semi-circles, and transverse lines through
their intersections with the cycloid, the arches and ^ will be ^ and ^ and ^ of
a semicircle, Page 227.
147

148

149

150

and so the versed sines of each, i. e. the altitudes of the corresponding
parallelograms will be equal, and consequently the parallelograms of the
internal and external trilinear space that are alike noted or signed will be
equal to each other. Now this inscription of curvilinear parallelograms always
respectively equal both in number and magnitude, since it may be continued in
both the trilinear figures ad infinitum; it will evidently follow, that the
trilinear figures themselves, whose infinite inscripts are always equal, will
be likewise equal to one another.

Proposition XXIV.
THE base of the quadratrix AE (Fig. 150) and the semidiameter of the
generating quadrant AD and the quadrant it self BD are in continual Proportion.

Demonstration.
For the quadrant DB is to the radius DA as the arch IB to the perpendicular H
e by Consect. 1. Def. 16 and I b is to H e as A b to A e by Prop. 34. lib. 1.
But the arch IB (if it be conceived to be less and less ad infinitum) will at
length coincide with I b, as ending in the same moment in the point B, wherein
H e will end in the point E, and so A e will end in AE and A b in AB. Therefore
at length DB will be to DA as IB ( i. e. I b) to H e, i. e, as A b to A e, i.
e. as AB (or DA) to AE. Q. E. D.

SCHOLIVM I.
CLavius about the end of the sixth Book of Euclid, and others, demonstrate
this indirectly by a deduction ad Absurdum, or concluding the opposite much
after this manner: If DA or AB is not to AE as DB to DA, suppose it to be so to
the greater A f or the less A e. In the first case therefore, because AB is to
A f as DB to DA per Hypoth. i. e. as K f to A f the quadrant K f and the radius
AB or DA will be equal. But as BD is to IB so is K f to H f by reason of the
similitude of the arches; and as BD to IB so also DA (or =K f) to the sine H e,
by Consect. 1. Def 16. Therefore the sine H e and the arch H f (to which the
same K f bears the same proportion) will be equal; which is absurd. In the
latter case, because AB would be to A e as DB to DA by the hypoth. i. e. as L e
to A e, the quadrant L e and the radius AB or DA would be again equal. But as
BD is to IB so is L e to M e by reason of the similitude of the arches; and as
BD to IB so also is DA ( ie=L e) to H e by Consect. 1. Def. 16. Therefore the
tangent H e and the arch M e (to which the same L e bears the same proportion)
will be equal, which is again absurd. Wherefore BD is to DA, not as DA to a
greater A f or a less A e; therefore as DA to AE. Q. E. D.

CONSECTARY I.
WHerefore it is evident from what we have deduced, if by means of the base of
the quadratrix AE you draw a quadrant, the side of the quadratrix DA will be
equal to it, and consequently double of the semi periphery, and quadruple of
the whole periphery.

CONSECTARY II.
IT is evident also that you may obtain a right line equal to the quadrant DB
of any given circle, if, having described a quadratrix, you make as AE to AD so
AD to a third equal to the quadrant DB: Which third proportional taken four
times will be equal to the whole periphery.

CONSECTARY III.
YOU may also obtain a right line equal to any less arch, if you make, as DA to
H e so a third proportional found ( i. e. the quadrant DB) to a fourth, by
virtue of Cons. 1. Def. 16.

CONSECTARY IV.
THE quadrature of the circle therefore, by virtue of Cons. 2. Def. 15. lib. 1.
as likewise the trisection of an angle, by virtue of Consect. 2. Def. 16. lib
2. may be Geometrically obtained, if the Quadratrix might be numbered among
Geometrical Curves.

SHCOLIVM II.
CLavius was also of this Opinion in the book before mentioned, who thought that
if the quadratrix be excluded out of the number of geometrical curves, by the
same reason you may also exclude the ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola, since
they as well as this are commonly described through innumerable points. But by
that great Man's leave, we may deny this consequence, by the same reason as Des
Carts has denied the converse of it in his Geom. p 18. and 19. by virtue of
which he suspects the ancients took the conick sections, etc. for mechanic or
non-geometrick lines, because they did the spiral, quadratrix, etc. for such.
But this is the difference between the description of the quadratrix and the
conick sections through points, that all and every of the points of the conick
sections, relating to any given point of the axis, may be geometrically
determined; but all the points of the quadratrix promiscuously related to any
point of the generating quadrant, cannot be geometrically determined, but only
those which respect some certain point, from which the quadrant may be divided
into two arches of known proportion. For if, e g. in the quadrant BD the point
X be given at pleasure, it will be impossible by Clavius's Rule to define a
point of the quadratrix answering to it, because the proportion of the arches
DX and BX is unknown, and consequently neither can a proportional section of
the right line AD be made: Not to mention that the last point E (which is the
primary and most necessary one to the quadrature) even by Clavius's own
confession cannot be geometrically defined. We may pass the like judgment on
Archimedes's spiral and such like curves, which are conceived to be described
by two motions independent on one another; as will be manifest to any one who
compares the genesis of the spiral with that of the quadratrix and what we have
hitherto said. Whence neither will Monantholius's trisection of a given angle
(which he essays) by means of a spiral be enough geometrical; which in his Book
de Puncto, Cap. 7. p. 24. he attempts to perform thus: To the center of a
described spiral and its first helical or spiral line BA ( Fig. 151.) he
applies the angle ABC equal to the given one abc; then having drawn circles
through F and A where the legs of the angle cut the spiral, he divides the
intermediate space DA into three equal parts in 1, and K: And then through these
points he draws circles cuting the helix in L and M; and lastly having drawn
BLN, BMO, he easily demonstrates from the genesis of the spiral that the arches
AO, ON, NC are equal. And so after the same manner not only any angle or arch,
but the whole periphery may be geometrically divided into as many parts as you
please; only supposing that this spiral line may be numbered among geometrical
ones; as we have heretofore hinted that the cycloid, conchoid, cissoid, and
logarithmical curve, etc. might be; and we have above sixteen Years ago
declared our opinion for it in our German Edition of Archimedes; and now are
therein confirm d by those celebrated Mathematicians Leibnitz, Craige, etc. who
number lines of this kind, although they cannot be expressed by our common
equations, among geometrical ones, notwithstanding the contrary opinion of Des
Carts, etc. because they admit of equations of an indefinite or transcendent
degree, and are capable of a Calculus as well as others, though it be of a nature
and kind different from that commonly used. See the Acta Erud. Lips. ann. 84.
p. 234. and ann. 86. p. 292. and 294.

CHAP. VI. The Conclusion, or Epilogue of the whole Work.
NOW we may at length understand what Honoratus Fabri delivers concerning the
distribution of figurate magnitudes into certain Classes, in his Synopsis Geom.
p. 57. and the following.

1. The first Class contains elementary figures, or equal indivisibles, such
as, 1. All Parallelograms, as the Square, Oblong, Rhombus and Rhomboid, the
elements whereof are equal right lines, as in Def. 12. lib. 1. 2. Unequal or
concave Surfaces, the elements whereof are curve lines moved through right lines
by a parallel motion; among which are chiefly reckoned cylindrical surfaces,
whereof see Def. 16. lib. 1. about the end. 3. Parallelepipeds, and among them
the cube, whose indivisibles are squares, or other Parallelograms. 4. Prisms
made by the motion of a Triangle, Trapezium, or any Polygonous Body, along a
right line, all the indivisibles whereof are consequently similar and equal to
the generating plane.

2. The second Class contains Figures whose Elements decrease in a simple
arithmetical Progression; such are, 1. Triangles, as is evident from Prop. 37.
lib. 1. 2. The circle, and its Sectors, as resolvible into concentrick
Peripheries according to Cons. 1. and 3. of the aforecited Prop. 3. The
Cylinder as resolvible into concentrick cylindrick Surfaces, as its
indivisibles. 4. The Surface of a Cone, whose elements are circular
Peripheries, and also of the Pyramid whose indivisibles are similar angular
Peripheries every where increasing in arithmetical Progression. 5. The
Parabolick Conoid, whose indivisibles are Circles according to the proportion
of the abscissa's in arithmetical Progression, by virtue of Prop. 14. lib. 2.
etc.

3. The third Class contains elementary Figures increasing in duplicate
arithmetical Progression; such are, 1. The Pyramid and Cone, the first whereof
may be resolved into angular Planes, the second into circular ones increasing
according to a series of square numbers; as is evident from Prop. 38. lib. 1.
and its Consectary. 2. The trilinear parabolick Space, as defined Prop. 10.
lib. 2. by the letters E h HK. 3. The Sphere, as far as it may be resolved into
spherical concentrick Surfaces, every one whereof may be considered as a base,
taking the semidiameter for the altitude. 4. The Cone, as resolvible into
parallel conical Surfaces described by the parallel indivisibles of the
Triangle. 5. The remainder of a Cylinder after an Hemisphere of the same base
and altitude is taken out, according to Schol. 1. of Prop. 39. lib. 1.

4. The fourth Class would comprehend all magnitudes resolvible into elements
or indivisibles increasing in triplicate, quadruplicate, etc. Arithmetical
Progression; such we have not treated of, but may be found among Planes
terminated by Curves of superior Genders; see Fabri's Synopsis, p. m. 67.

5. The fifth Class is of those Magnitudes, whose indivisibles decrease,
proceeding from a square number by odd numbers, as, 36, 35, 32, 27, 20, 11,
etc. such are, first, an Hemisphere, as is evident from Prop. 39. lib. 1. 2 An
Hemispheroid, as in Prop. 15 lib 2. 3. A Semi-parabola, as may be gathered from
the demonstration of Prop. ^0 lib. 2. For since the indivisibles of the
circumscribed trilinear figure eb are found in a duplicate arithmetical
Progression,, ^, ^, ^, the indivisibles of the semi-parabola will necessarily
be ^, ^, ^, ^, etc.

6. We may make a sixth Class of those Magnitudes whose indivisibles decrease
in a like Progression, not of the numbers themselves descending by odd steps
from a given square, but of their roots, which are for the most part surd ones;
such as is first, the Semicircle, as is evident from Prop. 43. lib. 1. and by
virtue of Prop. 5. lib. 2. and also the semi-ellipse, etc.

7. The seventh Class comprehends those Magnitudes, whose Elements are in a
Progression of a double series of numbers, as in the Parabolick Conoid, as may
be seen in the Scholium of Prop. 16. lib. 2.

But, to omit the other Classes of Magnitudes of a superior Gender, the
consider^tion whereof these Elements either have not touched on, or only by the
by; (which any one who pleases may see in Faber s Synopsis, especially those
which he comprehends under the sixth and seventh Classes, p. 70 and the
following) about those we have here particularly noted, there remain only two
things to be taken notice of. 1. That since in the first Class we place
Parallelograms and Cylinders, in the second Triangles, in the third Pyramids
and Cones, in the fifth Hemispheres, in the sixth semi-circles, etc. We may
with Hon. Faber call the first Class, that of Cylindrical or
Parallelogrammatick Figures; the second, the Class of Triangular Figures; the
third, of Pyramidals; the fifth, of Hemispherical Figures; the sixth of
semicircular ones, etc. 2. That having ranged or reduced after this manner
homogeneous Figures, or those of like condition, to a few Classes, their
dimension, and consequently almost the whole business of measuring may be very
compendiously reduced to a few Rules; whereof we will here give the Reader a
short Specimen, in the following

CONSECTARYS.
I. THE dimension of Parallelogrammatick Figures, i. e. of those of the first
Class, may be had, by multiplying the whole base by the whole altitude: See
lib. 1. Def. 12. Cons. 7. Def. 18. Cons. 6. Def. 16. Cons 3. and 4.

II. The dimension of Triangular Figures, i. e. of those of the second Class,
may be had by the multiplication of the whole Base by half the Altitude, or of
half the Base by the whole altitude; [see lib. 1. Def. 12. Consect. 8. Def. 15.
Consect. 2. Def. 18. Consect. 4. lib. 2. Prop. 14.] and their Proportion is to
their respective circumscribing Parallelograms, as 1 to 2; [see besides the
Prop. already cited, lib. 1. Prop. 37. and its first Consect.]

III. The dimension of Pyramidals, i. e. of magnitudes of the third Classis,
may be obtained by the multiplication of the Base by the third part of the of
Altitude; [see lib. 1. Def. 17. Consect. 3. and 4. and Def. 20. Consect. 1.
etc.] and their Proportion to the corresponding Figures of the Class of the
same Base and Altitude is as 1 to 3. [see besides the Prop. already cited Prop.
38. lib. 1. and its Cons. Prop. 39. and Schol. 1. lib. 2. Prop. 10. etc.

IV. The Proportion of Hemispherical Magnitudes, i. e. of the fifth Classis to
corresponding ones of the first Class of the same Base and Altitude is as 2 to
3; [see lib. 1. Prop. 39. lib. 2. Prop. 10. and 15.] and so their dimension may
be had by multiplying theit Base by of their Altitude.

V. The Proportion of semi-circular Magnitudes, i. e. of those of the sixth
Class to so many corresponding ones of the first Class of the same Base and
Altitude cannot be expressed by whole numbers or by a small fraction [see lib.
1. Prop. 43. and lib. 2. Prop. 11.] and consequently their exact numeral
dimension cannot be had.

AN INTRODUCTION TO SPECIOUS ANALYSIS, OR, The New Geometry, chiefly according
to the Method of Des Carts, But much facilitated by later Inventions, etc.

By J. CHRIST. STVRMIVS.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SINCE those ingenious Mathematicians of this present Age, which is now drawing
to a Conclusion, Vieta, Ougthred, Harriot, Carts, Schooten, Beaune, Van Hudde,
Heuraet, de Wit, and Slusius, and several other Famous Men coeval with them,
have by their Endeavors improved the Algebra of the Ancients, raised it to
vastly an higher pitch, and brought it from Numbers to universal Symbols, and
not only found the excellent uses of it in Geometry themselves, but also
communicated them to others; almost all Countries have furnished us with some
excellent Persons, who treading in the footsteps of their Predecessors, have
endeavored to advance it yet further: And even our Times are not without those
of the highest rank, as Wallis, Baker, Renaldinus, Mengolius, Huggeas,
Malbranch, Leibnitz, Craan, and several others, who endeavor to promote this
Science, deservedly reputed the very Apex of Humane Reason, and carry it more
and more toward its utmost Perfection by daily augmenting it with new and
curious Inventions. But in the mean time, while these ingenious Men wholly
busy themselves in promoting it, there are few found who condescend to explain
the first Principles of it, and show a ready way to young Beginners to arrive
at the knowledge of those Inventions. It is not long since a certain Friend of
mine, who for some time has publicly and successfully taught these Sciences,
complained to me by his Letters, of the want of a good Guide to Specious
Analysis, whereby he might instill the Principles of that admirable Art into
his Auditors. To whose Desires being not just then at leisure to satisfy, I
immediately after projected this Introduction, which at length you see
finished, in the Form we now present you with it, wherein we have all along
consulted to suit the Endeavors of young Beginners, as far as possible; as we
thought our selves engaged by the Duties of our Professorship to do, and have
comprised the Precepts of the Art in six or seven Pages, and accommodated
Examples of every kind to illustrate them. ^herein if I have but indifferently
accomplished my Design* I shall not think my Labor lost. We here add it to our
Mathesis Enucleata, both as being properly a part of it, and more especially,
because this Introduction presupposes the Reader to be acquainted with the
first Principles of Specious Computation, which we have therein laid down. And
so we commit our Endeavors to the Perusal and Censure of the Candid Reader.

INTRODUCTION TO SPECIOUS ANALYSIS.
THE Analytick Art, or Specious Analysis, is solely subvervient to finding of
Theorems, and resolving Problems, by leading us from certain Data or given
Quantities, into the knowledge of unknown and sought ones, by a Chain of
certain and infallible Consequences: This admirable Artifice may be reduced to
four Primary Heads, viz. Denomination, Reduction, Equation, and Effection (if
the Problem be a Geometrical one) or Construction.

I. DENOMINATION.
BY Denomination is understood a preparatory imposition of Names peculiar to
each Quantity, whereby every one of the Quantities given or sought, are denoted
by one or more peculiar Letters of the Alphabet at pleasure, but with this
(arbitrarious) difference, that known or given quantities are marked by the
former Letters of the Alphabet, a, b, c, etc. and the unknown or sought ones by
the latter, z, y, x, etc. But although this imposition of Names, is, as we have
said, altogether arbitrarious, yet there often happens not a little facility to
the Solution it self, by its being chosen as accommodate as possible to the
conditions of the quantities given and sought; which any one w^ll learn better
by Use than Precepts: As we find that both Theorems may be demonstrated, and
Problems resolved e. g. by an extraordinary Compendium, if we denote any reason
of two given Homogeneous quantities by a and e a, b and i b, d and o d, etc. (v
z. by expressing the Names of the Reasons by e, and i, and o, etc.) and
continued proportionality by a, ea, e{powerof2} a, e{powerof3} a, etc. and
discontinued or discrete by b i b, c i c, d i d, or after the like manner, as
we have done in our Math. Enucl. Lib. 1. Cap. 2, 3, 4, 7. and Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
etc.

II. EQVATION.
HAving thus given each quantity its Name, and making no further distinction
between the quantities given and those sought, but treating them all
promiscuously, and as already known, you must carefully search into and discuss
all the Circumstances of the Question, and making various Comparisons of the
quantities, by adding, substracting, multiplying, and dividing them, etc. 'till
at length, which is the chief aim and design of it, you can express one and the
same quantity two ways, which is that we call an Equation: And you must find as
many of these Equations, or Equalities of literal quantities, (as expressing
the same thing) as there are several unknown quantities in the Question,
independent on each other, and consequently denominated by so many different
Letters, z, y, x, etc. But if so many Equations cannot be found, after having
exhausted all the Circumstances of the Questions by one or two Equations; that
is a sign the other unknown quantities may be assumed at pleasure: Which the
Examples we shall hereafter bring will more fully show.

But as here also (as likewise in all this Art) Ingenuity and Use do more than
Rules and Precepts; yet we will here show the principal Fountains, for the sake
of young Beginners, whence Equations, according to circumstances obvious in the
Question, are usually had. These are partly Axioms self evident, E. g.

That the whole is equal to all its parts taken together.

That those quantities which are equal to one third, are equal among
themselves.

That the Products or Rectangles under the Parts or Segments, are equal to the
Product of the whole.

Partly some universal Theorems that are certain and already demonstrated, as,

Three Eucl. 6.17.
continual Proportionals being proposed, the Rectangle of the Extremes is equal
to the Square of the mean.

id. 6.16.
Four being proposed, whether in continued or discontinued Proportion, the
Product or Rectangle of the Extremes is equal to that of the Means.

And several others such like, which we have demonstrated in Cap. 2, 3, and 4.
Lib. 1. of our Mathesis Enucleat. partly in the last place, some particular
Geometrical Theorems already demonstrated, as e. g. that common Pythagorick one.

That in rightangled Triangles id. 1.47.
the Square of the Hypothenusa is equal to the two Squares of the sides.

That the Square of the Tangent of a id. 3.36.
Circle is equal to the Rectangle of the Secant and that Segment of it that
falls without the Circle; the first whereof, we have demonstrated, Lib* 1.
Math. Enuc. Def. 13. Schol. and also Prop. 34. Consect. 8. also Prop 44. after
various ways; to which may be numbered Prop. 34. with Schol. 11. n. 3. Prop. 37.
and following, Prop. 45. and 46. also the 48. and several others in Lib. 1.
Math. Enucl. and likewise Lib. 2 Prop. 1, 2, 3, and several following. And as
for Examples both of Denomination, and Equations found after various ways, you
may see them hereafter follow, and some we will here give you by way of
Anticipation.

III. REDVCTION.
An Equation thus found must be reduced, i. e. those two equal quantities,
which for the most part are very much compounded of the quantities given and
sought together, must be reduced to such a form, by adding or substracting
something to or from each part, or multiplying and dividing by the same, etc.
that the unknown or sought quantity alone, or its Square or Cube or Biquadrate,
etc. may be found on the one side, and on the other the quantity expressed by
mere given or known Letters, or affected with the unknown and sought ones; such
are these Forms which follow, distinguished by their Names prefixed to them,

A simple Equation, z= b, or y=^.

A pure Quadratick, ^.

A pure Cubick, ^.

An affected Quadratick, ^.

An affected Cubick, ^ etc.

A Biquadratick, ^ etc.

To one of which, or some other like them, when yo^ reduced your Equation first
found, there are Rules in rea^ whereby the Value of the unknown or sought
quantity z or x, may be either expressed in Numbers, if the Quest^ an
Arithmetical one, or geometrically determined if it Geometrical one: Which is
that we call Effection or Co^ction.

Thus therefore the whole, or at least the chief busine^ Analyticks, is
conversant in finding a convenient or fit Eq^on: For Reduction is very easy,
and consisting only in Operations and mere Axioms, as e. g.

If to equal quantities you add or substract equal ones Aggregates or
Remainders will be equal;

If equal quantities are multiplied or divided by the s^ the Products or
Quotients thence arising will be equal, (...) Page 5
Fig. I.

Fig. II.

Fig. III.

Fig. IV.

Fig. V.

VI

VII

VIII

IX

X

XI

XII

XIII

XIV

XV

XVI

XVII



IV. EFFECTION, or CONSTRVCTION.
1. In simple Equations.
^Uppose z= b, the quantity b is sought.

If z be =^.... or or x=^.... or ^ or ^ make as c to b so a to z, as b to a so
a to x, as h-1 to b+ g so f to y, as h+1 to b- g so f to z,
etc. every where according to n. 2.

Schol. 2. Prop. 34. Lib. 1. Math. Enuc.

If z be = ^, the Resolution of it into Proportionals (...) be more difficult,
because neither of the Letters are found ^ce in the Numerator. That therefore
you may have e. g. twice, you must make as k to n so m to a fourth Proportio^l
which call p; then will, by virtue of Prop. 18. Lib. 1. ^= mn, and the proposed
Equation be changed into this ^, to be now constructed from the 2 d. Case.

Or if ^, find a mean Proportional between k ^ l, which call p; and between m
and n, which call q, ^ording to n. 3. of the afore-cited Schol.; and the
proposed Equation, by virtue of Prop. 17. will be in this form: ^. Make
therefore in the right-angled ( Fig. 1.) B= p and BC= q; and the AC by virtue
of the Py^gorick Theorem, = pp+ qq: Which since it must be di^ed by r- s, make
further, by Prop. 18 as r- s to the ^, so is ^ to y, according to the afore^ed.

4 In like manner if x be = ^, make 1st. as b to m so n to a fourth which call
k; and so putting bk for mn, the Equation will be reduced to the second Case
under this form: ^

Or thus: Find a mean Proportional between b and g, which call p, and between m
and n, which call q; and the proposed Equation will be in this Form: ^ Make
therefore (in Fig. 2.) AB= p, and having on this described a Semicircle, apply
BC= q; then will, by virtue of Schol. 5. Prop. 34. AC= pp- qq: Which since it
must be divided by c+ d, make farther, as c + d to ^ so ^ to x; all from the
same Foundations, whence you have the Construction of the third Case.

5. If z be =^; make first as f to a, so a to a third Proportional m, and you will
have (putting fm for aa) ^, i. e. ^. Make secondly as f to m, so b to a fourth
n, and by putting fn for mb you will have z=^, i. e. ^, wherefore thirdly you will
have as g to n so c to z.

6. If y be =^ make first as m to n, so l to a fourth, which call n, and by
putting now mn for hl, you will have ^ i. e. ^= y. Therefore you will now have
secondly, as m to n, so l to y by Case 2: So that the Construction of the fifth
and sixth Cases is nothing but reiterations of the Rule of three, according to
what we have often inculcated, N. 2. and 3. Schol. 2. Prop. 34.

2. In simple Quadratick Equations.
1.
IF xx= ab or y{powerof2}=1 c or z{powerof2}= dd
you will have ^ ^ ^
that is to a mean proportional between a and b 1 and c d and d
and so the Construction will be had from n. 3. Schol. 2. Prop. 34. (see Fig.
3.) 2. If y{powerof2}= fg+ kl or x{powerof2}= fg- kl
you will have ^ ^
make therefore on the one side the Right-angled Triangle ABC ( Fig. 4.) whose
side

AB is = to a mean Proportional between f and g,

BC is = to a mean Proportional between k and l;

On the other a Right-angled ( Fig. 5.) whose side AB is = to a mean
Proportional between f and g, and the side BC = to a mean Proportional between
k and l; and on the one hand the Hypothenusa, on the other the side AC will be
the value of y AC will be the value of x
sought.

And all by virtue of the Pythag. Theor. and according to Schol. 5. Prop. 34.
or the Consectarys of Prop. 44. See Fig 4. and 5.

3. If z{powerof2}=^ i. e. ^ extracting the Roots on both sides, z will =^, and
so be the second case of simple Equations.

4. If y{powerof2} be =^, make first as l to f, so g to a fourth which call n,
and by putting ln for fg, you will have y{powerof2}=^ i. e. ^. Make Secondly, as m
to n, so h to a fourth, which call p; and by putting mp for nh, you will have
y{powerof2}= ^ i. e. pk, and so the first case of the present Equations.

5. If ^ in the first place the Rectangles fg and lm being turned into Squares,
and collected into one Sum, make them = nn. Then (since cc and cd are
multiplied by qb+ bd) in like manner qb and bd added make pp; and you will have ^.
Thirdly (since pp is already multiplied by cc+ cd) having added cc+ cd into one
Sum that they may e. g. make rr; x{powerof2} will =^, and so be the third case
of the present Equations.

3. In affected quadratick Equations.
1. IF zz be = az+ bb, then will ^; which may be thus in short demonstrated a
priori; Since z{powerof2}- az= bb per Hypoth. and that first quantity if it be
added to aa, it becomes an exact Square, the root whereof is z- a; therefore ^,
and consequently ^; and lastly ^; which last Root is a false one and less than
nothing, but yet gives you the proposed Equation back again as well as the
former; as will be evident to any one who trys, viz. having transferred a on
the other side, and so the two equal quantities z- a and ^ being squared. For
here will come out aa+ bb as well as if the radical Sign were affected with the
Sign + because - by - gives +. Therefore ^, and taking away on both sides aa,
zz- az= bb i. e. zz= az+ bb.

The value therefore of this Root will be had geometrically, by making (in Fig.
6.) CD= a and DE= b, that the Hypothenusa CE may be ^; and moreover, drawing
out on both sides CD, and at the interval CE describing a Semicircle AEB: This
being done, AD will be the value sought of the true Root z, and DB of the false
one.

2. If y{powerof2} be =- ay+ bb, then will ^; which again may thus appear:
Since y{powerof2}+ ay is = bb per Hypoth. adding to both sides aa, the first
quantity will be an exact Square, and ^. Therefore the Roots will be also
equal, viz. ^, and consequently ^; which is a false Root.

The value of these Roots may be had geometrically, viz. of the true Root DB in
Fig. 6. or BE in Fig. 7. and of the false one in the first AD, in the second AE.

3. If xx is = ax- bb, you will have ^ or ^.

Which may be demonstrated after the same way a priori, as the former Cases,
viz. Since x{powerof2}- ax is =- bb, adding on both sides aa, the former
quantity will be an exact Square, viz. ^. Therefore the Root of the one x- a =
to the Root of the other, viz. ^, and adding on both sides a, ^ which is one of
the true Roots. Or ^ which in this case is also a true one. But the value of
each may be obtained by making ( Fig. 8.) CB= a and by erecting BD
perpendicularly = b, and making the Semicircle BEA, and drawing DE parallel to
CB, and letting fall the Perpendicular OF: For thus CF will be ^ and
consequently AF, ^, and FB ^.

Or, with Carts, making ( Fig. 9) CB= a and BD= b, drawing DF parallel to CB,
that FD may be one root and ED the other; as is manifest from the precedent
Construction, and its Rule. See also another Deduction from Cartes's
Constructions, Schol. 1 Prop. 47. Lib. 1. Math. Enucl.

NB. 1. The ingenious Schooten has before showed this Method of demonstrating,
and also of finding out these Rules in his Comment on the Geometry of Des
Carts, p. m. 163. and moreover deduces another ingenious Method for all the
three Cases of these Equations, by taking away the second term in the Equation,
p. 290, and the following, where we may make only this Remark concerning the
third Case; that perhaps the Rule might be better deduced, if we make x= a- z
rather than x= z- a.

NB. 2. If any one has a mind to see the new Constructions of affected
quadratick Equations of the Abbot Catelan, he may find them in Acta Erud. Lips.
Ann. 1682. p. 86. and in the 27th Journal des Scavans. 1 Dec. 1681.

IV. For Cubick and Biquadratick Equations both simple and affected, and also
for all before mentioned, and consequently universally for all not exceeding
the fourth Dimension.
THE value of the unknown Quantity or Root may for any Case be determined by
one general Rule, found out by Mr. Thomas Baker an Englishman, occasioned by
what Des Carts had taught concerning this matter, Lib. 3. Geom. p. 85, and the
following; but now very much perfected by this Rule, and made more simple. Now
that this Rule may be the better comprehended by Learners, we will premise
these following things.

1. That all Equations occurring under those Forms which we have before shown
in the Article of Reduction, or the like, must always for this purpose be so
changed as to have all the terms or parts of the Equation both known and
unknown, affected and not affected, brought over to one side promiscuously, and
so on the other there will stand o or naught, as e. g. let ^, or ^; or ^; or ^;
or ^ etc. which also was usual to Des Carts in Lib. 3.

2. In all Equations the known quantity or Co-efficient of the second Term we
will generally denote by the Letter p, that of the third Term by the Letter q,
of the fourth by r, and the fifth (or absolute Number) by S; according to
Carts, but with some little alteration: So that hence the Equations we have
before been treating of, and all others like them (every where denoting the
unknown quantity by x) may all be reduced to these forms: ^, etc. etc.

3. These and the like Equations may either occur whole, or with all their
Terms, as here, or deprived of one or more of them, as the following Examples
will show, where we will always put an Asterisk in the place of the deficient
Term.

^

4. The unknown quantity in any Equation has N. This is an error, as has been
proved by Dr. Wallis.
as many diverse Roots or Values, as the Equation has Dimensions; which Des
Carts shows, Lib. 3. Geom. p. 69. at the same time evidently demonstrating
this, viz. that some of those Roots may be false ones, i. e. less than nothing:
Which from him we here suppose.

When therefore Des Carts in his Construction of Cubick and biquadratick
Equations, p. 85, and the following, requires as a necessary Condition, the
ejection of the second Term in the given Equation, unless it were already
wanting, and so was obliged to show a way to eject it, with several other
Preparations; and afterward, when by help of his Rule delivered p. 91. he had
found a way of finding two mean Proportionals, and dividing any given Angle
into three equal parts, then he use^ it for solving other solid Problems, or
finding two mean Proportionals, or trisecting an Angle. But the general Rule of
Baker has no need of these methods or helps, neither of the Ejection of the
second Term, nor any other Preparation, but immediately shows us a way, by the
help of a Circle and Parabola to find all the Roots of any given Equation, both
true and false, whether the Equation want any term or not, and howsoever
affected, after the way we will now, and perhaps a little more distinctly, show.

1. It supposes with Carts a Parabola NAM to be already described, (See Fig.
10. and 11.) whose Latus Rectum shall be L or 1, and its Axe ay; which Des
Carts only making use of, and never thinking of the other Diameters, was
forced to take away the second Term of the Equation, etc. Baker therefore
(strangely perfecting the Cartesian Geometry by this one thought) if the
quantity p or second Term be in the Equation applys to the Ax ay (or draws an
ordinate to it) BA=^ i. e. he erects at top of the Ax a on the right hand the
perpendicular aE=^ and from E draws EA y parallel to the Ax ay; whereby he
obtains the Diameter A y sought.

2. Having made this Preparation, the whole business depends on this, to find
the Center of the Circle to be described through the Parabola, which (by virtue
of some arbitrary suppositions in the beginning) he always seeks on the left
side of the Ax or Diameter, by help of two Lines ^ or b, and DH or d; viz. by
placing the former upon the Ax from a to D, if p be wanting in the Equation, or
upon the Diameter A y from A to D if p be there; and letting fall from the
point D the latter to aD or AD perpendicularly toward the left hand.

3. He shows how to find the quantity of either of these Line (which is here
very requisite) in any given Equation, by ^ certain general Rule (which he
calls the Central Rule, because it alone helps to find the Center H)
comprehended in these terms: Directions for the Bookbinder.
The Eight half-sheet Plates that are to be folded in, and the single Leaf
marked Page 89, are to be placed in those Pages of the Introduction to Specious
Analysis which the figures at the top of them direct to.

A SYNOPSIS of Mr. Baker's CLAVIS, to be annexed to Page 13, of the
Introduction to the Specious Analysis.
Of Aequations. Of Aequations. Of Central Rules. Class. I. 1. ^ ^. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

N B. The Sign denotes a dubious Case, viz. That either the Antecedent must be
Subtracted from the Consequent, or the Consequent from the Antecedent,
according as the matter will bear.

^

This Rule as it stands here whole, only answers to those ^^ations wherein are
all the Terms p, q, and r; and in the ^^^n time may also be easily accommodated
to all other Cases, (...) observing these things. 1. Whatever Term, or
Quantities ^^r, be wanting in the proposed Equation, that must also be
^^ctively omitted, or put out of the general Central Rule, that (...) ^emaining
quantities may determine the special or particular ^ral Rule. 2. As for what
belongs to the Signs, viz. whether (...) (which latter Sign denotes a dubious
Case, either that the (...) must be subtracted from the latter, or
contrary-wise, as (...) matter will bear) must be put in the Central Rule, he
(...) (a) that in the Rule you will always have ^, unless (...) in the proposed
Equation p and r are affected with diverse ^s: (b) By what Sign soever in the
proposed Equation it ^ens that the quantity q is marked with, it must be noted
(...) the contrary one (although involved with other quantities) ^e Rule; as may
be seen in the application of the Rule to ^ecial Cases done by the Author
himself for the sake of Be^ers, and is exhibited in the Synopsis hereunto
adjoining, ^h yet we have thought fit to give at the end of this Trea^ much
more contract as to the Central Rules, in a short ^pendium by way of Appendix.

By these Rules therefore, the quantities of the Lines aD ^D and DH will be so
determined, that the parts in the (...) marked with the Sign + (taken either
aggregately or (...)) will be put downwards from a to A toward y, and on ^ft
hand of D; but the negative Parts, or those affected ^ the Sign --, will be cut
off, on the one part above, on ^her on the right hand: Which being done the
Center H ^e found.

From the Center H through the Vertex of the Ax a (if the ^D is found in the Ax)
or in the other Case through the (...) of the Diameter A, you must draw a Circle
which by ^g or touching the Parabola will deermine the Roots sought, if the
Equation be not a Biquadratick i. e. has not the quantity S; otherwise another
Point L or Z must be found, ( vid. Fig. 12. and 13.) and a Circle described on
the Radius HL or HZ, according to Des Carts p. 86, and following, of his
Geometry.

7. Viz. If you have-S, you must take on the Line H a or HA produced, on the
one side AI=L or 1, and on the other AK = ^, and describing a Semicircle on
IK, draw AL perpendicular to AH, to obtain the point L. (see Fig. 12.) But if
you have +S, then in another Semicircle described on AH, apply the Line AZ = to
AL found, thereby to obtain Point Z, (see Fig. 13.)

8. A Circle therefore described from H through a or A, if S be wanting, but
through L if there be-S, and through Z if +S, may touch or cut the Parabola either
in 1, 2, 3 or 4 Points; from which if you let fall Perpendiculars to the Ax or
Diameter, you will obtain all the Roots of your Equation both true and false.

9. And, 1. If in the Equation p be wanting and- r be there, the true Roots
will be on the left side of the Ax, as NO, and the false ones as MO on the
right side. 2. But if there be in the Equation p and- p, the true Roots will
fall on the left side of the Diameter, and the false ones on the right; but if
+ p, on the contrary the true will be on the right hand and the false on the
left.

10. But if the Circle neither touches nor cuts the Parabola in any point, it
is a sign that the Equation is impossible, and has no Root either true or
false, but only imaginary ones. All which, how they may be found out, and that
they are undoubtedly true, are demonstrated a posteriori, in an easy and plain
way by the Author, wherefore we shall not give the Demonstrations of them here;
but remit the Reader, after he has made a little progress in this Art, to the
Author himself.

11. Wherefore now, (omitting also in this place the Doctrine of the
Composition of the plain and solid Geometrical Loci, or Places, which would
serve for a Complement of the Analytick Art) we will show the Practice of these
Rules already delivered, premonishing only this from Mr. Baker, if the Latus
Rectum be made Unity, that L in the Central Rules and all its Powers may be
omitted, and so the Rules exhibited more compendiously, as we have already done
in our Synopsis, and may be seen from the form of a general Central Rule
hereunto annexed.

^

To which Premonition of Baker we may also add this, if any given Line in the
Problem it self be taken for Unity, which may be often very commodiously done
[as a in the former Problem p. 91. Geom. Carts, and the Line NO in the latter,
and a again in the Equation p. 83. the last line] and then the same Line also
may be taken for the Latus Rectum of the Parabola to be described, if we have a
mind to make use of this Compendium for abbreviating the Central Rules. For
otherwise if we would construct all Problems, as Baker rightly asserts we may,
by only one Parabola, we shall fall often into very tedious Prolixities.

SOME EXAMPLES OF SPECIOUS ANALYSIS, In each kind of Equations.
I. In Simple Equations.
PROBLEM I.
HAving the sum of any two sides given for forming a Triangle ABC, to find each
of the sides, and form the Triangle.

Supppose e. g. three Lines given in Fig. 14. the first =AB+AC in the Triangle
sought, the second =AB+BC, the third =BC+AC, to find each of the sides e. g. to
find AB, which being known, the rest will be so also.

SOLVTION.
1. Denomination. Make AC+AB= a; AB+BC= b; BC+AC= c; AB= x; then will AC= a- x,
and BC= b- x, and so the Denomination be complete.

2. Equation. Now if the values of the two last Lines BC and AC be added into
one Sum, which we had before given; you will have this Equation a+ b-2 x= c.

3. Reduction. By adding on both sides 2 x, you will have ^; and substracting from
both sides ^; and dividing both sides by ^.

4. The Effection or Geometrical Construction, which the Equation thus reduced
will help us to

Join AE= a and ED= b in one Line AD, and from this backwards cut off DF= c;
and divide AF which remains into two equal parts in B, and you will have AB the
first side of the Triangle to be formed; and BE will give the other side AC,
which subtracted from ED, will leave GD= to the third side BC; of which you
may now form the Triangle ABC.

5. A general Rule for Arithmetical Cases. Add the two former Sums, and from
the Aggregate substract the third Sum; half the Remainder will give the side AB
common to the two former Sums. For an Example take this Question: There are
three Towns of ancient Hetruria, viz. Forum Cassii (which the Letter A denotes
in ABC) Sudertum (B) and Volsinii (C) which are at this distance one from
another; if you go from Volsinii to Forum Cassii and thence to Sudertum, you
mst go 330 Furlongs; from Forum Cassii to Sudertum and thence to Volsinii there
are 306 Furlongs; lastly, from Sudertum to Volsinii and thence to Forum Cassii
272 Furlongs. How far is each Town distant from each other.

PROBLEM II.
IN a right-angled Triangle ABC, having given the Base AB, and the difference
of the Perpendicular AC and the Hypothenusa BC to find the Perpendicular and
Hypothenusa, and form the Triangle.

Make e. g. the Base AB ( Fig. 15.) and the difference of the Perpendicular and
Hypothenusa BD, to find the Perpendicular AC; which being known, the
Hypothenusa AC will be known also, if the given difference be added to the
found Perpendicular.

SOLVTION.
1. Denomination. Make AB= a, BD= b, AC= x; then will BC= x+ b.

2. Equation by the Pythagorick Theorem, ^, viz. the two Squares of the Sides
to the Square of the Hypothenusa.

3. Reduction. Substracting from both sides xx, you will have ^; and moreover by
substracting also ^; and dividing by ^.

4. Effection or Geometrical Construction. Having described upon the given Base
AB a Semicircle, apply therein the given difference BD, and draw AD, whose
Square is = aa- bb. Since this must be divided by 2 b, make, as AE=2 b to AD =
^, so AD = ^ to AC the Perpendicular sought. To which if you add CF=BD, you
will have AF= to the Hypothenusa sought BC; which will come of course together
with the whole Triangle sought, if the found Perpendicular AC be erected at
right Angles on the given Base AB.

5. The Rule for Arithmetical Cases. From the square of the given Base
substract the square of the given difference, and divide the Remainder by the
double difference; and you will have the Perpendicular sought. E. g. suppose the
Base = 20 foot, and the difference between the Perpendicular and Hypothenusa 10.

PROBLEM III.
IN the right angled Triangle ABC, having given the side AC and the sum of the
other side AB and the Hypothenusa BC, to find the other side and the
Hypothenusa separately, and form the Triangle. Suppose the given side (that is
to be) AC (Fig. 16.) and the sum of the other sides AD, to find the side AB,
which being known the Hypothenusa BC will be known also.

SOLVTION.
1. Denomination. Make AC= a, AD= b, AB= x, then will BC= b- x.

2. Equation. ^ and substracting xx.

3. Reduction. ^; and adding ^; and substracting ^; and dividing by ^.

4. The Effection or Construction is like the former, and so will be manifest
only by inspecting that Scheme.

5. The Arithmetical Rule. From the square of the given sum substract the
square of the given side, and divide the Remainder by double the given sum; and
youll have the other side, and substracting that from the given sum, you have
the Hypothenusa also. E. g. let one side be 15, and the sum of the other two 45.

PROBLEM IV.
HAving given the Perpendiculars and sum of the Bases of two right-angled
Triangles having equal Hypothenuses, to find the Bases separately, and form the
Triangles. Suppose e. g. to form the Triangle ABC (see Fig. 17.) you have given
the Perpendicular AB, and for the other ADC, the Perpendicular CD, and the
given sum of the Bases BE, to find the Bases singly, viz. the less for the
greatest Perpendicular, and the greater AD for the less Perpendicular.

SOLVTION.
1. Denomination. Make AB= a, CD= b, the sum BE= c; make the lesser Base BC= x;
the greater AD will = c- x.

2. Equation. Since the Hypothenuses of the two Triangles are supposed equal,
the two AB+BC, i. e. xx+ aa will be = to the two AD+CD, i. e. ^.

3. Reduction. By taking away therefore xx and adding 2 cx, aa+2 cx will = bb+
cc; and further taking away from both sides ^; and dividing both sides by ^.

4. Geometrical Construction. Join the Lines b and c CD and BE at right Angles,
( n. 2.) and the square of Hypothenusa DE will = bb+ cc. Upon this Hypothen^
having described a Semicircle, apply therein the Line AD, ^ the square of AE
will = bb+ cc- aa. Which, since it m^ be further divided by 2 c, make ( n. 3.)
as BF=2 c to ^ = ^, so BG to BC, the lesser Base sought.

5. The Arithmetical Rule. From the sum of the squa^ of the lesser
Perpendicular and the sum of the Bases substract (...) square of the greater
Perpendicular, and the Remainder di^ded by the double sum of the Bases, will
give the lesser Ba^ E. g. make AB 76, CD 57, and BE 114.

PROBLEM V.
HAving given the Perpendiculars of two right-angled T^angles standing on the
same given Base, to find the Se^ments of the Hypothenuses. E. g. suppose the
common give Base be AB ( Fig. 18.) and the Perpendicular of one Triang^ AD of
the other BC; to find the segments of the Hypothen^ses, cutting one another
geometrically.

SOLVTION.
If a Geometrical Solution be required there is no need (...) any Analysis; for
having erected perpendicularly on the common given Base AB the given
Perpendiculars AD and B^ the Hypothenuses AC, BD being drawn immediately,
exhib^ their Segments EA, EB, EC, ED. But if it be to be do arithmetically by a
general Rule, then an Analysis will be n^cessary.

1. Denomination. Make the common Basis AB= a, B^ = b, AD= c; and, having found
AF, all the rest may had (for as AB to BC so AF to FE; which being given, y^
have also GD and HC, and consequently also DE, CE, and^ make AF= x, then will
BF or HE= a- x.

2. The Equation from FE found twice. 1. As AB to BC so AF to FE. ^ XVIII

XIX

XX

XXI

XXII

XXIII

XXIII

XXIV

XXV

XXVI

XXVII

XXVIII



As BA to AD so BF to FE. ^.

Therefore ^.

Reduction. Multiplying both sides by a you will have bx, c- cx; and adding on
both sides cx, bx+ cx= ac dividing both sides by ^.

The Arithmetical Rule. Multiply the commom base ^^e least Perpendicular, and
divide the Product by the sum ^e Perpendiculars; and you will have the lesser
segment of the (...) which being given you will have all the rest. E. g. sup^
AB=10, BC=9, AD=6.

PROBLEM VI.
O inscribe a Rhombus in a given Oblong, i. e. having the sides of the Oblong
AB and BC given, (Fig. 19.) to find Segment BF or DE, which being cut off, the
remainder FC ^E will be the side of the Rhomb sought.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, BC= b, BF= x: FC or FA will be = x (so far the Denomination.)
Therefore the square of FA, ^ch is bb-2 bx+ xx will be = aa+ xx, viz. to the
two ^res of AB and BF (so far the Equation;) and substracting both sides ^; and
^, and ^; and ^. (so far the Reduction.)

The Geometrical Construction. Having described a semi^le on BC ( n 2.) apply
CD or AB, and the BD will be bb- aa. Which since it must be divided by 2 b,
make, ^E=2 b to BD = ^, so BD to BF sought, and ^e cut off the side of the
Oblong BC ( n. 1.)

The Arithmetical Rule. From the square of the greater side substract the
square of the lesser, and divide the remainder by double the greater side, and
the quotient will give the Segment BF sought. E. g. suppose AB=4, and BC=8.

PROBLEM VII.
TO inscribe the greatest square possible in a given Triangle, i. e. having
given the height of the Triangle CD ( Fig. 20) and the Base AB, to find a
portion of the altitude CE, which being cut off there shall remain ED=FG.

SOLVTION.
Make the base AB= a; the altitude CD= b, CE= x; then will ED or FG= b- x.

By reason of the similitude of the Triangles ABC and FGC you will have as AB to
CD so FG to CE. ^

Therefore the Rectangles of the means and extremes will be equal, i. e. ax=
bb- bx; and adding on both sides bx, ax+ bx= bb, and dividing by ^.

Construction. Upon the side of the Triangle CB produced, make CH= b, and HI=
a, so that the whole Line shall be a+ b. And having joined ID and parallel to
it HE drawn from H, the part CE will be cut off, which is that sought.

For as CI to CD so CH to CE, ^ according to the second case of simple
Effections.

Arithmetical Rule. Square the given height of the Triangle, and divide the
Product by the sum of the base and altitude; and the quote is the part to be
cut off CE. E. g. suppose CD=10, and AB=15.

PROBLEM VIII.
IN an acute-angled Triangle having all the sides given, to find the
Perpendicular that shall fall from the Vertex on the Base, i. e. having given
AB, AC, BC (Fig. 21.) to find AD or BD (for having found the one you may easily
find the other) Coroll. Prop. 13. Lib. 2. Eucl.

SOLVTION.
If there be only required a Geometrical Construction of this Problem, there
will be no need of any Analysis; for having formed a Triangle ABC of the three
given sides, you need only let fall the perpendicular AD from the Vertex A,
which would determine the Segment BD. To find the general Arithmetical Rule,
which is the general Corollary of Euclid, or if any one for exercise sake had
rather determine the Perpendicular DA by the segment of the Base BD, than the
latter by the former, the Analysis will proceed thus:

Make AB= a, BC= b, AC= c, BD= x; then will CD be = b- x. Wherefore by the
Pythagorick Theorem AD= aa- xx, and by the same reason the same AD = ^.
Therefore ^; and by adding on both sides ^; and by transferring ^, and dividing
by ^.

The Arithmetical Rule. Substract the square of the lesser side from the Sum of
the of the base and greater side, and the remainder divided by double the base
will give its greater segment: If the of the greatest side be subtracted from
the sum of the other squares, etc. you will have the less segment CD.

Geometrical Construction Having described a semi circle upon AB ( n. 2.) apply
therein AC, and the BC will = aa- ccx, and continuing AC to B, till C B be = CB
( n. 1.) the of BB will = aa- cc+ bb; which since it is to be divided by 2 b
make as BE=2 b to BB = ^, so BF= BB to BD the segment sought = BD n 1.

PROBLEM IX.
IN an obtuse angled Triangle having the thr^e sides given to find the
Perpendicular let fall from the Vertex to the Base being continued: i. e.
Having given AB, BC, AC (Fig. 22. n. 1.) to find AD or CD (for the one being
found the other will readily be so also) Coroll Prop. 12. Lib. 2. Eucl.

SOLVTION.
What we premonished about the former Problem, we understand to be premonish'd
here also. For the rest make here also AB= a, BC= b, AC= c, CD= x; then will
BD= b+ x: Wherefore by the Pythagorick Theorem the AD will = cc- xx, and by the
same Theorem the same AD = ^.

Therefore ^; and adding to both sides ^; and transposing cc and ^; and
dividing by ^.

The Arithmetical Rule. Substract from the square of the greater side the sum
of the squares of the base and lesser side; and the Remainder divided by double
the base will give its continuation to the Perpendicular.

Geometrical Construction from the Equation reduced: Having described a
semicircle upon AB ( n. 2.) apply therein AC, and the of CB drawn will ^;
which since it must be divided by 2 b make, as CF=2 b to CE ^, so CE to CD the
segment sought, n 1.

PROBLEM X. Commonly ascribed to Archimedes.
THE Diameter AB of a given semicircle (Fig. 22 n. 1.) being any how divided
in L, and from L erecting a Perpendicular LX, and upon the segments LA and LB
having described two other semi-circles, whose semi-diameters are also given as
well as that of the great Circle CB; to find the Radii FM and Vy of the little
Circles that are to be so described, that they shall touch the Perpendicular
LX, the Cavity of the greater semicircle, and the Convexities of the less.

SOLVTION.
I. For the Radius FM.
1. Denomination. Make CB= a, EB= b then will CE = a- b; for which for
brevities sake put c. And let FM or FN or FK = x: Therefore OF will be = b+ x,
and CF (substracting FK from CK) = a- x. Wherefore now you will have at least the
names of the three sides in the CFE, so that according to Poblem 8. the Segment
of the base GE may be determined (which indeed is determined already, as being
=LE-LG or MF i. e. b- x) for which in the mean time we will put y; and now will
CG= c- y.

2. For the Equation. If the GE= y be subtracted from the OF = ^, you will have
the square of the Perpendicular FG = ^; and, if CG = ^ be subtracted from the
CF = ^, you will have the same of the Perpendicular FG = ^. Therefore ^.

3. Reduction. And taking from both sides the quantities xx and yy, ^; and
adding 2 ax and cc, but taking away aa from both sides, ^; and adding 2 ax and
cc, and taking away from each side ^; and dividing by ^. but the same y or EG
is = EL-MF i. e. b- x. Therefore ^; which is a new and more principal Equation:
And multiplying both sides by 2 c (you have a new Reduction) ^; and adding 2
cx, and transposing the others, ^; and dividing by ^.

The Geometrical Construction of this first Case. Add the determinate ( n 2.)
quantity 2 bc into one sum with the quantity aa, as in the beginning, n. 3.
Then from this sum substract successively the quantities bb and cc, and there
will come out (the same n 3) FH, whose ^: Which since it must be divided by ^,
make (the same n. 3) as FI = ^ to FH = ^, so FH to FM the Radius sought of the
little Circle to be described. This quantity FM being thus found, place it from
L to G ( n. 1.) and from G erect a Perpendicular, which being cut off at the
interval CF (which may be had, if from CB or CK you cut off FK=FM) or from E at
the interval OF (which is composed of the Radii EN and FN) gives the Center of
the little Circle to be described.

The Arithmetical Rule. Add twice the CEB to the square of the greatest
semi-diameter CB, and from the sum substract the Aggregate of the CE and EB;
divide the remainder by the sum of all the three Diameters, (AB, AL and LB) i.
e. by double the greatest AB; and you will have the Radius FM, etc. For Example
sake let a be = 12, b=4; c will be = 8, and x will be produced = 2.

II. For the Radius Vy by help of the obtuse-angled DVC.
1. Denomination. CA= a as above, DA or DL= b, and putting x again for the
sought V y or VK, CV will be = a - x, DL or DR= b, and consequently DV= b+ x,
and DC= a- b, for which for brevity's sake we will put c. Now you will have at
least in Denomination in the CVD the three sides, so that aecording to Problem
9. the segment CW may be determined, for which in the mean while we will put y;
then will DW= c+ y, which is the same as DL-WL or V y i. e. b- x.

2. For the Equation. If the CW= yy substract it from the CV = ^, and you will
have the of the Perpendicular VW, ^; and if the DW = ^, substract it from the
DV = ^, and you will have the same of the Perpendicular VW = ^ Therefore ^.

3. Reduction. Therefore taking from both sides xx and yy, ^; and adding 2 cy
and 2 ax, ^; and substracting ^, and dividing by 2 c, ^

But if you add to the same y or CW DC= c, you will have DW = ^ i. e. reducing
this c to the same Denomination, ^ = DW. But the same DW =DL-WL= b- x.
Therefore ^, and multiplying ^, and adding 2 cx, and transposing the rest, ^,
and dividing by ^ just as above in the first Case.

4. The Geometrical Construction therefore will be the same as there. See Fig.
23. n. 4. and 5.

5. The Arithmetical Rule is also the same, but the given quantities in this
Example, which the figure of the Problem will show, thus vary, while a remains
12, b will be 8, and c 4, from which data (or given quantities) there will
notwithstanding come out again, for x or the Radius V y 2.

II. Some Examples of simple or pure Quadratick Equations.
PROBLEM I.
TO make a Square equal to a given Rectangle; i. e. having given the sides of
the Rectangle, to find the side of an equal Square, Eucl. Prop. 14. Lib. 2.
Suppose e. g. the given sides of the Oblong to be AB and BC ( Fig. 24.) to find
the Line BD whose square shall be equal to that Rectangle.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a and BC= b, and the side of the square sought = x, and the Equation
will be ab= xx; and extracting the root on both sides ^.

Geometrical Construction. Join AB and BC in one right line, and describing a
semicircle upon the whole AC, from the common juncture B erect the
Perpendicular BD which will be the side of the square sought, according to Case
1. of the Effection of pure quadraticks.

Arithmetical Rule. Multiply the given sides of the Oblong by one another, and
the square root extracted out of the Product will be the side of the square
sought.

PROBLEM II.
THE square of the Hypothenusa in a right-angled being given, as also the
difference of the other two squares to find the sides. E. g. If the Hypothenusa
be BC ( Fig. 25.) and the difference of the squares of both the legs, and
consequently its Leg also BE given (for the squares being given the sides are
also given geometrically) to find the sides of the right-angled which shall
have these conditions; or more plainly, to find one side e. g. the lesser which
being found, the other, or the greater, will be found also.

SOLVTION.
Let the of the given Hypothenusa = aa, and the square by which the two other
differ = bb. Let the less side = x, and its = xx. Wherefore the greater will be
xx+ bb. And since the sum of these is = to the of the Hypothenusa, you will have
^; and substracting ^; and dividing by ^. Therefore ^.

Geometrical Construction. Having described a semicircle on BC, and applied
therein BE, the EC will = aa- bb; and having described another semi circle upon
EC divided into two Quadrants the DC will be ^, and so DC = ^ or the side
sought; which being also transferred upon the other semicircle described on
BC, viz. from C to A gives the other side AB and the whole sought.

The Arithmetical Rule. From the square of the Hypothenusa substract the given
difference, and the square root extracted out of half the remainder gives the
lesser side of the sought.

PROBLEM III.
HAving an equilateral ABC given (Fig. 26. n. 1.) to find the Center and Semi
diameter of a Circle that shall circumscribe it. i. e. Find the BD the side of
an Hexagon that may be inscribed in it. For if we consider the thing as already
done; it will be manifest that the side of the Hexagon BD will fall
perpendicularly on the side of the AB, as making an angle in a semicircle, so
having bisected the Hypothenusa DA you will have E the Center sought.

SOLVTION.
Make the side of the Triangle AB= a, BD= x, then will AD=2 x. Since therefore
the square BD i. e. xx being subtracted out of the square AD i. e. 4 xx, there
remains the square AB 3 xx, you will have the Equation ^; and dividing by 3 ^;
therefore ^

The Geometrical Construction. Having produced AB ( n. 2.) to F a third part of
it, the square of a mean proportional BD between BF and BA will be aa or ^, and
so the Line BD = ^. Therefore the Hypothenusa DA being divided in two in E, or
at the interval BD, making the intersection from B and A, you will have the Center
sought.

The Arithmetical Rule. Divide the square of the given side into three equal
parts, and the square Root of a third part will give the semi-diameter AE or BE
sought, by the intersection of two of which you will have the Center.

PROBLEM IV.
HAving given, in a right-angled Parallelogram, the Diagonal, or for a
right-angled, the Hypothenusa and the proportion of the sides, to find the
sides separately and construct the Parallelogram or. Suppose e. g. the given
Diagonal to be AB (Fig. 27. n 1.) and the given reason of the sides as AD to
DE, to find the sides.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, the reason of AD to DE as b to c; make the lesser side = x, then
will the greater be ^.

For the Equation, the of the sides are ^, AB; and multiplying both sides by
bb, ^; and dividing by bb + cc, ^. Therefore ^ i. e. Extracting the roots as
far as possible ^

Another Solution.

Call the name of the given reason e, so that assuming any line for unity, the
value of e may also be expressed by a right line, which shall be equal e. g. to
DE above. Wherefore because we make the less side x, the greater will be ex,
and so ^ i. e. dividing by ^ i. e. ^

The Geometrical Construction. The last Equation above being reduced to this
proportion as the ^ to b so a to x, make ( n. 2) AD and DE at right angles, and
AE will be = ^, and continuing AE and AD make as AE to AD so AB to AC the
lesser side sought. Having therefore drawn BC which determines the lesser side
AC, the greater side and so the ABC will be already formed, and may be easily
completed into a Rectangle. In the other Solution the last Equation agrees
with the precedent (for it gives us this proportion as ^ to 1 so a to x in
which 1 is = b, and ee = cc by what we have supposed) and so the Construction
will be the same.

The Arithmetical Rule may be more commodiously expresed by this last Equation
under the last form but one, after this way, divide the of the Diagonal by the
of the name of the Reason lessened by unity, and the root extracted out of the
Remainder is the lesser side sought.

PROBLEM V. (Which is in Pappus Alexandrinus, and in Cartes's Geometry, p. 83.
in a Biquadratick affected Equation, and p. 84. he gives us thereon a very
remarkable Note.)
HAving given the Square AD (Fig. 28) and a right line BN, you are to produce
the side AC to E, so that OF drawn from E toward B shall be equal to BN.

It will be evident, if you imagine a semicircle to pass through the points B
and E, that the most commodious way will be to find the line DG, that you may
have the Diameter BG; upon which having afterward described a semi circle,
there will be need of no other operation to satisfy the question, than to
produce the side AC 'till it occur to the prescribed Periphery.

SOLVTION. (As found by Van Schooten, p. 316. in his Comment on Cartes's
Geometry, which we will here give somewhat more distinct.)
1. Denomination. Make BD or DC= a, BN or FE= c, BF= y, and DG= x; the
Perpendicular EH will be = a, and EG=BF, viz y (because the EHG is similar to
BDF, by n. 3 Schol 2 Prop. 34. Lib. 1. Math^s. Enucl. and BD in the one = to EH
in the other) and BG= a+ x, BE= y+ c; and BH will have its Denomination, if you
m^ke (by reason of the similarity of the BFD and ^EH) as BF to BD so BE to BH
^. and you will have also HG = ^, i. e. having reduced them all to the same
Denomination, ^, i. e. ^. Having therefore named all the lines you have
occasion for, you must find two Equations, because there are assumed two
unknown quantities, viz. x and y.

2. For the first Equation and its Reduction. By reason of the similiarity of
the BGE and BEH, as BG to GE so BE to EH ^: Therefore the Rectangle of the
Extremes will be = to the Rectangle of the means, i. e. ^; and taking from both
sides ^.

3. For the second Equation and its Reduction. Since BH, HE and HG ^ are
continual proportionals, the Rectangle of the extremes are equal to the square
of the mean, i. e. ^; and multiplying both sides by yy, and dividing by ^, and
taking away ayy and transposing the rest, ^; and dividing by ^; i. e. dividing
actually as far as may be by ^.

4. The comparison of these two Equations thus reduced* gives a third new one,
in which there will be only one unknown quantity, viz. ^; and adding to both
sides cy, ^; and multiplying by ^; i. e. ^ and dividing both sides by ^; and
adding ^. Therefore ^.

5. The Geometrical Construction, which is the same Pap^ prescribes in Carts,
viz. having prolonged the side of (...) square BA to N, so that BN shall be =
to a given right li^ since BA is = a, and BN= c, the Hypothenusa DN will ^.
Having therefore made DG=DN, a^ described a semicircle upon the whole line BG,
if AC be pr^longed until it occur to the Periphery in E, you will have do that
which was required.

PROBLEM VI. (Which Van Schooten has in his Comment, p. m. 150, and following.)
HAving given a right line AB, from the ends of it A an^ B (Fig. 29.) to
inflect two right lines AC and B^ which shall contain an angle ACB = to the
given one D, an^ whose squares shall be in a given proportion to the Triang^
ACB, viz. as 4 d to a.

Viz. You must determine the point C, which the two rig^ lines AH and HC or EH
and HC will do, assuming the mi^dle point E in the line AB. Wherefore here will
be two u^known quantities HE and HC, and consequently two Equ^tions to be found
in the Solution; one whereof the giv^ proportion in the Question supplies us
with, and the other (...) have from the similar Triangles AIC and GFD, which
repr^sent equal angles.

SOLVTION.
Denomination. Make AE, half AB= a, HE= x a^ HC= y; therefore AH will be = a- x
and HB= a+^ whence the Denomination of the squares AC and BC is ea^ had; viz.
the one ^, and the other, a^ XXIX

XXX

XXXI

XXXII

XXXIII

XXXIV

XXXV

XXXVI

XXXVII

xx+ yy, so that the sum of the squares is 2 aa+2 xx+

And the ACB will be = ay: And since the ^ and AIC are similar, and the sides
of the former FD and ^rbitrary, so that for FD we may put b and for FC, c; ^he
sides of the latter are determined by the similitude of ABI and HDB, as being
right-angled ones, and ha^ the common angle B; they will be obtained by making
the Hypothen. BC to the Hypoth. AB so the base HB to ^ase BY, i. e.

^, whence substracting BC= e, there remains CI = ^.

For the first Equation, by virtue of the Problem as ^ to ay. And the Rectangle
of the ^mes is = to the Rectangle of the means, i. e. ^.

For the other Equation, since as DF to FG so CI to AI ^ the Rectangle of the
extremes will again be = to the Re^gle of the means, i. e. ^; multiplying both
sides by ^; ^h is the second Equation.

The Reduction of both Equations. (...) first was ^. ^refore dividing by ^.
substracting ^. ^he latter Equation was ^, i. e. ^ituting again the value ee,
which was ^; and by transposition, ^; and dividing by ^, or ^, or (putting 2 f
for ^) ^.

Wherefore we have the value of xx twice expressed, but by quantities partly
unknown, because y is found on both sides. Wherefore now we must make a new
comparison of their values, whence you will have this new

5. Third Equation, in which there is only one of the unknown quantities: ^;
and adding on both sides both yy and aa, ^; or dividing by 2, ^; and
transposing ^; and dividing by ^; which is the value of the quantity y in known
terms.

But this value in one of the precedent Equations, viz. in this ^, being
substituted for y and its square for yy, will give ^; i. e. all being reduced
to the same denomination, ^; and ^.

6. The Geometrical Construction, which Schooten gives us p. 153. Having made
the angle KAB ( n. 2. Fig. 29.) equal to the given one D, erect from A, AL
perpendicular to KA, meeting the Perpendicular EM in L; and from the Center L,
at the interval of the given right line d, describe a Circle that shall cut KA
and EL produced to K and M. Then assuming EN=KA, join MA, and from N draw NH
parallel to it, which shall meet AB in H. Afterward, having described from L,
at the interval LA, the segment of a Circle ACB, draw from H, HC perpendicular
to AB meeting the circumference in C, and join AC, CB.

NB. The reason of this elegant Construction, which the Author concealed, for
the sake of Learners we will here show. 1. Therefore, he reduced the last
Equation (extracting the root, as well as it could bear, both of Numerator and
Denominator) to this: ^ multipl. by ^, so that after this way the Construction
would be reduced to this proportion, as d+ f to a so ^. 2. He made the angle
KAE = to the given one D, and the angle KAL a right one, so that having
described the segment of a Circle from L the inscribed angle will also be made
equal to the given one, according to the 33. Lib. 3. Eucl. 3. By doing this, EL
expresses the quantity f, since by reason of the similarity of the KOA s. GFD,
n. 1. and AEL (for the angles LAE and AKO are equal, because each makes a right
one with the same third Angle KAO) you have as KO to OA so AE to EL i. e. ^

4. Making now LM and LK = d you had EM= d+ f, and AK = ^ (for the AL is = to
aa+ ff, which being subtracted from LK = ^.)

5. Wherefore there now remains nothing to construct the last Equation above,
but to make EN=AK, and to draw HN parallel to AM; for thus was the whole
proportion as EM to EA so EN to EH ^ to x. Q. e. f.

For the point H being determined, a perpendicular HC thence erected in the
segment already described defines the Point C, which answers the Question.

PROBLEM VII.
HAving given the four sides of a Quadrangle to be inscribed in a Circle, to
find the Diagonals and their Segments, and so to construct the Quadrangle, and
inscricbe it in the Circle. As e. g. suppose the given sides are AB, BC, CD, DA
( Fig. 30 n. 1.) which now we suppose to be joined in^o a quadr^ngle inscribed
in the Circle, the Diagonals also AC and BD being drawn ( n. 3.) to find first
the segments of the diagonals A e, B e, etc. which being had, the Construction
is ready.

SOLVTION.
Denomination. Make AB= a, AC= b, CD= c, DA = d, A e= x [for this segment alone
being found, the rest will be found also, as will be evident from the process.]
Since therefore the vertical angles at e are equal, and likewise the angles in
the same segment BCA, BDA, also DAC, DBC, etc. are equal, the Triangles A eD
and B eC, also A eB and C eD are similar: wherefore it will follow that, 1. As
DA to A e so CB to B e ^ 2. As AB to B e so CD to C e ^ 3. As AB to A e so CD
to D e ^


Therefore the whole Diagonal AC will be = ^ and BD = ^.

2. The Equation. But now by Prop. 48. Lib. 1. Math. Enucl. the Rectangle of
the Diagonals is equal to the two Rectangles of the opposite sides.

Diag. AC, ^

Diag. BD, ^

Therefore the of the Diagonals ^.

3. Reduction, i. e. taking (a) for unity ^; i. e. the quantities on the left
hand being reduced to the same denomination.

^; and multiplying both sides by dd, ^; and dividing both sides by d, ^; and
then dividing both sides by ^; i. e. in the present case, where b by chance
happens to be = a, ^

Therefore ^ or in our case ^

4. The Geometrical Construction, which, by supposing a (and in the present
case also b) to be unity, ought to determine, 1. The quantities cd, ^, cc, and
their aggregate with unity. 2. The aggregate of cd and dd. 3. To divide the one
by the other. And, 4. To extract the root out of the quotient, or also to
extract the roots first out of each quantity, and divide them by one another;
which may all of them be separately done in so many separate Diagrams, but more
elegantly connected together after the following or some such like way. 1. Join
AD and DC ( n. 2.) into one line, and having described a semicircle thereupon,
erect the Perpendicular DE; and the line AE drawn will = ^. 2. Making the angle
CAG at pleasure, make AF=AB, and draw CG parallel to the line DF; so FG will be
=^. Now if, 3. in the vertical angle you make AH=CD, the line HI drawn parallel
to DF will cut off AI= cd. 4. In AK erected = to AB, if you take AL=AH or CD,
and draw LM parallel to KH, you will have AM= cc. 5. Having prolonged AG to N and
AH to O, so that GN shall be =AI+AM and AO=AB or AK, and having described a
semicircle upon the whole line NO, a perpendicular erected AP will be = ^ and
so, 6. if AQ be made =AE and AR=AF or AB, and you draw a line RS from R
parallel to PQ; AS will be = x, i. e. the segment sought A e of the Diagonal
AC; which being given, by force of the first Inference premised in the
Denomination above, by drawing DS and, having made DT=BC, TV parallel to it;
you will have also the other segment B e=SV and by their Intersection on the line
AB ( n. 3.) the point e, through which the Diagonals must be drawn which will be
terminated by the other given sides, and thence you will have the quadrilateral
figure ABCD sought, to be circumscribed about the Circle, according to Consect.
6 Defin. 8. Mathes. Enucl.

NB. Unless we had here consulted the Learner's ease, the artifice of this
Construction might be proposed after a more short and occult way, thus: Make DE
a mean proportional between AD and DC, and draw AE. Then having made any angle
CAG, make AF=AB, and at this Interval describe the circle FROK, and draw CG
parallel to DF. Moreover in the opposite vertical angle, having made AH=CD,
draw HI parallel to DF, and having erected the perpendicular AK, and thence the
abscissa AL=AH, make LM parallel to HK, and thence having prolonged AH to O,
and GN being made equal to AI+AM, make AP a meam proportional between AO and
AN, cutting the hidden circle in R; and lastly having made AQ=AE, if RS be
drawn parallel to QP, you will have AS the value of x sought, etc.

III. Some Examples of Affected Quadratick Equations.
PROBLEM I.
HAving given, to make a right angled Triangle ABC, the differences of the
lesser and greater side, and of the greater, and the Hypothenusa, to find the
sides separately and form the Triangle. E. g. Having given the right line DB (
Fig. 31.) for the difference of the perpendicular and base, and CE for the
difference of the base and Hypothenusa, to find the perpendicular AC, which
being found, you will have also, by what we have supposed, the base AB, and the
hypothenusa BC.

SOLVTION.
Make the difference DB= a, CE= b; put x for the perpendicular; the base, which
is greater than that will be x+ a and the Hypothenusa x+ a+ b. Therefore by
virtue of the Pythagorick Theorem,

^; and substracting from both sides ^.

Wherefore by the first case of affected quadratick Equations ^.

Construction. Find a mean proportional AK between AH=2 b and AI= a (n. 2.) (
Fig. 31.) and having made both AF and AG= b, place the Hypothenusa KF from AL,
and cut off GC equal to the hypothenusa GL; thus you will have AC the
perpendicular of the Triangle sought, and adding DB you will also have the base
AB, and from thence having drawn the hypothenusa BC, it Will be found to differ
by the excess required CE.

The Arithmetical Rule. Join twice the product of the differences multiplied by
one another, to twice the square of the difference of the base and the
hypothenusa; and if the square root of this sum being extracted be added to the
aforesaid difference, you will have the perpendicular sought. Suppose e. g. both
the differences of CE and DB=10.

PROBLEM II.
IN a right-angled having given the Hypothenusa and sum of the sides, to find
the sides. E. g. If the Hypothenusa BC be given ( Fig. 32.) and the sum of the
sides CAB, to find the sides AB and AC separately, to form the Triangle.

SOLVTION.
Make the Hypothenusa BC= a, the sum of the sides = b. Make one side e. g. AB=
x, then will the other side AC be = b- x. Therefore

^; and adding 2 bx, and taking away ^; and dividing by ^.

Therefore according to Case 1. of affected Quadraticks. ^ i. e. ^ or ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Having described a semicircle upon BD=BC so a
apply therein the equal lines BE and DE, and having described another
semicircle on BE apply therein BF= b, to be prolonged farther out. Lastly, if
another little semi circle be described at the ^nterval OF, the whole line AB
will be the true root or the side sought, and GB the false root, etc.

The Arithmetical Rule. From half the square of the Hypothenusa substract the
fourth part of the square of the given sum, and the root extracted out of the
remainder, if it be added to half the sum, will give one side of the Triangle;
and subtracted from the given sum, will give also the other Suppose e. g. BC
to be 20, and the sum of the sides 28.

PROBLEM III.
HAving given again in the same the Hypothenusa, as above, and the difference
of the sides DB (Fig. 33.) to find the sides.

SOLVTION.
Make the less side x, the difference of the sides = b; the greater side will
be x+ b. Let the Hypothenusa be = a. Therefore, ^; and taking away ^; and
dividing by ^.

Therefore by case 2, ^ i. e. ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Having described a semicircle upon BD=BC or a,
apply therein the equal lines BC and DC, and having described another
semicircle on DC apply in it DF = b, and if at the same interval you cut off
FA from FC, the remainder AC will be the lesser side sought, etc.

The Arithmetical Rule. From half the square of the Hypothenusa substract the
square of half the difference, and if you take half the difference from the
root extracted out of the remainder, you will have the lesser side of the Triangle
required, and by adding to it the given difference you will have also the greater.
E. g. Let the Hypothenusa be 20, and the difference of the sides 4.

PROBLEM IV.
HAving given the Area of a right-angled Parallelogram, and the difference of
the sides to find the sides. E. g. If the Area is = to the square of the given
line DF, and the difference of the sides ED ( Fig. 34.) to find the sides of
the rectangle.

SOLVTION.
Make the given Area = aa, the difference of the sides = b, the lesser side x;
then the greater will be x+ b. Therefore the Area xx+ bx= aa; and substracting
bx xx=- bx+ aa.

Therefore according to case 2, ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Join at right angles AG= a, and GH= b, and
having drawn AH and prolonged it, describe the little Circle at the interval
GH: so you will have AE the lesser side, and AD the greater of the Rectangle
sought, etc.

The Arithmetical Rule. Add the given Area and the square of half the
difference, and having the sum, substract and add the difference from or to the
root extracted, and so you will have the greater and less sides of the rectangle.

PROBLEM V.
HAving given for a right-angled Triangle the difference of both the Legs from
the Hypothenusa, to find the sides and so the whole Triangle. E. g. Suppose the
difference of the less side to be BD and of the greater DE ( n. 1. Fig. 35.) to
find the sides themselves, and so make the Triangle.

SOLVTION.
For BD put a, for DE, b. Let the greater side be x; the Hypothenusa will be x+
b; therefore the lesser side will be x+ b- a. Now the of the sides are = to the
of the Hypothenusa, i. e. 2 xx-2 ax+2 bx+ bb-2 ab+ aa = xx+2 bx+ bb; and taking
away aa, ^; and adding 2 ax and 2 ab, and taking away ^. Therefore ^ i. e. ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Between the given differences BD and DE* find (
n 2.) a mean proportional DF* and join to it at right angles the equal line FG,
and cut off DH equal to DG; and so you will have BH the greater side of the
triangle sought. This being prolonged to C, so that HC shall be = b, having
described a semicircle upon the whole line BC apply therein BA=BH; and having
drawn AC, the Triangle sought ABC, will be formed.

The Arithmetical Rule. If the square root extracted from the double rectangle
of the differences be added to the greater difference, you will have the greater
side sought, etc.

PROBLEM VI.
HAving given, to make two unequal Rectangles, but of equal height, the sum of
their Bases with the Area of ^her (viz. the greater,) and the proportion of the
sides of the ^her (viz the least,) to find the sides separately. E. g. Let the
sum of the bases be AB ( n. 1. Fig. 36) and the square of the line BC= to the
Area of the greater rectangle; and let the sides of the lesser rectangle be to
one another as CD to DE: To find the sides of both the rectangles; i. e. to
find the common altitude, which being found the other sides will be easily
obtained from the Data; or to find the base of the greater which, with the same
ease, will discover the rest.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, and the Area of the greater rectangle = bb; ^^d the proportion of
the altitude to the base in the lesser, as c ^d; to find e. g. the greater base
which call x. Therefore (...) common altitude will be =^, and the base of the
lesser ^^ctangle= a- x.

Wherefore you will have for the Equation, as c to d so ^ to a- x.

Therefore ac- cx=^; and multipl. by x, acx- cxx= bbd; and adding cxx and
taking away bbd, acx- bbd= cxx. Now that you may conveniently divide both sides
by c, make first as c to b so d to a fourth which call f, and then put cf for
bd, and you will have ^; and dividing by ^; and so according to case 3. ^ or ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Find first the quantity f^ (number. 2. Fig. 36.)
according to the following proportion, as c to b so d to f; and a mean
proportional between b and f will be = ^. Then having at the interval a
described a semi circle ( n. 3.) upon the given line AB, and erected BD= ^, and
having made OF= to it, CF will be ^* To which AC being added will give x for
one value and FB for the other. And for the common altitude, which we called ^,
make as x to b, so b to a fourth, i. e. as AF to FH so FH to FG; which will be
the altitude of both rectangles A g and B g which may now easily be constructed.

The Arithmetical Rule might easily be had from this Equation reduced; but you
may have it more commodiously from this other

SOLVTION.
Let the Denomination remain the same as above, only her^ put x for the common
altitude, and express the reason of the lesser base of the rectangle to this
altitude by e, and that bas^ will be = ex: Therefore the base of the greater
Rectangl^ will be = a- ex. Having now multiplied the com^mon altitude by each
base, the area of the greater rectangl^ will be ax- exx, and hence you will have
the Equation

ax- exx= bb; and adding exx, and taking away bb, ax- bb= exx; and dividing by
^. Therefore by case 3.

^.

Wherefore now this will be the Arithmetical Rule. If from the fourth part of
the square of the sum of the bases divided by the of the name of the reason you
substract the given area divided by the same name of the reason, and if the
root extracted ^ut of the remainder be added to or subtracted from half the
sum of the bases divided by the same name of the reason; this sum or ^emainder
will give the altitude of the given Rectangles, and that multiplied by the name
of the reason one of the bases: And that being subtracted from the given sum
of the bases ^ill give the other base. For Example, let the sum of the ba^ be
16, the area of one of the rectangles 30, the ^ame of the reason which the
common altitude has to the base ^f the other rectangle = 2. There will come out
the com^on altitude, on the one side 5, on the other 3, etc.

PROBLEM VII.
HAving given the Perpendicular of a right-angled Triangle let fall from the
right angle, and its Base, to find the ^ments of the Base, and so to form the
Triangle.

E g. If the base of the right-angled Triangle you are to ^m be AB ( Fig. 37.)
and the length of the perpendicular ^^ or BF; to find the segments of the base,
and so the point (...), from which you are to make the perpendicular CD, to
form ^e Tiangle ABG.

SOLVTION.
Let the given base be = a; and the given perpendicular ^b: Then will one of
the segments of the base be = x; ^d the other = a- x, and b a mean proportional
between ^e said segments, i. e.

x to b as b to a- x;

therefore ax- xx= bb; and by adding xx and taking a^y bb, ax- bb= xx.
Therefore by case 3. ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Having described a semicircle upon the given
line AB, if you erect the perpendicular BE, and from the point G (which is
determined by EG parallel to AB) let fall GD equal to it, you will have the two
segments sought, AD = ^ and DB = ^, which Construction, it cannot be denied,
but it may be evident to any attentive person even without the Analysis.

But that case may by the by be taken notice of wherein the given perpendicular
would not be BE but BF. For in this case the perpendicular BF being erected
upon AB, the parallel FG would not cut the semicircle; which is an infallible
sign that the Problem in this case is impossible, where the perpendicular is
supposed to be greater than half the base; which is inconsistent with a right
angle.

The Arithmetical Rule. From the square of half the base take the square of the
given perpendicular, and add or substract the square root extracted out of the
remainder, to or from half the base; and on the one hand the sum will give the
greater segment, and on the other the difference will give the less.

PROBLEM VIII.
HAving given the perpendicular of a right-angled Triangle that is to be let
fall from the right angle, and the difference of the segments of the base, to
find the segments, and describe the Triangle.

E. g. If the perpendicular is, as above, BE, and the difference of the
segments AH ( n. 1. Fig. 38.) to find the segments AD and DB, from whose common
term you are to erect a perpendicular DG or DC to form the Triangle.

XXXVIII

XXXIX

XL

XL

XLI

XLI

XLII



SOLVTION.
Make the lesser segment = x, and the difference of the seg^ts = a, the greater
segment will be x+ a Make the gi^ perpendicular as before = b: Therefore you will
have as x+ a to b so b to x; and consequently, xx+ ax= bb; and substracting ax,
xx= bb- ax. Wherefore according to case 2. ^.

The Geometrical Construction. Make HD= a, DG equal perpendicular to b; HG will
be = ^ = HB or ^, viz having drawn a semicircle from H through G. ^erefore DB is
the less segment, and AD the greater; and ^ing drawn AG and BG, or on the other
side, (making the ^pendicular DC=DG) having drawn AC and BC, the ^iangle will
be constructed. Or with Carts, make ( n. 2.) ^= a and EB= b, and having
described a Circle from ^hro' E draw BHA; and so you will have the two segments
^ght AB the greater and DB the lesser.

The Arithmetical Rule. Join the squares of the half diffe^ce and perpendicular
into one sum, and then having extra^ the root substract half the difference
from it; and the re^nder will be the lesser segment sought; and having added ^
difference you will have also the greater.

PROBLEM IX.
HAving given for a rigbt-angled Triangle one segment of the base and the side
adjacent to the other segment, to find rest and construct the Triangle.

As if the lesser segment of the base DB be given ( Fig. 39.1.) and the side AC
adjacent to the other segment; to find greater segment of the base, which being
found the rest easily obtained, and consequently the whole Triangle.

SOLVTION.
Make the greater segment = b, the given side = c, the segment sought = x. Now
if we suppose the triangle ABC to be already found, it is evident, 1. If from
the square of AC you substract the AD, you will have the CD= cc- xx. 2. The same
CD may also be otherwise hence obtained, because, the angle at C being a right
one, CD is a mean proportional between BD and DA, i. e. between b and x; whence
the rectangle of the extremes bx is = of the mean CD. Wherefore now it follows,
3. that cc- xx= bx; and adding xx, cc= bx+ xx; and substracting bx,- bx+ cc=
xx. Therefore according to case 2. x=- b+ bb+ cc.

Geometrical Construction. Join OF= b (n. 2. Fig. 39.) and FA= c at right
angles, and having described a Circle from E through F draw AEB; so you will have DA
the greater segment and DB the less; having erected therefore a perpendicular
from D, and described a semicircle upon AB, you will have C the vertex of the
triangle sought, whence you are to draw the sides AC and BC.

The Arithmetical Rule. Join the of half the given segment, and the of the
given side into one sum; and having extracted the root of it, if you thence
take half the given segment, you will have the segment sought.

PROBLEM X.
HAving given in an oblique angled Triangle the perpendicular height, and the
difference of the segments of the base, and the difference of the other sides,
to find the sides and form the triangle.

As, if the altitude CD be given ( n. 1. Fig. 40.) and also the difference of
the segments of the base EB, and the difference of the sides FB (as is evident
from the triangle ABC ( n. 2.) conceived to be so formed beforehand) and you
are to determine the base it self and both sides, etc.

SOLVTION.
Make the given perpendicular CD= a (see n. 2. Fig. 40.) EB= b, FB= c: For the
lesser segment of the base AD put x, and the greater will be x+ b. It is now
evident that you may obtain the CB by the addition of the DC and BD, ^, and the
AC by the addition of the AD and DC, viz. aa+ xx: So that the side AC will be =
^, and the side BC = ^. But since also this same side BC may be obtained by
adding the difference c to the side AC, so that it shall be = ^: you will have
this Equation, ^; and squaring both sides, ^; and substracting from both sides
^; and again squaring it, ^; and substracting from both sides 4 ccxx (because c
is less than b) and transposing the rest, ^ and dividing by ^ i. e. dividing
the affected quantities by 4 both above and underneath, ^ and actually dividing
the former part by ^.

Therefore according to the second case, ^; or reducing bb to the same
denomination with the rest ^; and leaving out those quantities that destroy one
another ^.

The Arithmetical Rule. Multiply four times the square of FB by the square of
the perpendicular CD, and add to it the product of the square of EB into the
FB, and from the sum substract the biquadrate of FB; and the remainder will be
the first thing found. Then substract four times the square of FB from four
times the square of EB; and the remainder will be the second thing found.
Lastly, divide the first thing found by the second, and from the quotient take
half after having extracted the root: Thus you will have the lesser segment of the
base sought, etc. E. g. In numbers you may put 2 for FB, 4 for EB, 12 for CD.

As for the Geometrical Construction, the quantity of the last Equation
contained under the radical sign will help us to this proportion,

as ^ so cc to a fourth; or dividing all by 4,

as ^ so cc to a fourth, which is of the quantity under the radical sign.
Assuming therefore the quantity c for unity, make ( n. 3.) IK= c IN and KL= b;
NO will be = bb, and substracting OP= cc (i. e. to unity) there will remain NP=
bb- cc. In like manner IS and KM= a, ST will = aa; to which if you add SX=NO,
and take thence XV= unity; TV will be = ^. Wherefore if you make NR equal to
this TV, and PQ= of unity or cc, since NP is = bb- cc; by the rule of
proportion there will come out DR of that quantity, which is under the radical
sign. Therefore this being taken four times will give DZ for the whole
quantity; to which if you join D y= to unity, and, having described a
semicircle upon the whole line YZ, erect the perpendicular DE; this will be
the root of the said quantity, and taking hence moreover OF= b, you will have DE
or DA the less segment of the base sought. Therefore adding GB= b to DG, DB
will be the greater segment, and, having let fall the perpendicular DC= a, BC
and AC will be the sides sought. Q. E. F.

IV. Some Examples of Affected Biquadratick Equations, but like Affected
Quadratick ones.
PROBLEM I.
TO find a square ABCD (such as in the mean while we'll suppose n. 1. to be in
Fig. 41.) from which having taken away another square AEFG, which shall be half
the former, ^here will be left the Rectangle GC whose Area is given. E. g.
Suppose the given area equal to the square of the given line LM, to find the
true sides of the squares AB and AE, answer^ng to these supposed ones, n. 1.

SOLVTION.
Make the area of the rectangle that is to remain = bb, and GB= x; BC or AB
will be = ^, and substracting hence GB, the remaining side of the lesser square
AG=^- x, (...). ^. Since therefore the square of this is supposed ^o be half of
the square of AB, this will be the Equation: ^; and multiplying by xx, ^ and
multiplying by 2, ^; and substracting 2 b{powerof4}, and adding ^; and dividing
by 2, ^.

NB. The same Equation may be obtained, if, putting x for GB or FH, and having
found the of AG or GF as above, you infer ^.

This last Equation, though it be a biquadratick, yet may be rightly esteemed
only a quadratick one, because there is neither x{powerof3} nor single x in it,
and so you may substitute this for it, ^, viz. by supposing y= xx. Whence
according to the third case of affected quadraticks, y will = ^ i. e. ^ or = ^.

Therefore ^.

Geometrical Construction. Now if the given line b be assumed for unity, bb and
b{powerof4} will be = = to the same line Therefore, if between LM as unity, and
MN= b viz ^ you find a mean proportional MO ( n. 2. Fig. 41.) that will be = ^,
which being subtracted from LM, and added to it, will give the two values of
the quantity y. Moreover therefore by extracting its roots, i. e. by finding
other mean proportionals LR and LS between the quantities found LP and LQ and
unity ( n. 3.) they will be the two values of the quantity x sought; the first
whereof LR will satisfy the question, and the other LS be impossible.
Wherefore to form the square it self, since its side will be = ^; by making ( n
4.) as x to b so b to a fourth, it will be obtained: And this may be further
proved, if finding a mean proportional BK between BY=LR and the side of the BC,
it be equal to the given quantity LM.

Arithmetical Rule. From the given area or the square of the given line LM
substract the root of half the biquadrate of the same line; thus you will have
the value of the FC, viz. xx: Therefore extracting further the square root of
^^is, it will be the value of x sought.

PROBLEM II.
TO find another square ABCD (Fig. 42. n. 1.) out of the middle whereof if you
take another square EFGH, which ^all be a fourth part of the former, the area
of the rectangle ^K intercepted between BC and FG prolonged, shall be equal
(...) the square of a given line LM; i. e. having these given to and the
segment BY, and consequently also the side BC or ^B.

SOLVTION.
Make the area of the given rectangle, or the square of LM (...) to bb, and the
side sought of the rectangle BY= x; the over side BC will be = ^, and having
subtracted out of it (...) and GK ( i. e. 2 x) the side of the lesser square
FG will ^^-2 x, i. e. ^; whose square since it is the ^orth part of the greater
square by the Hypothesis, you will have ^; (...) multiplying both sides by ^;
(...) taking away 4 b{powerof4}, and adding ^; and dividing by 4, ^.

Therefore according to the third case of affected quadratick ^quations, ^ i.
e. ^.

Therefore ^.

Geometrical Construction. If the given line b be taken (...) unity,
b{powerof4} and bb will be equal to it. Therefore if betwe^ LM as unity, and
MN=3 b, you find a mean proporti^nal MO ( n. 2. Fig. 42.) 'twill be ^; which
subst^cted from MQ=2 b, or added to it, will give two values the quantity xx,
viz. PQ and IQ; the first whereof will (...) only a true one, and of use here.
Now therefore a mea^ proportional QR found between PQ and unity will expre^ the
quantity sought x.

Therefore for forming the square it self, since its side AB=^, you may proceed
as in the former Constructon, ( vi^ n. 3.)

PROBLEM III.
HAving given the base of a right-angled Triangle, and mean proportional
between the Hypothenusa and Perpe^dicular, to find the Triangle. As if the
given base be A ( Fig 43.) and the mean proportional between AC and B^ be CD;
to find the perpendicular BC, and Hypothenu^ AC.

SOLVTION.
Make the given base = a, and the mean proportional = the perpendicular BC= x,
then will the Hypothenusa be (...) the Hypoth, -^.

Page 56.
XLIII

XLIV

XLV

XLVI

XLVII

XLVIII



^erefore ^; ^d multiplying both sides by ^; ^d substracting ^. ^erefore by the
second case of affected quadraticks ^, and ^.

Or thus.

Make the Hypothenusa AC= x, then will the perpendi^ar be BC=^. Therefore ^; ^d
multiplying by ^. ^^erefore by case 1. ^ and ^.

Geometrical Construction; the first for the latter Equation. (...) be put for
unity, the line AB will be also = aa, and king, as a to b so b to a third, i.
e. as LM to MN so LO OP, and you will have bb. Having erected the perpendicu^
AQ=OP upon AM, and drawn MQ or M n equal to ^, and consequently A n will be =
^, (...) the value of xx. Moreover a mean proportional AC and between A n and
AR unity will be the value of x, i. e. Hypothenusa sought; which being found,
you may easily ^mplete the Triangle ABC.

2. In the case of the former Equation, making every thing before AK would be
the value of the quantity xx, i. e. ^. Therefore a mean proportional RT and
between RS=AK and AR unity will be the value of x, i. e. the perpendicular
sought, and so AT the Hypothenusa of the Triangle sought.

Arithmetical Rule. In the first Solution add the biquadrate of the given mean
proportional to the biquadrate of half the given base; and having extracted the
square root of the sum, take from it half the square of the given base; the
root of the remainder will give the perpendicular of the triangle sought, and
the root of the sum will give the hypothenusa of it.

PROBLEM IV.
HAving the Hypothenusa of a right-angled Triangle given, and a mean
proportional between the sides to find the Triangle. As if the hypothenusa be
AC ( Fig. 44.) and a mean proportional between the sides BD, to find the sides
AB and BC.

SOLVTION.
Make the given Hypothenusa = a, and the mean proportional = b, and the
perpendicular BC= x; the basis AB by the hypoth. will be ^. Therefore ^; and
multiplying by xx, ^; and substracting b{powerof4}, ^.

Therefore by the third case, ^ and ^.

Geometrical Construction. If a be put for unity, AC will be also = aa, and by
making as AC to CG ( a to b) so AF to GH ( b to a third) this third will be GH=
bb. Assuming therefore OC= aa=OB the radius of a semicircle, and having
erected CD= bb=BE parallel to it, EO will be ^, and consquently EC = ^, and EA
^, viz. the double value of the quantity xx. Therefore for the double value of
x, you must extract the roots out of them, i. e. you must find the mean
proportionals AL and AM between unity AC and AI=EC on the one side, and AK=AE
on the other; Although these last may be more compendiously had, and the triangle
it self immediately constructed, if having found EC and EA, you draw CB and AB:
For these will be those two last mean proportionals = = AL and AM; for by
reason of the ABC, AEB, and BEC, BC is a mean proportional between AC and CE,
and AB a mean proportional between the same AC and AE by the 8. Lib. 6. Eucl.
which is Consect. 3. Schol. 2. Prop. 34. Lib. 1. Math. Enucl.

PROBLEM V.
HAving given the Area and Diagonal of a right-angled Parallelogram, to find
the sides and so the Parallelogram. As if the given Area be = to the square of
a given line BD ( Fig. 45.) and the Diagonal AC, to find the sides AB and BC.

SOLVTION.
If for the given Area, or square of the line BD you put bb, and make the
Diagonal AC= a, and put for the lesser side BC, x; the other side will be ^.

Therefore ^; and multiplying by xx, ^; and substracting b{powerof4} ^. Which
Equation, since it is the same with that of the preceding Problem (which is no
wonder, since this fifth perfectly coincides with the fourth; for the Diagonal
AC is the hypothenusa, and BD, whose square is = to the given area of the
rectangle, is a mean proportional between the sides AB and BC) and so will have
the same Construction, (see Fig. 45.) and the same Arithmetical Rule, which may
be easily formed from the last Equation of the preceding Problem.

PROBLEM VI.
HAving given the first of three proportional lines, and another whose square
is equal to both the squares of the other two, to find those two proportionals.
As if AC ( Fig. 46.) be the first of the three proportionals, and another line
ED given, whose square equals the two squares of the others taken together; to
find those two as second and third proportionals.

SOLVTION.
If for AC you put a, and make the given line ED= c, and the second
proportional = x, the third will be ^. Wherefore the squares of the two last
will be ^+ xx= cc, ED by the hypoth. and multiplying both sides by ^; and
substracting ^. Therefore ^ and ^.

Geometrical Construction. If a be put for unity, AC will also = aa and
a{powerof4}, and making as AC to CD ( a to c) so AF to DE ( c to a third) DE
will be = cc. Now having made AK=DE, i. e. cc, a mean proportional AI found
between AC and AK will be ^. Therefore taking AO=AC, viz. aa, the hypothenusa
OI will be = ^. And OA= a being subtracted from OI or OH equal to it will
leave AH the value of xx; and the root of that being extracted, i. e. finding
another mean proportional AG between AC and AH, it will be the value of x, i.
e. the second of the proportionals sought, and since AC is the first given, AH
will be the third. Q. E. F.

NB. This Construction may be abbreviated, and the first Operation, by which
you find DE, to which afterward AK is made equal, may be omitted. For since
you make use of a mean proportional between CA and DE sought, which is = to the
given line ED, and afterward AI a mean proportional between AC and AK is
sought; it is evident that AI will be equal to ED given, and consequently that
they may be immediately joined at right angles at the beginning of the given
line AC, and the rest may then be done as before.

Some Examples of Cubick and Biquadratick Equations, both simple and affected,
whether reducible or not.

PROBLEM I.
BEtween two given right angles to find two mean proportionals. E. g. Suppose
given AB the first and CD the fourth, ( Fig. 47. n. 1.) between these to find
two mean proportionals.

SOLVTION.
Make the first of the given quantities AB= a, the other CD= q, the first mean
= x, then will the latter be ^, and consequently ^= q; and multiplying by aa,
x{powerof3}=** aaq.

The Central Rule will b ^=AD ^=DH. i e. according to a supposition we shall by
and by make, a=AD, and q= DH.

Geometrical Construction. If AB or a be made unity, and also the Latus Rectum
of your Parabola, and you describe, by means of this Latus Rectum, the
Parabola, according to Schol. 1. Prop. 1. Lib. 2. Math. Enucl. [see n. 2. and
3. Fig 47.] ^n which AB is the Latus Rectum; A1, A2, etc. the Abscis^a's; AI,
AH, etc. the semiordinates; make moreover ( n. 4) AD= a, and having from D
erected a perpendicular = q, describe a circle at the interval AH, cutting the
parabola in N: Which being done, a perpendicular to the Ax will be the root
sought or the value of x, i. e. the first of the means, and consequently OA the
other; since NO by the first property of the Parabola (see Prop. 1. Lib. 2.
Mathes. Enucl.) is a mean proportional between the Latus Rectum AB, and the
abscissa AO. And by this means there will come out, by Baker's Central Rule the
very construction of Des Carts, Geom. p. m. 91.

The Arithmetical Rule. Multiply the square of the first by the fourth given,
and the cube root extracted out of the product, will express the first of the
means sought.

PROBLEM II.
HAving given the solid Contents of a solid or an hollow Parallelepiped, and
the proportion of the sides, to find the sides. As, if the given capacity or
solid contents be = to the cube of a certain given line IK ( Fig. 48. n. 1.)
and the proportion of the height to the length be as AB to BC, and to the
latitude as the same AB to BD; to find first the altitude, which being had, the
other Dimensions will also be known, by the given proportions.

SOLVTION.
Make IK= a, AB= b, BC= c, and BD= d; and lastly the height sought = x, then
as b to c, so x to the length required ^; and as b to d, so x to the latitude
sought ^.

Multiplying therefore these three dimensions of the Parallelepiped together,
you will have its capacity or solid contents ^ = a{powerof3}; and multiplying by
bb, cdx{powerof3}= a{powerof3} bb; and dividing by cd, ^ i e. ^.

Therefore the Central Rule will be the samc as above, ^=AD and ^=DH, i. e.
according to the supposition which will by and by follow, ^=AD and ^=DH.

Geometrical Construction. If IK or a be made unity, and at the same time Latus
Rectum, and by means of it you describe a Parabola, after the way we have
shown, Fig. 47. n. 2. and 3. and shall always hereafter make use of; and then
to prepare the quantity ^ (which in the Central Rule is the the quantity ^)
make ( n. 2.) IK-IM=BC-KL=BD-MN as a to c so d to e; so that for cd you may put
ae, and afterward divide by a both above and underneath; you will have the
quantity ^.

Therefore by further inferring as 2 e to bb, so aa to a fourth IO-IP=IT-IK-IQ,
and you will have the quantity DH, which will determine the center, after AD is
made equal ^. Having therefore described from that center a circle through the
vertex of the Parabola A ( n. 3.) a semiordinate NO drawn from the intersection
will be the altitude sought, which will easily give you the length and breadth
by the reasons above shown.

Another Solution.

Which will be more accommodated to the Arithmetical Rule.

Let the rest of our Positions or Data remain as above, but the name of the
proportion which the altitude has to the length be = e, and of that which it
has to the latitude = i, the length will be = to ex, and the latitude to ix.
Wheref^ multiplying the sides together, you will have the whole solidity ^; and
dividing by ei, ^. Therefore ^ Hence

The Arithmetical Rule. Multiply together the given na^ of the reasons, and
divide the given cube by the produ^ which done, the cubick root extracted out
of the quotient (...) be the altitude of the solid sought.

Another Geometrical Construction. Now if we would a^ construct this Equation
x{powerof3}=^ geometrically, putting AB=^ for unity, BC and BD will be the
names of the reasons = ^ and i. Making therefore first IK-IM-KL-MN as a to e so
i to a fourth f (Fig. 49. n 1.) af ^ be = ei, and the proposed Equation will
have this form: ^ i. e. aa / f.

Therefore 2. making as f to a so a to a third IQ, that will be the value of
(...) But hence 3 by extracting the cube root, i. e. by finding t^ mean
proportionals between unity b, viz. AB and the (...) found ^Q; the first of
them will give the root sought.

NB. The same Central Rule would come out according Baker^s Central Rule, which
would have the same form of Equation, as the precedent Example x{powerof3}**-
aa= o, taking b for the Lat. Rect. and unity, ^=AD and ^=DH, ^=AD and ^ i. e.
IQ=DH

(see Fig. 49. n. 2.)

Page 64.
XLIX

L

LII

LIII



PROBLEM III.
HAving given the solid contents of a solid or hollow Parallelepiped, and the
difference of the sides, to find the sides. (...) if the given capacity be
equal to the cube of any given ^e LM ( Fig. 50. n. 1.) and the difference
whereby the ^gth exceeds the breadth = NO, and the difference by which (...)
breadth exceeds the altitude or depth = PQ, to find the ^gth, breadth and depth.

SOLVTION.
Make the side of the given cube = a, the excess of the ^gth above the breadth
NO= b, and of the breadth above (...) depth PQ= c, make the depth = x, the
breadth = x+ c, ^d the length = x+ b+ c. Multiplying therefore these ^ree
dimensions together.

^

^ according to the forms of Baker and Carts ^

Wherefore the Central Rule contracted by the supposition which will hereafter
follow will be this, ^ = AD and ^ = DH. ^ e. by virtue of the supposition just
now mentioned (which ^kes LM viz. a for unity and also for Lat. Rectum)

^ = AD. And ^ = DH.

Or more short; ^ i. e. ^ = AD; and ^ ( ^ i. e. ^ = DH.

Geometrical Construction. If LM or a be taken for unity or Latus Rectum of the
Parabola to be described, that being described ( Fig. 50. n. 3.) you are first
of all to determine two quantities AD and DH; which may be done two ways;
either by Baker's form of his Central Rule, or by ours immediately divided by
the quantities of the last Equation.

1. For AD by our form, ^ = AD, you must make ( Fig. 50. n. 1.) as a to b so b
to a third (AB to AC so BE to CF) which will be bb, and D{powerof2} the eighth
part of this CF must be added to A{powerof2} the half of AB. And by Baker's
form you must make, 1. as AB (= a, n. 2.) to AC (= p i. e. b+ c) so BE (= p i.
e. b+ c) to a fourth CF (which will be = ^*) 2. Make moreover as AB to AG ( a
to b) so BH to GI ( c to bc) and, as AB to AK ( a to c) so BH to KL ( c to cc)
and the two quantities found GI and KL ( bc and cc) being added into one sum
will give the quantity q=MN, the half whereof MO will express the quantity ^ in
the Rule, and to be subtracted from the former ^. Actually therefore to
determine the quantity AD not on the Ax, but on another Diameter of the
described parabola n. 3. (because the quantity p is in the Equation) having
made a perpendicular to the Ax aE=^ i. e. to the line BE n. 2. and from E
having drawn EA parallel to the ax, according to our form AD n. 1. transfer it
only on the diameter of the parabola n. 3. from A to D, either by parts ^ i. e.
LM from A to c, and ^ i. e. CF n. 1. from c to D: But according to Baker's
form, first you must put ^=LM n. 1. from A to 1. Secondly you must put from 1
to 2 the quantity ^=CF n. 2. Thirdly you must put from 2 to 3 backwards the
quantity to be subtracted ^=MO n. 2. which being done, the point D will be
determined.

[It is evident by comparing these two ways of Construction, that we may join
our forms not incommodiously to Baker 's; because by ours the quantity AD was
obtained more compendiously than by Baker 's, which will also often happen
hereafter. And where this Compendium cannot be had, there is another not
inconsiderable one, that, if the quantities AD and DH determined according to
both ways shall coincide, (which happens in the present case) we may be so much
the more sure of the truth]

2. As for DH by our form, you must put it from D to e on a perpendicular
erected from D on the left hand, the quantity ^ = BE n. 2. falling here upon
the Ax. Then for the quantity ^ make n. 4. as a to bb (LM to LN) so b to ^ (MO
to NP) and this quantity must be put from e to f in a perpendicular to the
Diam. Thirdly, for the quantity ^ you must farther make n. 4. as a to bb (DM to
LN) so c to a fourth (MQ to NR) which must be put from f to g. Lastly the
quantity ^ (which is = MO n. 2.) must be put backwards (because to be
subtracted) from g to H, which is the center sought. In like manner by Baker's
form, first ^=BE is put from D to 1 even to the Ax. Secondly, for the quantity
^ make, n. 4. as a to ^ (LM to LS=CF n. 2.) so ^ to a fourth (MT=AC n. 2. to
SV) and this SV is further put ( n. 3.) from 1 to 2. Thirdly, make in the same
Fig. n. 4. for the quantity ^, as a to ^ (LM to MT) so ^ to a fourth (LX to XZ)
and this XZ is put backwads ( n. 3.) from 2 to 3, which precisely coincides
with the point g. Lastly the remaining quantity ^ (=MO n. 2. and so by what we
have said above, precisely coinciding with the interval g H) is put backwards
from g to H the Center sought.

[Hence it appears again that Baker 's form is more laborious than ours; though
both accurately agree, and hereafter, for the most part, we shall use them both
together, tho in' the work it self, rather in Figures, than in that tedious
process of words, which we have here for once made use of, that it might be as
an Example for the following Constructions.]

Having therefore found by one or both ways the Center H, and thence described
a circle through the vertex of the parabola A, the intersection N will give the
perpendicular to the diameter NO, the value of the quantity x sought.

PROBLEM IV.
TO divide a given angle NOP, or a given arch NQTP (Fig. 51. n. 1.) into three
equal parts; i. e. having given or assumed at pleasure the Radius NO, and
consequently also the Chord of the arch NP, to find NQ the subtense of the
third part of the given arch.

SOLVTION.
If NO be made unity, NP= q, and NQ be supposed = z; having drawn QS parallel
to TO, you will have three similar triangles NOQ, QNR and RQS. For since the angle
QOP is double of the angle QON, and the same (as being at the Center) double
also of the angle at the Periphery QNR; it will be equal to the angle QON. But
the angle at Q is common to both triangles: Therefore the whole are
equi-angular, and consequently the legs NQ and NR equal, as also NO and QO; and
by the like reason also PY and PT. Wherefore if RS should be added to RY, the
line NP by this addition would be triple of the line NQ; and so would give the
Equation, if RS was determined; which may be done by means of the QRS, similar
to the two former NOQ and QNR; for the angle RQS is equal to the alternate one
QOP=QNR, and the angle at R common to the triangles QNR and RQS, etc. Wherefore
as NO to NQ so NQ to QR 1- z- z- zz and as NQ to QR so QR to RS z- zz- zz-^

Therefore according to what we have above said ^; and substracting ^; or ^

Therefore the Central Rule will be (supposing also unity NO for the Latus
Rectum,) ^ = AD i. e. by our +^ i. e. 2NO=AD form, and ^=DH. and ^=DH.

Geometrical Construction. Having described your parabola ( Fig. 51. n. 2.)
take on its Ax (because the quantity p is wanting in the Equation) AD=2NO, and
from D having erected a perpendicular = ^NP to H; that will be the Center, from
which a circle described through A, by cutting the parabola in three places, will
give the three roots of the Equation, viz. NO and no true ones, the first
whereof will express the quantity sought NQ ( n. 1.) the latter the line NV,
being the subtense of the third part of the compl. of the arch; and MO will
express the false root, which is equal to the former taken together: All the
same as in Carts p. 91. but here somewhat plainer and easier.

PROBLEM V.
HAving three sides given of a quadilateral Figure to be inscribed in a circle,
AB, BC, CD, (Fig. 52. n. 1.) to find the fourth side, which shall be the
Diameter of the Circle.

SOLVTION.
If we consider the business as already done, and make AB= a, BC= b, CD= c, and
AD= y; we shall have first in the right-angled ABD, BD= yy- aa, and (since in
the obtuse angled BCD the BD is = BC+CD+2 of BC into CE) if those two BC+CD (
i. e. bb+ cc) be subtracted from BD ( yy- aa) you will have 2. yy- aa- bb- cc= to
the two said rectangles of BC into CE. But these two rectangles may also be
otherwise obtained, 3, if the segment CE be otherwise determined; which may be
done by help of the similar ABD and CED (for the angles at B and E are right
ones, and ECD and BAD equal, because each with the same third BCD makes two
right ones; the one ECD by reason of its contiguity, the other at A by the 22.
Eucl. Lib. 3.) viz. by inferring as DA to AB so DC to CE y- a- c-^ for now
multiplying CE=^ by BC= b, the of BC into CE will be = ^ and two such ^.

Now therefore yy- aa- bb- cc=^; and multipl. by y, y{powerof3}*- aa y=2 abc;
i. e. by Baker's and Cartes's forms. - bb y=2 abc; i. e. by Baker's and
Cartes's forms. - cc y=2 abc; i. e. by Baker's and Cartes's forms.
y{powerof3}*- aa y-2 abc= o. - bb y-2 abc= o. - cc y-2 abc= o.


Therefore the Central Rule will be (supposing the same quantity e. g. a for
unity and Lat. Rect.) ^ = AD and ^=DH, i. e. according to our form, ^ i. e. ^ =
AD, and

Geometrical Construction, which, without any circumlocution, from our form is
founded on the foll. in Fig. 52. n. 2.

LM= a n. 3. A 1.=LM from n. 2.

MN and LP= b 1, 2=PQ

PQ= bb 2, 2=ST

LS and MO= c DH=PR

PR= bc MO and mo two false roots

ST= cc NO the true root; upon which having described a semicircle the
quadrilateral will be easily made. According to Baker's form, for AD there
would be n. 3. first A c=LM, then cD=^=VX, half the line VZ, which is
compounded of LM, PQ and St; but DH is = PR as above.

PROBLEM VI.
HAving given to form a right-angled Triangle the least side BA (Fig. 53. n.
1.) and the difference of the segments of the base, to find the difference of
the sides, and so form the Triangle. If we represent the business as already
done, having given AB and EC to find FC.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, and EC= b, and FC= x; then will BC= a+ x: Therefore the AC=2 aa+2
ax+ xx and the line AC ^ and ^. Now therefore ACE i. e. ^ multiplied by b or bb
i. e. ^ is = GCF [but GC is = 2 a+ x] i. e. 2 ax+ xx by Cons. 1. Prop. 47. Lib.
1. Mathes. Enucl. and squaring both sides

^; and transposing all, ^. - bb (p) (q) (r) (s)

Therefore (taking a for 1 and the Latus Rectum of the parabola) the Central
Rule will be, ^ = AD and ^ = DH i. e. according to our form and Reduction, ^

Geometrical Construction. First from our form, the compendiousness whereof
will here appear, for it requires only one preparation n. 2. in which LM= a, MN
and LO= b, OP= bb, which being premised, and the diameter A y (because the
quantity p is in the Equation) being drawn ( n. 3.) make AI=LM, and 1, 2 or
^D=OP, and DH=LM. The rest therefore being also performed, which the quantity S
occurring in the present Equation requires, according to the last precepts of
our introduction, you will have NO the value of x sought; whence ( n. 4.) at the
interval AB having described a Circle, and made a right angle at B, if FC be
made = to the found NO, you will have the ABC required, and EC will be found at
the beginning of the prescribed magnitude.

Now if you were to find the center H by Baker's form without our Reduction, 1.
you must put of ( n. 3.) AB from A to c. 2. For the quantity ^ make as 1 to ^
so ^ to a fourth, which would be = 2AB, viz. 2DM, and to be set from c to d. 3.
The quantity ^ (to obtain which you must substract OP ( n. 2.) from the
quadruple of LM, and divide the remainder by 2) must be set off backwards from
d to e, by thus determining the point D. 4. The quantity p, which here is
precisely = LM, must be transferred from D to f on a perpendicular erected from
D. 5. For the quantity ^ make as 1 to ^ (= 2AB) so ^ (also = ^) to a fourth
quadruple of LM; and this must further be produced from f to the point g (which
here the paper will not permit) 6. For the quantity ^ make as 1 to ^ so ^ to a
fourth, (which would be = to the quadruple of LM, but taking away OP) which
must be set backwards from g to h. 7. Lastly the quantity ^ (=OP) set off from
h backwards or toward the right hand to i will at length give the point H
required.

Another Solution of the same Problem.
This Problem may be more easily solved, and will give a far more simple
Equation, if you are to find not FD but AE. Make therefore ( n. 1. Fig. 53.) =
x, and the rest as above; AC will be = x+ b, and its xx+2 bx+ bb; therefore the
BC= xx+2 bx+ bb- aa; therefore the of the tangent HC= xx+2 bbx+ bb-2 aa. But
the rectangle ACE will be bb+ bx. Therefore by Prop. 47. Lib. 1. Math. Enucl.

^; and turning all over to the right hand, ^ or ^. Therefore by case 2 of
affected quadraticks, ^.

The Geometrical Construction may be performed according to the rules of
quadraticks Fig. 54. n. 1. as will be evident to any attentive Reader. Having
therefore described a circle at the interval BA, whether it be done from any
arbitrary center (see n. 4. Fig. 53.) or upon AE found in the pres. Fig. making
an intersection at the said interval in B; and applying AE, and producing it
until EC become equal to the given quantity q, and at length having drawn BC
you will have the triangle right-angled at B, and also the difference of the sides
FC. But to make it more short and elegant; having determined AE by a little
circle ( Fig 54 n. 3.) prolong it to the opposite part of the circumference in
C, and draw AB and CB; for as the radius of the little circle is b, so EC is =
b.

Now if you would construct the Equation above by Baker's rule (that its
universality may also be confirmed by an Example in quadraticks) viz.

^;

The centtal rule will be (taking a for 1 and the L. R.) ^ = AD LIVE

LV

LVI

LVII

^ = DH. i. e. by our Reduction, ^ = AD ^ i. e. ^ = DH.

The Construction therefore will consist in these: LM ( n. 2. ^g. 54)= a, MO=
b, LP= b, therefore PR=^: ^N=PR viz. ^, therefore Q=^. In Fig. 53. n. 3. ^= b,
A1=LM, 1, 2, or 1 D=PR; D1=LP MO, 1, 2, or 1 H=PQ Having drawn a circle from
(...) through A you will have the true root TO= to AE sought; ^d MO the false root.

NB. Hence it is evident that one Problem may have seve^l Solutions and
Constructions, some more easy and simple, ^hers more compound and laborious;
viz. according as the ^^known quantity is assumed more or less commodious to
the ^urpose: which may not be amiss here to note for the sake (...) Learners.

PROBLEM VII.
SUppose a right line BD (Fig. 55.) any how divided in A, to divide it again in
C, so that the square of BA shall ^e to the square of AC as AC to CD.

SOLVTION.
Since the first segments BA and AD are given, call the first (...) and the
other b, and call AC the quantity AC x; and CD ^ill be = b- x. Now therefore
since we suppose as the of AB to the AC so AC to CD ^

aab- aax will = x{powerof3}, and transferring the qu n^ities on ^he left hand
to the right, x{powerof3}* aax- aab= o.

Wherefore the Central Rule (taking a for 1 and the L. R.) will be -^=AD and
^=DH. i. e. by our form ^ i. e. o=AD, that D may fall on the vertex of the
parabola; and ^ i. e. ^=DH. The Construction therefore will be very simple, as
is evident from the fifty fifth Figure.

PROBLEM VIII.
THere is given AB the capital line of a horn work (which we represent (though
rudely) n. 1. Fig. 56) and the Gorge AD, also part of the line of defense OF,
to find the face BE, the flank DE, the curtain (or the chord) DF, also the
angle of the Bastion ABE, etc. and so the whole delineation of the horn work.
It is evident if you have the flank DE or the curtain DF, the rest will be had
also. Suppose therefore, the capital line AB and the gorge AD, and part of the
line of defense OF to be of the magnitudes denoted by the Letters a, b, c, on
the right hand.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, AD= b, and OF= c, and DF= x; then will AF= x+ b, and by reason of
the similitude of the BAF and EDE and ECB, as FA to AB so FD to DE ^

But now DF+DE are = = OF i. e. ^; or giving the same denomination to all the
quantities on the left hand, ^ and multiplying both sides by ^ and translating
all the quantities on the right hand by the contrary signs to the left, ^

Wherefore (putting a for 1 and L. Rectum) the Central Rule will be, ^ (because
the quantity q is negative in the Equation, for cc is greater than aa+ bb)=AD;
and ^ = DH. or according to our Reduction, ^ = AD and ^ i. e. ^ i. e. ^ = DH.

Wherefore the Geometrical Construction requires no other preparatory
determination by our form than of the quantities ^ for AD, ^ for DH at the
center, and bbcc to determine the radius of the circle; which are exhibited by
n. 2. Fig. 56. viz NP is = cc, RS= bcc, RV= bbcc, which are found by means of
LM= a, LR= b, LN and MO= c, MQ=NP and MT=RS. Having therefore described a
parabola, n. 3. and drawn its diameter, transfer AD=NP upon it (because the
quantity p is in the Equation) and also RS from D upon H perpendicularly, and
on the right hand, (because DH=-^;) and so you will have the center H; through which
having drawn KAI so that AK shall be = to the quantity bbcc or S, i. e. RV,
etc. a circle described at the interval HL will cut the parabola in M and N,
and applying the magnitude NO it will be that of the Curtain sought; upon
which, n. 4. having laid down the circumference of the horned work by help of
the given lines AB and AD, you will have the line OF, of the magnitude which was
above supposed. Now if any one has a mind to do the same thing by Baker's way;
by laying down first the interval AB =^ and then making bc=^, and lastly,
putting cd for the quantity ^; he will fall upon the same point D, and in like
manner may express the other parts of the Central Rule by the intervals D e,
of, fg, and setting back the last gh, he will fall upon the same center H: But
this is done with a great deal more trouble and labor to determine so many
quantities, and also is in more danger of erring by cutting off so many parts
separately, as experience will show; and thus we have by a new argument shown
the advantage of our Reduction.

Another Solution of the same Problem.
Things remaining as before (only assuming the given lines AB, AD and OF, n. 1.
Fig. 56. one half less, that the Scheme may take up less room) make BE= x, as
the first or chief unknown quantity; then will BF= x+ c, and its xx+2 cx + cc:
And since as BE to BC=AD so BF to AF a fourth, which will be ^ and its square =
^. Wherefore if this square be subtracted from the square of BF, there will
remain the square of BA, i. e.

^; i. e. all being reduced to the same denomination, ^; or according to the
forms of Carts and Baker, ^

Therefore the Central Rule (putting again a for 1 and the L. R.) will be ^ =
AD and ^ = DH; or by our Reduction, ^ i. e. ^ = AD; and ^ i. e. ^=DH.

Geometrical Construction. Having therefore described a parabola ( Fig. 56. n.
5.) and drawn the diameter A y, make A1= a and 1, 2=^, so you will have the point
D; make moreover D{powerof3} or 2, 3= c, and backwards 3, 4=^ (we here omit to
express the Geometrical determination of these quantities ^ and ^ as being very
easy) and you will have the point H, etc. and there will come out the quantity
sought NO; which since it is equal to half BE n. 4. the business will be done;
which Baker's form will also give, exactly the same, but after a more tedious
process.

PROBLEM IX.
IN any Triangle ABC (the scheme whereof see n. 1. Fig. 57.) suppose given the
Perpendicular AD, and the differences of the least side from the two others EC
and FC to find all the three sides. i. e. Chiefly the least side AB which being
found, the others will be so also.

SOLVTION.
Make AD= a, EC= b, and FC= c, AB= x; then will BC= x+ b and its square be xx+2
bx+ bb, and AC= x+ c and its square be xx+2 cx+ cc; and BD will be ^, and DC ^.
But the BC may also be obtained otherwise, and the Equation also, if BD+DC+2 of
BD by DC be added into one sum according to Prop. 4. Lib. 2. Eucl. viz.

^, multiplied by BD xx- aa, gives the rectangle of the segments ^ and this
doubled i. e. multiplied by 4, gives the quantity which is contained under the
radical sign in the Equation]

Therefore turning all over on the left hand which are before the sign to the
right hand, prefixing to them the contrary signs, you will have ^ and taking away
the Vinculum on the left hand, and squaring on the right ^ and adding and
substracting on both sides, as much as can be, ^ and transferring all to the
left, ^ and dividing all by 3, ^

Note, I sought this Equation also after two other ways; 1. By a comparison of
the AC with the two squares AB+BC, after 2 CBD thence subtracted, according to
Prop. 13. Lib. 2. Eucl which is the 46. Lib. 1. Math. Enucl. and I formed the
same with the present. 2. By putting at the beginning y for x+ b and z for x+
c, and going on after the former methods, 'till you have this Equation, ^ in
which* when afterward I substituted the values answering the quantities yy and
zz, etc. This same last Equation came out a little easier, but (NB) with all
the contrary signs.

Now to form the Central Rule, and thence make the Geometrical Construction, we
must determine first each of the quantities p, q, r and S, that we may know
whether they are negative or positive; and you will find ( n. 2. Fig. 57.) p=G2
positive, q=H{powerof4} negative, and K{powerof4}= S also negative; and that by
help of the quantities LM= b or 1, MN and LO= a, OP= aa, MQ and LR= c, RS= cc,
and also LT= cc, TV and LX= c{powerof3}, XY= c{powerof4}. Wherefore the form of
the last Equation will be like this, x{powerof4}+ px{powerof3}- qxx- rx- S= o,
and so the Central Rule (taking here b for 1 and the L. R.) ^ = AD and ^ = DH.

Wherefore, having now described a parabola (as may be seen n. 4.) having found
the diameter A y transfer upon it first A b=LM ( n. 2) and then bc= DP ( n. 3.)
i. e. ^; and thirdly cD=^ i. e. H{powerof4} ( n. 2.) moreover from D to e put
off MB ( n. 3.=^, and from e to f put off DR=^, and from f to g put off CF=^;
and from g backwards to h put off half the quantity r, or I5 ( n. 2.) and
having done the rest as usual, you will have NO, the side required of the Triangle
to be described; the description whereof will be now easy ( n. 5.) having all
the three sides known. This may serve for an Examen, if having described a
semicircle AGB upon AB=NO, you apply the given line AD, and from B through D
draw indefinitely BDC: Then at the interval AB having described the Arches AE
and BF, add the given line EC to BE, for thus having joined the points A and C,
FC ought to be equal to FC before given.

SCHOLIVM.
WE have here omitted our Reduction, because it would be too tedious, and would
express the quantities AD and DH (especially the latter) in terms too prolix.
For AD would be = ^ ( viz. because ^ is found = ^ and ^ taken in it self = ^;
but here [where by virtue of the Central Rule it is taken positively, when it
is in it self negative] under contrary signs it is = ^ or ^ or ^ or ^ yet more
contractedly (because b is unity) AD = ^; which parts may be expressed without
any great difficulty on the Diameter A y, by its portions A1, 1, 2; 2, 3; 3D:
But the other quantity DH, or the definition of the Center H, would also have
some tediousness, as because ^

If you take away out of the quantities ^ and ^ (since this latter is to be
subtracted, and so left, as it is, under the sign -; but the other, also
negative in it self, but here positively expressed in the Central Rule, must
have all the contrary signs) I say, if you take out of these quantities those
which destroy one another, and add the rest with the two former quantities,
they will be ^ = = DH. or a little more contracted (because b is 1) ^ = DH.

But now if any one has a mind to illustrate this by a numeral Example and try
the truth, etc. of the quantities found; they may make e. g. a=12, b=1, and
c=2; and they will easily find that in the last Equation the quantity p will be
4, and q-190, r-388, S-195: Secondly in the Central Rule of Baker they will find
^=, ^=2, and ^= 95, and so the whole line AD=97; and further ^=1, ^=4, ^=190,
and ^, and so the whole line DH=195-194 i. e.=1. Thirdly, likewise in our
Reduction (if we proceed by each part corresponding to Baker's) ^, and ^. The
sum for AD 97; but further ^; and ^ to be subtracted; and so the sum for
DH=195-194=1. Which same quantities will fourthly come out, if the quantities
AD and DH contracted, as they are expressed in letters above, be resolved into
numbers.

PROBLEM X.
YOU are to build a Fort on the given Polygons EAF (see Fig. 58. n. 1.) whose
capital line AB shall equal the aggregate of the gorge and flank, and the
squares of these added together shall be equal to the square of the given line
GH, and the solid made by the multiplication of the square of the flank by the
gorge, shall be equal to the cube of the given line IK.

LVIII

LIX

LX



SOLVTION.
Make the Gorge AC= z, whose square zz subtracted from bb the square of the
given line b, will leave the square of the flank DC= bb- zz. Now this square
being multiplied by the gorge AC or z will give bbz- z{powerof3}= g{powerof3},
the cube of the given line IK; and adding to both sides z{powerof3}, and
substracting bbz, o= z{powerof3}*- bbz+ g{powerof3}.

Therefore if we take g or IK for 1 and L{powerof3}, g{powerof3} will be the
line g, and

The Central Rule: ^ = AD. and ^=DH. i. e. according to our Reduction, ^ = AD
and ^ DH.

Geometrical Construction. Having described a Parabola ( n. 2. Fig. 58.) make
on its ax A1=IK and 1, 2, s. viz. 1D=MN (from n. 1.) and DH=IK. Then having
described a circle from H, and found the true root NO upon the given angle EAF
( n 3.) make AC=NO, and having erected the perpendicular CD divide it by AD=GH
( n. 1.) and make AB=AC+CD; and the Fort will be drawn.

PROBLEM XI.
IN a right-angled Triangle ABC (which we denote by n. 1. Fig. 59) having given
the greater side AC, and made the less side AB= to the segment CE, which shall
cut off from the base BC a perpendicular let fall from the right angle A; to
find these lines AB or CE, and consequently the whole triangle.

SOLVTION.
Make AC= a, CE or AB= x. Therefore, 1. you will have aa- xx=AE. And because the
BEA and CAE are similar, you will have as AC to CE so BA to AE ^

And so, 2. AE=^. Therefore ^= aa- xx; and multipl. by aa, x{powerof4}=
a{powerof4}- aaxx; or, according to the form of Carts and Baker, transposing
all to the left, x{powerof4}*+ aaxx*- a{powerof4}= o i. e. x{powerof4}*+ qxx*-
S= o.

Therefore (taking a for 1 and L. R.) the Central Rule will be ^ i. e. o=AD and
^ i. e. o=DH; that H may fall on the vertex A.

Geometrical Construction. Since a is assumed for unity and L, the quantity S
also and Latus Rectum i. e. AI and AK and consequently the mean proportional AL
and the radius HL will be = = to the given side AC, and consequently at that
interval having described a circle, through the Parabola rightly delineated,
you will have NO the value of the quantity x, i. e. of the lesser side AB. Having
drawn therefore NA, which is = to AC by Construction, if you draw to it the
perpendicular AB cutting NO produced to B, you will have the Triangle sought ABC,
and AB (which will be a sign of a true Solution) will be found = NO or CE.

Another Construction. Since in the Equation above found there is neither
x{powerof3} nor x, it may be looked upon as a quadratick, and constructed after
the same way, as several other like it among the Examples n. 4. viz. because ^;
according to case 2 of affected quadraticks, ^, and ^ i.e. ^ Wherefore ( n. 3.
Fig. 59.) if AC be made = a and CD^ a, the mean proportional CG will be = ^,
and taking hence GF= a, there will remain FC = ^: And now between this or CH
equal to it, and unity AC, having found another mean proportional CE it will be
the value of the quantity x sought=NO ( n. 2.)

PROBLEM XII.
IN a right-angled Triangle ABC (Fig. 60. n. 1.) there is given the
Perpendicular BA, a segment of the Hypothenusa BD, and a segment of the Base
EC, from C to the perpendicular DE let fall from the end of the segment BD; to
find AE DC, and consequently the Base AC and the Hypothenusa BC, and so the
whole Triangle.

SOLVTION.
Make AB= a, BD= b, and EC= c, and DC= x; which being given, the rest cannot be
wanting: Therefore xx- cc=DE. But the same DE may be had, if you infer as BC to
BA so DC to DE ^

And then square the quantity DE, the square will be ^; and multiplying both
sides by ^ and substracting also ^ (...) Page 89.
LXI

so PV= to it, that PX may be ^; and lastly P y= q, that PZ may be ^. These
being thus prepared, if ( n. 4) A b be made = AB ( n. 1.) bc=RT, and cd
backwards = PQ we shall light on the point D; and, if we make D e=BD, of=PX (
n. 5. which interval was too big to be represented in the Paper) and from f you
put backwards fg=PZ, and on from g beyond to the right hand gh=2RS; we shall
light on the point H, etc. Which of these two methods is the shortest and
fittest for practice, any one, never so little experienced, may here see; and
first Learners may take notice if they would construct by Baker's form, in the
Diagrams n. 3. n. 5. and the like, they must take care to make the angles PLN,
SPT pretty large; which we have here represented the less to save charges in
cutting on Copper.

PROBLEM XIII.
HAving given the Diameter of a Circle CD (n. 1. Fig. 61.) and the line BG,
which falls on it perpendicularly, (which we have here only rudely delineated)
to find the point A. from which a right line AC being drawn shall so cut the
line BG in F, that AF, FG, GD shall be three continual Proportionals.

SOLVTION.
If CF be found, the point A will be also had, and the section of the line BG
will be made. Make therefore CF= x, and (because the perpendicular BG is given,
there will also be given the segments of the diameter CG and GD) make GD= b,
and CG= c; then will BG= bc* and CD= b+ c. Since therefore the CAD and CGF are
right-angled, and have the angle at C common, they will be similar.

Therefore, as CF to CG so CD to CA ^

Therefore AF = ^ and FG ^.

But by the Hypothesis, as AF to FG so FG to GD ^.

Therefore the rectangle of the extremes will be equal to that of the means, ^;
and multiplying by ^; and transposing all to the left, ^; i. e. by the
Cartesian form,

^.

Therefore (taking b for 1 and L.) the Central Rule will be, ^ = AD and ^ = DH.
or according to our Reduction, ^ i. e. ^ = AD and ^ i. e. ^ = DH.

Geometrical Construction. Having described upon the given line CD ( n 2.) a
semicircle, and applied in it the given perpendicular BG, as the figure shows,
you will have the segments of the Diameter GD= b, and to the quantity p in Baker's
form, and CG= c, which ( n. 3. where LM= b, LO and MN= c) will give OP= cc and
to the quantity q. Wherefore having described a Parabola ( n. 4.) and the line
VZ=2 b, having cut off the fourth part of XZ, and the eighth of YZ (whereof the
one will be = ^, viz. ^, and the other to ^) if you transfer A1=XZ upon the
diameter of the Parabola A y, and moreover 1, 2 or 1 D= to half OP ( n. 3.) and
transversly D{powerof3}=YZ and backwards 3, 4= OP, as also 4, 5=CG ( n. 2.)
you will have the center H, and having described a Circle at the interval HA, the
root NO must be transferred from ( n. 2.) C to F, and continued to A the point
sought. In Baker's Form (because the quantity p is = b or 1) ^ is = ^ and ^=^,
and the quantity q or cc=OP, ( n. 3.) make therefore in the Diameter of the
Parabola A b=GD, and bc=GD, ( n. 2.) and lastly cd=OP ( n. 3.) and you will have
the point D the same as before. Make moreover D e=GD and cf=^CG, and then
backwards fg=OP, and lastly gh=GD, and you will have the same center H, and the
coincidence of the parts in both forms will be pleasant to observe; which
otherwise seldom happens.

Other Solutions of the same Problem.
Carolus Renaldinus, from whose Treatise de Resol. and Compos. Math. Lib. 2. we
have the present Problem, proceeds to solve it in another way, changing it
plainly into another Problem: viz. he observes, 1. That the angles FAD (see n.
1. of our 61. Fig.) and FGD, since both are right ones on the same common base
FD, are in circle. Hence he infers, 2. (by virtue of the Coroll. of the 26.
Prop. 3. Eucl.) that the DCG and ACF are equal, and consequently CD, CA, FC and
CG are four continued proportionals. Then he observes, 3. That GD is the excess
of the first of these proportionals above the fourth CG, and AF is the excess
of the second AC above the third CF; and so, since 4. the rectangle of AF and
GD is = to the square of the mean proportional FG (for AF, FG, GD, are supposed
to be continual proportionals) and this FG is the excess, by which the square
of the third CF exceeds the square of the fourth CG; now the present Problem
will be 5. reduced to this other: Having two right lines (CD and CG) given to
find two such mean proportionals (AC and FC) that the of the excess of the
first above the fourth ( viz. of FA into GD) shall be equal to the excess, by
which the square of the third (FC) exceeds the square of the fourth (CG) viz.
by the square FG.

Wherefore instead of the former he solves this latter Problem, putting for CG,
b, for GD, c, so that the first of the given lines CD shall be = b+ c, and the
other GD= b; calling the first mean proportional AC, x; and thence denominating
the latter ^ ( viz. multiplying the fourth by the first, and dividing the
product by the second) and moreover he finds the excess of the first ( b+ c)
above the fourth (b) to be c, and the excess of the second (x) above the third
^ to be ^ i. e. ^; so that the of these two excesses is ^, and because the of
the third FC is = ^, having subtracted bb=GC, there is given the FG = ^ = of
the excesses we just now found. So that now you will have the Equation ^ etc.

We also endeavored to find another Solution, by finding an Equation from the
line BD ( n. 1. Fig. 61.) as which might be twice obtained by means of the two
right-angled Triangles FAD and FGD, since it is the hypothenusa of both. But
here, besides the former denominations of our Solution we must first give a
denomination to the line AD, by making as CF to FG so CD to AD ^, etc.

But whosoever shall prosecute this Solution of ours, or that of Renaldinus to
the end, will find much more labor and difficulty in either, than in the first
we have given.

APPENDIX.
THE Invention of the special Central Rule for the case of Problem 1. Of Cubic^
Equations, etc. which may serve for an Example for all the other special ones
which belong to our Synopsis, p. 354. (and from these special ones) to find a
general one.

In Fig. 47. n. 4. make AD= b, DH= d; and so we shall have the of the radius
HA= bb+ dd. But this HA or HN, may be also had otherwise, by putting,

2. For the quantity NO, as sought, the letter x, and by inferring from the
known Property of the Parabola, as L to NO so NO to AO ^ and substracting AD= b
from AO, you will have DO or PN = ^; whose is ^.

But you also have PH=DH-DP or NO, i. e. d- x; whose is therefore = dd-2 dx+ xx.

Wherefore adding the PN and PH, you will have the HN = ^.

Wherefore the Equation will now be readily had: ( HN) -- ( HA) ^; and taking
from both sides ^. and multiplying all by L{powerof2} and also dividing by ^.

+L{powerof2} x

3. And now farther comparing this Equation with a form like ours in Probl. 1.
viz. with this, ^; It is manifest, since in ours also the third term, viz. q is
wanting, that the correspondent one to it in the former -2 bL+L{powerof2} is
equivalent to 0; and adding to both sides 2 bL, L{powerof2} will be made = 2
bL; and dividing by 2L, ^ will = b or AD. In like manner, since - r in our form
answers to the quantity 2L{powerof2} d in the former; 2L{powerof2} d will = r,
and, dividing by 2L{powerof2}, DH or d will = ^: Which is the other Member of
the Central Rule to be found.

NB. The Analytick Art has this particularly to be admired in in, that it finds
its own Rules by an Analysis: Whereof we have here an evident Example, and
several others in the Resolution of affected Quadraticks, p. 345. and the
following.

II. The Invention of the Central Rule, in the Case of Fig. 11. and the like.
1. HA= bb+ dd as above.

2 Putting x for NO, as sought, we may infer from a new Property of the
Parabola, which we have demonstrated Prop. 6. lib. 2

as L to NO so OR to AO, i. e. (putting a for BA or FO given; that NO-OF i. e.
NF or OR shall be = x- a) as L to x so x- a to ^ = AO.

Therefore having subtracted AD i. e. b from AO, you will have DO or HP = ^;
whose is ^.

But PN also is = NO-PO or HD, = x- d is = ^.

Therefore having added the PH and PN, there will come out HN ^, = HA i. i. bb+
dd; and taking away from both sides ^; and multiplying every where by
L{powerof2} and diving by ^.

3. And now comparing this Equation with another form, which shall be like an
Equation arising from the Solution of some Problem, e. g. with this ^; to this
you will have = this other, ^.

4. Wherefore, because in these equal forms, first, 2 a is = p, a will be = ^
i. e. the line BA. Secondly, Because aa (or ^) ^;

Therefore ^, and dividing by ^ = AD.

Thirdly, Because ^ i. e. ^; therefore dividing by 2L{powerof2}, d will be = ^
i. e. ^ i. e. resolving ^ into equivalent Terms expressed by p and q, ^; which
is the other member of the Central Rule to be found. viz. a is = ^

Therefore ab will be = ^

Therefore ^.

THE INDEX OF THE FIRST BOOK.
SECTION I.
CHAP. I. COntaining the Definitions or Explications of the Terms which relate
to the Object of the Mathematics. Page 1 CHAP. II. Containing the Explication
of those Terms which relate to the Affections of the Objects of the
Mathematics. p. 35
SECTION II.
CHAP. I. Of the Composition and Division of Quantities. p. 55 CHAP. II. Of the
Powers of Quantities. p. 59 CHAP. III. Of Progression or Arithmetical
Proportionals. p. 66 CHAP. IV. Of Geometrical Proportion in general. p. 69
CHAP* V. Of the Proportions or Reasons of Magnitudes of the same kind in
particular. p. 90 CHAP. VI. Of the Proportions of Magnitudes of diverse sorts
compared together. p. 114 CHAP. VII. Of the Powers of the sides of Triangles
and regular Figures, etc. p. 12
BOOK II.
SECTION I.
COntaining Definitions. p. 154
SECTION II.
CHAP. I. Of the Chief Properties of the Conick Sections. p. 166 CHAP. II. Of
Parabolical, and Hyperbolical, and Elliptical Spaces. p. 198 CHAP. III. Of
Conoids and Spheroids. p. 204 CHAP. IV. Of Spiral Lines and Spaces. p. 208
CHAP. V. Of the Conchoid, Cissoid, Cycloid, and Quadratrix, etc. p. 218 CHAP.
VI. The Epilogue of the whole Work. p: 231
An Introduction to Specious Analysis; or, The New Geometry of Des Carts, etc.
page 1 Some Examples of Specious Analysis in each kind of Equations. p. 16 1.
In Simple Equations. ibid. 2. Some Examples of pure Quadratick Equations. p. 28
3. Some Examples of Quadratick affected Equations. p. 41 4. Some Examples of
affected Biquadratick Equations, but like affected Quadratick ones. p. 53 5.
Some Examples of Cubick and Biquadratick Equations, both simple and affected,
whether reducible or not. p. 61
Appendix. p. 93
FINIS.

