A LETTER FROM Sir John Suckling TO Mr. HENRY GERMAN, In the beginning of the
late Long Parliament, Anno 1640.
SIR,
THat it is fit for the King to do something Extraordinary at this present, is
not only the Opinion of the Wise, but the Expectation. Men observe him more
now than at other times: for Majesty in an Eclipse [like the Sun] draws Eyes
that would not so much as have looked toward it, if it had shined out, and
appeared like it self. To lie still now, would at the best show but a Calmness
of Mind, not a Magnanimity; since in matter of Government to think well at any
time, (much less in a very Active) is little better than to dream well. Nor
must he stay to act till his People desire, because it is thought nothing
relishes else; for therefore has nothing relished with them, because the King
has for the most part staid till they have desired, done nothing but what they
have or were Petitioning for. But that the King should do, will not be so much
the question, as what he should do. And certainly for a King to have right
Counsel given him at all times, is strange, and at this present impossible. His
Party for the most part (I would that were modestly said, and it were not all)
have so much to do for their own Preservation, that they cannot (without
breaking a Law in Nature) intend another. Those that have Courage have not
perchance Innocence, and so dare not show themselves in the King's Business;
and if they have Innocence, they want Parts to make themselves considerable; so
consequently the things they undertake. Then in Court they give much Counsel as
they believe the King inclined, determime his Good by his Desires; which is a
kind of setting the Sun by the Dial; interest which cannot err, by Passions
which may.

In going about to show the King a Cure, now a Man should first plainly show
him the Disease. But to Kings as to some kind of Patients, it is not always
proper to tell how ill they be. And it is like a Country Clown, not to show the
way, unless he know from whence, and discourse of things before.

Kings may be mistaken, and Counselors corrupted; but true Interest alone
(says Monsieur de Rohan) cannot err. It were not amiss then to find out the
Interest; for setting down right Principles before Conclusions, is weighing the
Scales before we deal out the Commodity.

Certainly the great Interest of the King is, A Union with his People; and
whosoever has told him otherwise, (as the Scripture says of the Devil) was a
Seducer from the first. If there ever had been any one Prince in the whole
world, that made a Felicity in this Life, and left fair Fame after death,
without the Love of his Subjects, there were some color to desp^se it.

There was not among all our Princes a greater Courtier of the People than
Richard the Third, not so much out of Fear, as out of Wisdom. And shall the
worst of our Kings have striven for that, and shall not the best? (it being an
Angelical thing to gain Love.)

There are two things in which the People expect to be satisfied, RELIGION and
JUSTICE; nor can this be done by any little Acts, but by Royal and Kingly
Resolutions.

If any shall think, that by dividing the Factions (a good Rule at other times)
he shall master the rest now, he will be strangly deceived; for in the
beginning of things that would do much, but not when whole Kingdoms are
resolved. Of those now that lead these Parties, if you could take off the major
Number, the lesser would govern, and do the same things still: nay, if you
could take off all, they would set up one, and follow him.

And of how great consequence it is for the King to resume this right, and be
the Author himself, let any body judge; since (as Cumneus said) Those that have
the Art to please the People, have commonly the Power to raise them.

To do things so that there shall remain no Jealousy is very necessary, and is
no more than really reforming, that is, pleasing them. For to do things that
shall grieve hereafter, and yet pretend Love (amongst Lovers themselves, where
there is easiest Faith) will not be accepted. It will not be enough for the
King to do what they desire, but he must do something more. I mean by (doing
more) doing something of his own, as throwing away things they call not for, or
giving things they expected not. And when they see the King doing the same
things with them, it will take away all thought and apprehension that he thinks
the things they have done already ill.

Now if the King ends the differences, and takes away Suspect for the future,
the Case will fall out to be no worse than when two Duellists enter the Field,
where the worsted Party (the other having no ill Opinion of him) has his Sword
given him again, without further hurt after he is in the others power. But
otherwise it is not safe to imagine what may follow; for the People are
naturally not Valiant, and not much Cavalier. Now it is the nature of Cowards
to hurt where they can receive none. They will not be content (while they fear
and have the upper hand) to fetter only Royalty, but perchance (as Timorous
Spirits use) will not think themselves safe while that is at all. And possibly
this is the present state of things.

In this great Work (at least to make it appear perfect and lasting to the
Kingdom) it is necessary the Queen really join; for if she stand aloof, there
will still be Suspicions: it being a received Opinion in the world, That she
has a great Interest in the King's Favor and Power. And to invite her, she is
to consider with her self, whether such great Virtues and eminent Excellencies
(though they be highly admired and valued by those that know her) ought to rest
satisfied with so narrow a Payment as the Estimation of a few: And whether it
be not more proper for a great Queen to arrive at Universal Honor and Love,
than private Esteem and Value.

Then how becoming a Work for the sweetness and softness of her Sex, is
composing of Differences and uniting Hearts? and how proper for a Queen,
reconciling King and People?

There is but one thing remains, which whispered abroad busies the King's Mind
much (if not disturbs it) in the midst of these great Revolutions, and that is,
The Preservation of some Servants, whom he thinks somewhat hardly torn from him
of late; which is of so tender a nature, I shall rather propound something
about it, than resolve it.

The first Quaere will be, Whether as things now stand (Kingdoms in the
Balance) the King is not to follow Nature, where the Conservation of the more
general still commands and governs the less. As Iron by particular sympathy
sticks to the Loadstone, but yet if it be joined with a great Body of Iron, it
quits those particular Affections to the Loadstone, and moves with the other to
the greater, the common Country.

The second will be, Whether if he could preserve those Ministers, they can be
of any use to him hereafter? since no man is served with a greater prejudice,
than he that imploys suspected Instruments, or not beloved, though able and
deserving in themselves.

The third is, Whether to preserve them there be any other way, than for the
King to be first right with his People? since the Rule in Philosophy must ever
hold good, Nil dat quod non habet. Before the King have Power to save, he must
have Power.

Lastly, Whether the way to preserve this Power be not to give it away? for the
People of England have ever been like Wantons, which pull and tug as long as
the Princes have pulled with them, as you may see in Henry III. King John,
Edward II. and indeed all the troublesome and unfortunate Reigns; but when they
have let it go, they come and put it into their hands again, that they may play
on, as you may see in Q. Eliz.

I will conelude with a Prayer, (not that I think it needs at this present;
Prayers are to keep us from what may be, as well as to preserve us from what
is) That the King be neither too insensible of what is without him, nor too
resolved from what is within him. To be sick of a dangerous Sickness, and find
no Pain, cannot but be with loss of Understanding, ('it is an Aphorism of
Hippocrates;) and on the other side, Opiniastry is a sullen Porter, and (as it
was Wittily said of Constancy) shuts out oftentimes better things than it lets
in.

FINIS.

