THE SUR-REJOINDER OF Mr. Attorney General TO THE REJOINDER Made on the behalf
of the CHARTER Of the CITY of LONDON.

LONDON Printed for S. Mearne, 1682.

(...)City aforesaid, as to the making and publishing of the Law for the
levying of moneys of the persons coming to the public Markets held within the
said City with Victuals and Provisions there to be sold, and the exacting and
levying of such moneys above supposed to be made by them the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens above, by rejoining, pleaded for our said Lord the King
that now is, says, that for any thing by them therein alleged the Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchises, to be of themselves one Body Corporate and
Politic in Matter, Fact, and Name, by the name of the Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the City of London, and by the same name to plead and be
impleaded, to answer and to be answered by them above as aforesaid claimed,
ought not to be allowed to the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, because
that by protesting that they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London, the aforesaid seventeenth day of September in the six and
twentieth year abovesaid in the aforesaid Replication mentioned, as also
continually afterward and from the time whereof the memory of man is not to
the contrary, were not seized, or as yet are seized of, and in the public
Markets aforesaid in their Demesne as of Fee, nor by the whole time aforesaid
at their own charges, have provided, or have been accustomed, or ought to
provide Marketplaces, or places where such Markets were to be held, as often
as need should be, and Stalls, Standings, and other conveniences for persons
coming to the said Markets with Victuals and Provisions there to be sold, for
the better and more convenient exposing of the same to sale, as the said Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens above by rejoining have alleged, and protesting
also that the aforesaid Rates by the Act or Ordinance aforesaid, so as
abovesaid, ordered to be paid at the aforesaid time of the making of that
Order, and from thence hitherto were not reasonable, nor as yet are reasonable,
as they the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens have likewise above
alleged. Notwithstanding for Plea, the said Attorney General of our said Lord
the now King, says, that by a certain Act in Parliament of our said Lord the
now King, held at Westminster, by several Prorogations the Fourteenth day of
February, in the Two and twentieth Year of the Reign of our said Lord the now
King (amongst other things) it was enacted, to the end that fit and commodious
places within the said City and Liberties thereof, might be set out and
appointed for the rebuilding and keeping Markets with greater convenience than
before they had been; so that the principal Streets might not be pestered and
obstructed thereby as before they had been accustomed, and that the Royal
Exchange, Guild Hall, the Sessions House in the Old Bailey and the common Goals
and Prisons within the said City might be enlarged and made more commodious for
the public use and ornament of the City, and be better secured from the danger
and casualty of Fire; and that some convenient distance, interval, and circuit
of ground might be left between the Royal Exchange, and other Houses to be
built within the said City. That the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the said
City, in Common Council assembled, should and might employ, and by the
aforesaid Act they were authorized to employ such places and portions of Ground
within the said City and Liberties thereof, as by and with the approbation of
our said Lord the King, then were, or before the tenth day of March 1669.
should be set out and adjudged necesary and convenient, as well for the public
Marketplaces there, as also for the ornament, enlargement, and convenience of
the said Royal Exchange, and other places before mentioned, and every, or any
of them respectively; And to the intent that a reasonable satisfaction might be
given to the Proprietors, and others, having any Estate or Interest in the
grounds and places which had been, or should be set out, taken, and used for
public Marketplaces; the aforesaid Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, by
themselves, or others in that behalf to be appointed and authorized, were to
treat, and agree with the Owners, and others interessed in the same: and in
case of a wilful refusal, or of any such disability or impediment, as in a
certain other Act of Parliament, in the said Act specified for the rebuilding
of the City of London (lately before made) were mentioned, or of any other
incapacity whatsoever in the Owners thereof, or others interessed in the same,
to treat and agree. The said Mayor and Court of Aldermen should, and were by
the foresaid Act authorized and required to cause Juries to be impannelled in
such manner and form as by the aforesaid Act it was directed and appointed, so
as no two Jurors so to be impannelled, should come out of one and the same Ward
to adjudge and assess what recompense and satisfaction in every of the Cases
aforesaid ought to be awarded and given to the respective Owners, and others
interesfed in the Grounds and Places so set out, to be taken and employed for
any the uses or purposes as aforesaid, in pursuance of the said Act, according
to such their respective Estates and Interests. And it was further Enacted,
that for all sorts of Coals which from and after the first day of May, One
thousand six hundred and seventy, and before the Nine and twentieth day of
September, which should be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
eighty seven, should be imported and brought into the said Port of the City of
London, or the River of Thames within the Liberties of the said City, upon the
same River, there should be paid by way of Imposition thereupon, according to
the Rates hereafter mentioned (that is to say) for all such Coals as should be
there imported and brought in from and after the said first day of May, One
thousand six hundred and seventy, and before the Four and twentieth day of
June, One thousand six hundred seventy seven, there should be paid for every
Chaldron or Tun thereof, two shillings over and above the Imposition of twelve
pence the Chaldron or Tun, by the said Act for the Rebuilding the City of
London appointed to be paid. And for all such Coals which should be there
imported, and brought in, from and after the said Four and twentieth day of
June, One thousand six hundred seventy seven, and before the said Nine and
twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred and eighty seven, there
should be paid for every Chaldron or Tun thereof three shillings, and the same
should by virtue of the said Act be collected, levied, and paid in such sort
and manner, in all and every respect, as in and by the said former Act was
limited and appointed for the collecting and levying the duty of twelve pence
the Chaldron or Tun of Coals imposed by the said former Act, and all and every
the Powers, Authorities, Directions, and Provisions, in or by the said former
Act mentioned or provided for the levying and collecting thereof; all which
moneys so to be received upon account of the said respective Impositions, or
either of them, should from time to time be paid into the Receipt of the
Chamber of the City of London, and from thence should be issued out and paid
according to the directions and appointment of the aforesaid Act of the Two and
twentieth year abovesaid, and not otherwise; and the said Chamber of the City
of London should stand and be charged with all the residue of the said moneys
there paid in, which should not be issued out and paid accordingly. And it was
further enacted, that all and every sum and sums of money which should be
raised upon the receipt of the several and respective Impositions aforesaid or
by such additional duty in case of concealment thereof, as by the aforesaid
former Act was appointed, should be employed and disposed in manner and form
following, (that is to say) one fourth part of all the moneys which from and
after the said first day of May, One thousand six hundred seventy, and before
the said four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred seventy
seven, should be raised and payable upon the receipt of the aforesaid
Imposition of two shillings for every Chaldron or Tun of Coals, or in case of
concealment thereof as aforesaid, should be employed and disposed of, for and
toward the satisfaction for the Grounds set out and employed for enlarging of
the Streets, making of Wharfs and Keys, public Market Places, and other
public Uses, as well in that Act as in the Act afore-recited, mentioned, and
appointed, and that one moiety of all the moneys which from and after the said
Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred seventy seven, should
be raised or payable upon the aforesaid Imposition of three shillings the
Chaldron or Tun of Coals from time to time should be employed and disposed for
satisfaction for the Ground set out and employed as aforesaid, and for such
other public uses and purposes as in that Act and in the Act before recited,
were mentioned and appointed, as by the same Act of the Two and twentieth year
abovesaid, amongst other things more at large is manifest', and does appear.
And the said Attorney General of our said Lord the now King, Who, etc. for our
said Lord the now King, further says that by virtue of that Act, they the said
Major and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, before the
making and publishing of the aforesaid Law, (to wit) the first day of
September, in the six and twentieth year of the reign of our said Lord the now
King aforesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, had and
receivid for Duty and Tax aforesaid, of two shillings every Chaldron or Tun of
Coals brought into the City of London, or the Port thereof, a great sum of
money to the purposes aforesaid. And further the said Attorney General of our
said Lord the now King, Who, etc. for our said Lord the now King, says that the
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, without any right,
title, or authority whatsoever, (the aforesaid premises notwithstanding) the
aforesaid Thursday (to wit) the said seventeenth day of September in the six
and twentieth year of the reign of our said Lord the now King aforesaid, and in
their Common Council then held in the Chamber of the Guild Hall of the City of
London aforesaid, (to wit) in the Parish of St. Michael Bassishaw London, being
assembled together, made, established, and published the aforesaid Law by
themselves in fact enacted for the levying the aforesaid several sums of money
of all the Subjects and Liege People of our Lord the now King, as well Free men
as not Free men of the City of London, and of other Foreigners coming to the
said public Markets held within the said City, with their Victuals and
Provisions there to be sold, and have raised and levied, and have made to be
raised and levied the said several sums of money, under the sole color and
pretense of the Law aforesaid, so illegally made by themselves for their
private gain and profit, and without any other right, title, or authority
whatsoever, by the aforesaid space of seven years (after the said seventeenth
day of September in the six and twentieth year a foresaid) next following and
upwards, at London aforesaid, in the Parish aforesaid, of all the Liege People
and Subjects of our said Lord the King, coming to the said public Markets (by
the whole time aforesaid) held within the said City, with Victuals and
Provisions, there to be sold, and converted and disposed of these moneys to
their own uses, in subversion of the good Rule and Government of the aforesaid
City, and to the great oppression and impoverishing of all the Liege People of
our said Lord the now King, resorting and coming to the said Markets with their
Victuals and Provisions, to the great damage and hurt of all the Liege People
and Subjects of our said Lord the King, to the increasing of the Prices of all
Victuals and Provisions sold in the aforesaid Markets, and to the manifest
disheriting of our said Lord the now King, and his Royal Crown, and against the
Trust in them reposed (as in a Body Corporate and Politic) by our said Lord
the King, and the Laws of this Kingdom of England, as the said Attorney General
of our said Lord the now King, for our said Lord the now King above, by
replying, has alleged. Without that that the said Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London, from the time whereof the memory of man is not
to the contrary, have had, or have been accustomed to have Tolls, Rates, or
Sums of money by them the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City
aforesaid above supposed to be assessed by the aforesaid Law or Ordinance, and
reduced to a certainty, as by the Plea of them the said Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid above, by rejoyning is supposed;
and this the said Attorney General of our said Lord the now King is ready to
aver; Whereupon for that the said Major and Commonalty and Citizens for the
cause aforesaid, have forfeited the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises, to
be of themselves a Body Corporate and Politic; the said Attorney General as
formerly for our said Lord the King, prays Judgment, and that the said Mayor
and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, may be convicted
of the premises aforesaid, and be forejudged and excluded from their Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchises. etc.

And as to the Plea of the aforesaid Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City aforesaid above by rejoining, pleaded as to the residue of the said Plea
of the said Attorney General in assigning the Forfeitures as aforesaid above,
by replying pleaded, the said Attorney General of our said Lord the now King,
protesting that the said Prorogation of the said Parliament by our said Lord
the King, was for diverse necessary and urgent causes concerning the good and
profit of our said Lord the King and his Kingdom, and according to the true and
undoubted Prerogative and power of our said Lord the now King, and by the same
Prorogation the prosecution of public Justice of the Kingdom, and the making
necessary provisions for the preservation of our said Lord the King and his
Protestant Subjects had not received interruption, as by the aforesaid Petition
by the Votes and Suffrages of the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
said City in their said Com. Council assembled so as aforesaid ordained, falsely
and maliciously is alleged, notwithstanding for Plea the said Attorney General
for our said Lord the now King, says that the Plea of the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid above, by rejoining in
that behalf pleaded, and the matter therein contained, is not sufficient in Law
for them the Mayor and Com and Citizens of the City aforesaid, to claim the
Liberties, Privileges and Franchises aforesaid, to be of themselves a Body
Corporate and Politic, in Matter, Fact, and Name, by the name of the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London aforesaid, and by the same name
to plead and be impleaded to answer and be answered, to be to them allowed or
adjudged, or maintained: And that he the said Attorney General (to that! Plea
in manner and form aforesaid pleaded) is not necessitated, nor by the Law of
the Land bound in any wise to answer for our said Lord the now King; and this
the said Attorney General of our said now Lord the King is ready to aver.
Whereupon for want of a sufficient Plea of them the said Mayor and Commonalty
and Citizens of the City aforesaid in this behalf, the said Attor. General of
our said Lord the now King for our said Lord the now King, as formerly, prays
Judgment, and that the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London aforesaid, may be convicted of the premises, and be forejudged and
excluded from their Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises.

(...)ctionem and publicationem legis pro levatione denariorum de personis ad
publica Mercata infra Civitat' praedict' tent' cum victualibus and
provisionibus ibidem vendend'acceden' ac exactionem and levationem hujusmodi
denar' superius fieri supposit' per ipsos Majorem and Communit' ac Cives
superius rejungendo placitat' pro eodem Domino Rege nunc dicit quod per aliqua
per ipsos superius inde allegat' libertat' privileg' and Franches. fore de
seipsis unum corpus corporat' and politicum in re facto and nomine per nomen
Majoris and Communitat' ac Civium Civitat' London ac per idem nomen placitare
and implacitari respondere ae responderi per ipsos superius ut prefertur
clamat' eisdem Majori and Communitat' ac Civibus allocari non debent quia
protestando quod ipsi praedict' Major and Communit' ac Cives Civitat' London
praedict' decimo septimo die Septembris, anno vicesimo sexto supradicto in
Replicatione praedict' mentionat' necnon continue postea and a tempore cujus
contrar' memoria hominum non existit minime seisit' fuer' seu adhuc seisit'
existunt de and in publicis Mercatis praedict' in dominico suo ut de feodo, nec
per totum idem tempus sumptibus suis propriis providerunt seu providere
consuever' and debuerunt fora Mercatoria sive loca ubi hujusmodi Mercata tent'
fuer' quotiescunque necesse fuit and Stallas, Stationes, and alias
accommodationes pro personis ad eadem Mercata venien' cum victualibus and
provisionibus ibidem vendend' pro meliori and magis convenien' vendicon'
exposicon' eorundem prout praedict' Major and Communitat' ac Cives superius
rejungendo allegaver' protestandoque etiam quod Rat' praedict' per actum sive
ordination' praedict' ut praefertur solvi ordinat' praedict' tempore
confectionis ordinationis illius and extunc hucusque non fuer' rationabiles,
nec adhuc rationabiles existunt, prout iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives
superius similiter allegaverunt. Pro placito tamen idem dict' Attorn' dict'
Domin' Regis nunc Generalis dicit quod per quendam actum in Parliamento dict'
Dom' Regis nunc tent' apud Westmonaster' per seperales Prorogationes decimo
quarto die Februarii, Anno Regni dict' Dom' Regis nunc vicesimo secundo, inter
alia inactitat' fuit ad finem quod apti and commodi loci infra dictam Civitat'
and Libertat' ejusdem, extra posit' and appunctuat' forent pro reedificand' and
custodiend' Mercata ampliori convenientia quam antea fuer' ita quod principales
stratae non forent impedit' Anglice pestred' and obstruct' perinde prout antea
consuet' fuit. Et quod Regale Excambium, Guihald', le Sessions House in le
Old Bailey and commun' Jail and Prisone infra praedict' Civitat' forent
amplificat' and fact' magis commodi pro publicis usu and ornament' Civitatis,
and melius securitat' a periculo and casualitate conflagrationis. Et quod
alique convenien' distantiae, intervall' and circuitus fundi forent relict'
inter Regal' Excambium, and alias domos edificand'infra Civitat' praedict' quod
Major, Aldermanni, and Commun' Civitat' praedict' in Commun' Concilio
assemblat' impenderent, Anglice, should and might employ, and per Actum
praedict' Authoritat' fuer' impendere talia loca and portion' Fundi infra
Civitat' praedict' and Libertat' ejusdem prout per and cum dicti Domini Regis
nunc approbation' tunc suer' vel ante decimum diem Martii, Millesimo
Sexcentesimo Sexagesimo Nono, forent extraposit' and adjudicat' necessar' and
convenien' tam pro publicis Mercatis ibidem, quam etiam pro ornamento
amplificatione and convenien' praedict' Regal' Excambii, and aliorum locorum
praementionat' and cujuslibet vel alicujus eorundem respective and ad
intention' quod rationabilis satisfactio dat' soret Proprietar' and alior'
habent' aliquem statum sive interesse in fundis and locis quae fuissent vel
sorent extraposit', capiend', and occupand' pro publicis locis Mercatoriis
praedict' Major, Alderman' and Commun' per ipsos vel alios in ea part fore
appunctuat' and authorizat' tractarent and agrearent cum Proprietor' and
al'interessat' in eisdem and in casu voluntary recusationis sive alicujus
talis inhabilitatis sive impediment' qual'in quodam al' Actu Parliamenti in
eodem Actu specificat' pro re-edificatione Civitat' London, nuper antea fact'
mentionat' fuer' seu alius incapacitat' cujuscunque inde Proprietar' inde vel
alias interessat' in eisdem ad tractand' and agreand' praedict' Major and Cur'
Alderman' forent and fuer' per Actum praedict' authorizat' and requisit'
causare Jur' fore impannellat' in tal' modo and forma prout per Actum praedict'
direct' and appunctuat' fuit, ita quod null' duo Jur' praedict' sic fore
impannellat' venirent ex una and eadem Warda adjudicare and assidere qual'
compensation' and satisfaction' in quibuslibet casibus praedict' forent
adjudicat' and dat' respectivis Proprietor' and aliis interessat' in fundis and
locis sic extraposit' capiend' and occupand' pro aliquibus usubus vel
propositis ut prefertur in prosecutione ejusdent Actus secundum tal'eorum
respectivos status and interess'. Et ulterius inactitat' fuit quod pro
omnimodis Carbonibus quae ab and post primum diem Maii, Millesimo Sexcentesimo
and Septuagesimo, and ante vicesimum nonum diem Septembris, qui foret in Anno
Dom' Millesimo Sexcentesimo Octogesimo Septimo, forent importat' and abduct' in
praedict' Portum Civitat' London, seu Rivum Thamesis, infrae Libertat' Civit'
praedict' super eundem Rivum solut' foret per viam Impositionis, superinde
secund' ratas postea mentionat' (videl') pro omnibus tal' Carbonibus qual ibi
importat' and induct' forent ab and post primum diem Maii, Millesimo
Sexcentesimo and Septuagesimo, and ante vicesimum quartum diem Junii, Millesimo
Sexcentesimo Septuagesimo Septimo, solut' foret pro qualibet Celdar' seu Tonna
inde duos solidos ultra Imposition' duodecim denar' pro Celdar' seu Tonna per
praedict' Actum pro re-edificatione Civitat' London, appunctuat' solvend'. Et
pro omnibus tal' Carbonibus quae ibidem importat' and induct' forent ab and
post praedict' vicesimum quartum diem Junii, Millesimo Sexcentesimo
Septuagesimo Septimo, and ante praedict' Vicesimum Nonum diem Septembris,
Millesimo Sexcentesimo Octogesimo Septimo, solut' forent pro qualibet Celdar'
sive Tonna inde tres solides, and iidem Vigore Actus praedict' forent collect'
levat' and solut' in tali forma and modo in omni and quolibet respectu, prout
in and per praedict' priorem Actum fuit limitat' and appunctuat' pro
collectione and levatione debit' duodecim denar' pro Celdar' sive Tonna
Carbonum imposit' per priorem Actum praedict' and omnes and quaslibet potestat'
Authoritat', Directiones, and Provision' in vel per praedict' priorem Actum
mentionat' vel provis. pro levatione and collectione inde. Omnesque quidem
denar' sic recipiend' super comput' praedict' respectivarum Imposition' seu
earum alterius de tempore in tempus forent solut' in receptu Camerae Civitat'
London, and abinde forent emanat' and solut' secundum directionem and
appunctuation' praedict' Actus de Anno Vicesimo Secundo supradicto and non
aliter. Et praedict' Camera Civitat' London, staret and onerat' fuit cum toto
resid' denar' praedict' ibidem solut' qui non sic emanat' forent and solut'. Et
ulterius inactitat' fuit quod omnes and quaelibet summa and summae monet' quae
levat' foret super reception' seperal' and respectivarum Imposition' praedict'
sive per tal'additional' debit' in casu concelament' inde prout per praedict'
priorem Actum appunctuat' fuit foret' occupat' and disposit' modo and forma
sequen' (videl') una quarta pars omnium denarior' quae ab and post praedict'
primum diem Maii, Millesimo Sexcentesimo and Septuagesimo and ante praedict'
Vicesimum Quartum diem Junii, Millesimo Sexcentesimo Septuagesimo Septimo
forent levat' sive solubil' super reception' praedict' Imposition' duorum
solid' pro qualibet Celdar' vel Tonna Carbonum sen in casu concelament' inde ut
prefertur foret' occupat' and disposit' pro and erga satisfaction' pro fundis
extraposit' and occupat' pro amplificatione, Stratarum confection' Wharfarum
and Portuum publicorum Mercatorum locorum and aliorum publicum usuum tam in
Actu ill' quam in Actu praecitat' mentionat' and appunctuat' and quod una
medietas omnium denar' qui ab and post Vicesimum quartum diem Junii, Millesimo
Sexcentesimo Septuagesimo Septimo forent levation' seu solubil', super praed'
Imposit' trium solid pro Celdar' vel Tonna Carbonum de tempore in tempus foret,
occupat' and disposit' pro satisfactione pro fundo extraposit', and occupat' ut
prefertur, and tal'al' publicis usibus and proposit' qual'in actu ill' and in
Actu praerecitat' fuer' mentionat' and appunctuat' prout per eundem Actum de
anno Vicesimo Secundo supradicto inter al' before liquet and apparet. Et
praedict' Attorn' dict' Dom' Regis nunc general' qui etc. pro eodem Dom' Rege
nunc ulterius dicit quod virtute actus illius iidem Major and Communitas ac
Cives Civitat' London praedict', ante confectionem and publicationem legis
praedict', scilicet primo die Septembris, anno Regni dicti Dom' Regis nunc
Vicesimo Sexto supradicto apud London praedict' in Parochia and Warda praedict'
habuer' and receper' pro debito and vecligali praedict' de duobus solidis pro
qualibet Celdar' sive Tonna Carbonum in Civitat' London, sive Portum ejusdem
importat' vigint' denariorum summam ad proposita praedict'. Et ulterius idem
Attorn' dict' Dom' Regis nunc General', qui, etc. pro eodem D. Rege nunc dicit
quod Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' London, absque aliquo jure, titulo,
sive authoritat' quibuscunque premissis praedict' non obstantibus praedict' die
Jovis scilicet praedict' Decimo Septimo die Septembris, anno regni dict' Dom'
Regis nunc Vicesimo Sexto supra dict' in eorum Commun' Concilio adtunc tent' in
Camera Guildhall Civitat' London praedict', videlicet, in Parochia Sancti
Michaelis Bassishaw London, insimul assemblat' fecer' condider' and publicaver'
praedict' legem per ipsos de facto inactitat' pro levatione seperal' denar'
summarum praedict' de omnibus Subditis ac Ligeis Domin' Regis nunc tam liberis
quam non liberis hominibus Civitat' praedict' and aliis extraneis ad publica
Mercat' infra Civit' praedict' tent' acceden' cum Viclual' and Provisiombus
suis ibidem vendend'ac easdem seperal' denar' summas sub solo color and
praetextu legis praedict' sic per ipsos pro eorum privato lucro and commodo
illegaliter fact' and absque aliquo alio Jure, Titulo, sive Authoritat'
quibuseunque per praedict' spatium Septem Annorum post praedict' Decimum
Septimum diem Septembris, Anno Vicesimo Sexto supradicto prox' sequen' and
amplius apud London praedict', in Parochia praedict' de omnibus dict' Domin'
Regis Ligeis and Subditis ad praedict' publica Mercata per totum tempus
praedict' infra Civitat' praedict' tent' cum Victual' and Provisionibus ibidem
vendend'accedentibus exeger' and levaver' and exigi and levari fecer' and
denar' ill'ad eorum proprios usus converterunt and disposuerunt in subversion'
boni regiminis and Gubernation' Civitatis praedict' and in magnam oppressien'
and depauperation' omnium dicti Domini Regis nunc Ligeorum ad Mercata praedict'
cum Victualibus and provisionibus suis acceden' and venien' ad grave dampnum
and nocumentum omnium Ligeorum and Subditorum dicti Domini Regis in
augmentation' preciorum omnium Victual' and Provision' in Mercata praedict'
vendit' ac in dicti Domin' Regis nunc and Coronae suae Regiae exheredationem
manifestam ac contra fiduc' in ipsis ut Corpore Corporat' and Politic' per
Domin' Regem ac Leges hujus Regni Angliae reposit' prout praedict' Attorn'
dict' Dom' Regis nunc Generalis pro eodem Domin' Rege nunc superius replicando
allegavit, absque hoc quod praedict' Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitatis
London a tempore cujus contraria memoria hominum non existit habuer' seu habere
consuever' toluet', rats, sive denar' summas per ipsos Majorem and Civitat' ac
Cives Civitat' praedict' superius supposit' fore per praesat' Legem sive
Ordination' praedict' assess' and in certitudinem reduct' prout placitum
ipsorum Majoris and Communitat' ac Civium Civitat' London, praedict' superius
rejungendo supponitur. Et hoc idem Attorn' General' pro eodem Domin' Rege nunc
parat' est verificare unde ex quo' iidem Major and Communitas ac Cives
Libertat', Privileg', and Franches. praedict' fore de seipsis Corpus Corporat'
and Politicum ex causa praedict' for is fecer' idem Attorn' General'ut prius
pro eodem Domin' Rege nunc pet' Judicium, and quod praedict' Major and
Communitas ac Cives Citat' London praedict', de praemissis convincantur ac de
Libertat', Privileg', and Franches. ill'abjudicentur and excludentur, etc.

Et quoad placitum praefat' Majoris and Communitat' ac Civium Civitat'
praedict' superius rejungendo placitat' quoad resid' praedict' placiti praefat'
Attorn' General'in assign' forisfactur' ut prefertur superius replicando
placitat' idem' Attorn' dict' Dom' Regis nunc General' protestando quod
praedict' Prorogatio dicti Parliamenti per praefat' Dom' Regem fuit pro
diversis necessar' and urgentibus causis bonum and utilitatem dicti Domin'
Regis and Regni sui concern', and secundum veram and indubitat' Prerogativam
and potestatem dicti Domin' Regis nunc, Et per eandem. Prorogationem prosecutio
publicae Justitiae Regni and preparationis, Anglice the making provisions
necessar' pro preservatian' dict' Domin' Regis and ejus Subditorum
Protestantium non recepissent obstructionem Ang' Interruption, prout per
Petitionem praedict' per Vota and Suffragia praefat' Majoris and Communit' ac
Civium Civitat' praedict' in dicto Communi Concilio assemblat' sic ut prefertur
ordinat' false and malitiose allegatur pro placito tamen idem Attorn' General'
pro eodem Dom' Rege nunc dic' quod placitum praefat' Majoris and Communit' ac
Civium Civitat' London praedict' superius rejungendo in ea part placitat'
materiaque in eodem content' minime sufficien' in lege existunt ad ipsos
Majorem and Communit' ac Cives Civitat' praedict' ad clamand' Libertat',
Privileg' and Franches. praedict' fore de seipsis Corpus Corporat' and
Politicum in re facto and nomine per nomen Majoris and Commun' ac Civium Civ'
London praed', ac per idem nomen placit' and implacit. resp' and responderi
sibi allocand' seu adjudicand' manuten', Quodque ipse idem Attorn' Gener' ad
placitum ill' modo and forma, praedict' placitat' pro eodem Dom Reg' nunc
necesse non habet, nec per Legem terrae tenetur aliquo modo respondere. Et hoc
idem Attorn' dict' Dom' Regis nunc General' pro eodem Domin' Rege nunc parat'
est verificare. Vnde pro defectu sufficien' placiti ipsorum Majoris and
Communitat' ac Civium Civitat' praedict' in hac part idem Attorn' dicti Domin'
Regis nunc General' pro eodem Dom' Rege nunc ut prius pet' Judicium, and quod
praedict' Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat' London praedict' de premissis
convincantur and de Libertat' Privileg' and Franches. ill'abjudicantur and
excludantur, etc.

FINIS.

