THE Subject's Religion: Directing and Disposing them to a Conscientious and
Careful DISCHARGE of their DUTY IN THE CHOICE OF PUBLIC MAGISTRATES and
OFFICERS.

By a Citizen of London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1691.

THE PREFACE.
THis Discourse is not designed to exclude any of their Majesty's Subjects from
a share in the Government, that are really Friends to it, and worthy of it.

Or to interfere with that Indulgence which the Law allows to honest and mell
meaning Persons, who desire no more than Liberty of Conscience (as a
Christian's Birthright) to live quietly and peaceably under the Government.

But on the contrary, to unmask and give a Check to the boundless Ambition of
those Seducers, who willingly deceiving themselves, do by Jesuitical
Principles, labor to raise Scruples and Niceties in the Minds of others, that
are honest and well-meaning, so as to incline and dispose them (in aversion to
our Established Religion and Government) wilfully to exclude themselves, by not
qualifying themselves as the Law directs; which the most tender Conscience
(rightly informed) according to the sincere Principle of the Gospel, may freely
and cheerfully do.

And I am confident, there are few Dissenters that are Men of Reason and Parts,
and of long standing, but are of the late Duke of Norfolk's Opinion; who, when
the Test was imposed in the House of Lords; declared he had been born, and bred
a Roman Catholic, and it would be of great Scandal and Offense to many
Thousands, if he renounced his Persuasion at that Age. And therefore (as a
Person of Honor) he declared to this Effect:

I am not (said he) so bigoted to my own Persuasion, but I believe my Son may
go to Heaven in the Communion of the Church of England, wherein he may enjoy
his Peerage.

And thereupon he cheerfully laid down his Robe on the Table; saying, He that
shall take that Test, and sit in this House (continuing a Roman Catholic) is a
Villain.

So I am fully persuaded, these Persons, if they were rightly informed, and did
well consider, though they themselves might scruple for the same Reason; yet,
in order to settle, and secure our Religion and Government, and preserve a
Posterity in this Kingdom, (for it is morally impossible any thing else should
do it,) they would not hinder, but rather encourage their Children and Servants
to join in our Communion, that so they might be capable to share in our
Government; and by their own good Example and Endeavors, promote a Reformation
of Manners among us, as the only Means to heal our Divisions, and unite us all
among our selves against our Foreign Enemies.

Especially when they all agree, the Doctrine (which is the vital Substance in
Religion) of the Church of England, to be one and the same with what is taught
in every private Congregation.

We may well then wonder why they, who pretend so much to greater Purity in
Religion, should lay so much stress in the Shadow or outward Persuasion, (which
is but the Crust and Shell of Religion,) as to sacrifice the Peace and Harmony
of a Kingdom, by setting up so many different Ways of Worship in the Bowels of
it, in opposition to that Public uniform Way, which the prudent and holy
Reformers in every Country (who bore their Testimony to the Stake) thought fit
to establish, (as well at Geneva and in Holland, as also in Denmark and Sweden,
etc.) and annexed it inseparably to their Government; not no be changed or
altered by any Private Spirit, but only by the same supreme Authority that
founded it, as the alone Prop and Support of the Government.

Which every sincere Christian of a peaceable Temper, and well guided
Conscience must needs approve of: And when by Provdence they shall transplant
themselves into another Government of the reformed Religion, (as we are are all
Members of one mystical Body the Catholic Church,) will as cheerfully join in
Communion of the Worship there established, as if it had been the same wherein
they themselves were educated. After the most excellent Pattern and Example of
his Sacred Majesty now on the Throne, and his Royal Highness the Prince of
Denmark, and many other honorable and worthy Persons, (now Subjects of this
Kingdom,) who had their Education in foreign Parts, from a Discipline of
different Persuasion.

As the only Means (under Heaven) to support and secure every Government
against the secret, subtle, and Hellish Designs of the worst of Enemies,
Jesuits and Sectaries; who, under pretense of a Private Spirit, Revelation, and
an Extraordinary Call, do place Religion chiefly in the outward Way or
Persuasiou, as most taking with their ignorant, and short-sighted Followers,
which they pretend to form from the very Letter of the Gospel; setting up as
many Ways and Fashions, as may best suit the several Humors and Fancies of the
Leaders and People; herding and separating them into so many peculiar Churches
or Folds, under Conduct of their several Guides, as so many Holy Orders of the
Church of Rome; the old and usual Jesuitical Methods to divide, undermine, and
destroy Kingdoms and States, Religion and Government together.

And that I may speak plain, (for to mince the Truth in this Case, would be to
betray the Justice of the Cause for which we contend,) we have in the following
Discourse an infallible Test, to try and distinguish what Persons their Sacred
Majesty's now on the Throne (as just and rightful Parents of their Country, by
their public professing, owning and defending our Laws and Government, and our
Established Religion) may with greatest Confidence rely upon for their
Security.

Whether on such as do conscientiously join themselves, and draw all others
(they can) into the same Communion with their Majesty's, and under that
Discipline do imbibe those Principles, which naturally dispose them as
Christians and good Subjects, to sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes for the
Honor and Safety, as well of their Religion and Government, as also of their
Majesty's, (under God, their Head and Guardian) to which they are obliged (for
their own Safety) by Religion and Nature, as they are Members of one and the
same Body, and of one and the same Communion with their Majesty's.

Or whether their Majesty's can reasonably expect the same Loyalty and
Security, from such, as are seduced by Jesuits and Sectaries; who (founding
Dominion in Grace) do (by contrary Principles infused) as naturally, and with
as keen a Zeal dispose their Followers to Separation from our Communion, and
(when opposed in their Designs) also to Rebellion, in order to strip their
lawful Princes (though of the same established Religion annexed to the
Government) of their Dominion, to promote their own Worldly Design. Which is no
strange Doctrine; for what has been done, may be again by the same Agents and
Means, as naturally as Effects hold of Causes.

For whatever may be pretended by our Enemies to the contrary, it is manifest
that all Treasons, Conspiracies, and Rebellion (whether hatched and promoted by
Jacobites, Jesuits, or Sectaries) do take their Beginning, Progress, and
Continuance from one and the same Fountain and Original, as they are all
managed under the Conduct of one and the same Sovereign Pilate, Lucifer
himself; and acted by one and the same predominant Principles of Ambition and
Worldly Design, which is quite contrary to the Doctrine and Principles of the
Church of England, as well as that of our Blessed Redeemer, who renounced all
Dominion in this World.

So that it is most manifest, that neither the Doctrine nor Discipline of our
Established Religion can (without weakening, wounding, and betraying it self)
either countenance, or patronize any Enemies to our Government, though they all
(whether Jesuits, Sectaries or Jacobites) as Enemies to it, do abuse, wrest,
and misapply both our Doctrine and Discipline, as well as they do the Gospel it
self, to justify their Rebellion, and carry on their own Designs.

All which will fully appear in the following Discourse.

THE Subject's Religion: Directing and Disposing them, to a Conscientious
Discharge of their Duty, in the Choice of their Public Magistrates and
Officers.
The Introduction.
SHould we judge of the Christian Religion by the Pride, Malice, and Railery,
the Ambition, and Worldly Design of many Christians, who have separated from
our National Communion, under a Pretense of greater Purity, and of being more
Holy than their Neighbors; and had no other Rule for our Standard, we might
with the poor Indians, when they beheld the ill Actions, and Bloody Cruelty of
the Jesuits, who came in a Saint like Disguise to convert them, choose rather to
go to Hell in our natural Religion, than to accompany such fiery Zealots in
their Diabolical Practice, (though with Angels Tongues,) to their Celestial
Paradise.

This may sound harsh in the Ears of many tender Minds, (who are hoodwinked,
and imposed upon by their Seducers,) whose Souls, I am confident, would abhor
the Evil, were it unveiled unto them, as the Murder of Caesar was by Anthony,
when he spread his bloody Garments in the Senate House; and therefore, it is
nenessary that both the Criminals, and the Seduced should feel the Smart of the
Lance, in opening the Wound, by reflecting upon one Capital Crime for all the
rest, that the same Disease may not ulcerate again, to an incurable Distemper;
especially, when that Capital Crime will appear to be the most barbarous, and
execrable Tragedy, that ever was acted in the Face of the Sun; if seriously
considered, with all its impious, and aggravating Circumstances; and to be of
so great a Scandal to the Protestant Religion, that nothing can, or ought to
raze it either out of our Annals, or Memory, but a Repentance of as a deep a
Dye, even to an Abhorrence of the Fact.

This should never have been revived* or here taken notice of, did not the
surviving Bloody Actors, and such as are tainted with the same Pernicious, and
Treasonable Principles, still endeavor in secret by their venomous Tongues,
and Pens, to justify their Villainy, and to Canonize the very Regicides
themselves, (as the Papists have done their French Friar, and Ravilliac,) by
raking into the Ashes of their now Sacred Majesty's Royal Ancestors, to
reproach both their Memory, and our Established Religion, with the most
malicious, infamous, and false Reflections, thereby to render both our
Established Religion and Monarchy; nay, if it were possible, the very sacred
Name, and Title of a Crowned Head, Tyrannical, and odious, to make way for
their darling Commonwealth.

And at the same time, (when there was never more need of Union among Their
Majesty's Subjects,) venting their Malice, in the most virulent, and provoking
Language, by their Squibs, and Trumpets against those, who have approved
themselves, both in Purse and Person, Loyal Subjects to Their Sacred Majesty's
now on the Throne, as well as true, and constant to the Church and Government;
and in whom (we all know) the Power, both Civil, and Military, here, in this
City resided, during His Majesty's Absence, and the Invasion lately threatened
by the French; stigmatizing them with the odious Names of Jacobites, Rapparees,
and Traitors; though all (in effect) do amount to no more than a nauseous
Repetition of the same Stuff, which they so lately exhibited against some of
the same Persons, in the Honorable House of Lords; making good nothing of
their black Charge, but their own Malice and Revenge for Personal Injuries,
apprehended toward themselves.

However, these Worthy, and Loyal Men (notwithstanding all these Provocations,)
as became good Christians, have not answered them according to their Folly; but
by their Patience, and Silence, have returned their venomous Arrows into their
own Bosoms.

By all which, and many other apparent Evidences, it is manifest, that these
irreconcilable Enemies to our Established Religion, and Government, do daily
refresh our Memory with the Blackness of their Crimes, and awaken our slow, but
just Apprehensions, to suspect, they are preparing again, if they succeed in
their Endeavors (which God forbid) for another Bloody Scene.

Doubtless such wicked Practices, and unrighteous Dealings of many Persons,
who, under such specious Pretenses of greater Purity, do either wholly dissent
from our National Communion, or are such partial Ambodexters, as to communicate
with us in the Morning, and do separate from us in the Evening, have caused so
many Practical Atheists among us; who giving themselves up to Sensuality,
through neglect of Piety and Devotion, do from thence, with Lucretius, the
Epicurean Philosopher, not only form Arguments against all Religion in general;
but also against Divine Providence it self, and take occasion (in his
Atheistical Expressions,) to maintain, That Lib. 1. Saepius olim Religio
peperit Scelera, atque impia facta.
Religion has done, and will contrive, promote, and act the greatest Ill.
Concluding from such prodigious Impiety in our Separated Votaries, as he did
from the Bloody Sacrifice of a Royal Virgin, by the Trojan Priests, to buy a
Wind for Troy Tantum Religio potuit suadere Malorum.
Such devilish Acts Religion could persuade.

For as the designing Leaders in Separation, and Rebellion, have ever had an
insatiable Appetite after Dominion and Rule, (though under a Veil of Religion
and Zeal for Reformation); (so they always bait their Hook with Interest,
Trade, and worldly Design, to engage the Hypocrites, and formal Professors in
their Cause. And we need not wonder at the numerous Train of their ignorant and
bigoted Followers, if we consider, that not one in Ten of those poor deluded
Proselytes, (though they talk so loudly of Religion, and quarrel about the
Shadow, or outward Persuasion,) did ever inwardly and savingly relish the vital
Substance of it in their hearts, or truly understand what it is, farther, than
as a blind Zealot, to follow his Guide as an infallible Oracle of that
Persuasion; believing that in so doing, he is in the ready way to Jerusalem,
and shall be accepted.

By which means, many thousands of poor deluded Animals, thus bigoted, and (by
their Leaders) dubbed Saints; as they are admitted Members into separate
Congregations; are puffed up with an overweening Conceit of their own
Perfection and Holiness, (as so many blind Papists incorporated into their
Religious Fraternities,) though they have no more of a pure Spirit, and of
Primitive Christianity, in real Meekness, Christian Charity, and Self-denial;
than the Picture hanging against a Wall, has of the real Essence, and
Substance of the Soul and Body of a Man.

And thus we see Ignorance in Separation, as well as in Popery, becomes the
Mother of Devotion.

And we may appeal to the surviving Spectators of our late intestine, unhappy
Broils, how our Religion, and Government (as inseparable Supporters of each
other,) were by the same Instruments, and Methods, both overturned together;
though the first Miners (those of the Presbytery) were blown up themselves by
those of the Congregational Way; who afterward disagreeing amongst themselves,
who should be uppermost, brought all into Confusion; leaving us for a while,
without any settled Order, or Government in the Kingdom; till by a miraculous
Revolution, our Religion and Government were both restored on their old
Foundation.

Wanting nothing but Reformation of Manners in its Members, and Harmony in
Divine Worship, as the best Means to stem the Tide of Debauchery, and
Profaness, in order to such a Reformation; and to check and countermine the
Jesuit on the one hand, and the Sectary on the other; so as to secure our
settled Religion, and Government against the Subtilty and Malice of both.

That instead of Emulation, Strife, and Envy, and contending who shall be
uppermost, we might all, as Subjects of one Government, and Members of one
National Communion, humble our selves under the mighty Hand of God, and provoke
one another (in Tenderness,) to Love, and to good Works; thereby to propagate
the Faith in the Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace.

Now as it cannot be denied, but the Presbyterians (laying the Blood of the
Royal Martyr, at the door of those of the Congregational Way) were the chief
Instruments in that mighty Revolution; so it is as plain, that what they did in
order to it, was to establish Presbytery here in this Kingdom.

So we must also allow the Dissenters to be eminently instrumental in the late
happy Revolution, to settle their Sacred Majesty's now on the Throne.

But though I shall not here question from what Principle they acted therein;
yet I may boldly say, that if they were real Friends and Well-wishers to
Monarchy, they would as readily demonstrate their impartial Affection and
Loyalty to their Majesty's, to secure and support them now in the Throne, as
they are Guardians and Head of our Established Religion and Government, by
disposing their Subjects to Harmony in Worship, the alone Seminary and Nursery
of true Loyalty and Union among our selves; and live in Charity with their
conforming Brethren; peaceable, and content with the Indulgence allowed them,
till a proper Medium may be found out for all to join in the same Communion, as
Subjects and Children of one and the same Civil, and Politic Parents and
Government.

And in the mean time, forbear to rail against, and cry down the innocent Rites
and Ceremonies of our Established Religion, to create Offense in the Ignorant
and the Weak, with Designs thereby to draw our Members into their Separation,
as if the external way of Worship were the vital Substance in Religion.

Especially when the Church of England lays no more stress in any Rite or
Ceremony, than Decency, and Order, (according to the Tenor of the Gospel,) do
require: And it is plain from the the 34th Article, that (as things
indifferent) they may from time to time, be changed, altered, or abrogated, to
promote Peace and Harmony in the Church; but not to be done by any private
Spirit: And it is most manifest, our Holy and Reverend Governors are
inclinable, nay, most desirous, to comply with any reasonable Demands in order
thereto, if the Dissenters would agree among themselves, and make their
application, (as becomes Inferiors,) to those who are entrusted by the
Government, in so sacred and weighty an Affair. We may justly (therefore)
pronounce a Woe against them that do hinder, nay, that do not (as much as in
them lies) promote so great a Blessing to their Majesty's, and the whole
Kingdom.

But what hopes can we now entertain, that Dissenters should ever unite with
us; when they are so far from any such Condescension, or Application in order
to it, that (by Color of their Indulgence, but contrary to the Design of the
Lawmakers) they have set up their Standard in open defiance against it;
Printing and publishing the Heads of their Association, and Agreement between
the Presbytery, and the Congregational, (as irreconcilable as Fire and Water,)
to increase and multiply their It is no Gospel-Argument to measure the Goodness
of their Cause by the Agreement, or Number of their Leaders: For had the
Jesuits but the same Scope, and Liberty, they would soon outstrip them in their
Union and Number, both of Leaders and Followers, having one and the same End
and Design at the bottom, to undermine, and blow up our settled Religion and
Government together; though these are the most dangerous, as owning the
Doctrine of our Church, for a Blind to the short-sighted, the better to carry
on their subtle Design against the Foundation.
Leaders, as it were under their Political Discipline, assigning to each his
Parochial Boundaries, as so many Patriarchs, each, within his peculiar
Province, in opposition to the settled Religion, and established Discipline of
our National Church: And all this done, that they may the more effectually
dispose their own Followers to a greater Aversion to our Communion, and draw
our Members, with the Baits of Interest, Trade, and Advantage, into their
separate Congregations, as into so many Arks of Salvation, as if no sure Guide
can be found elsewhere, in the right and ready way to Jerusalem.

And yet at the same time (notwithstanding the legal Test, and Qualification,
by the Government enjoined) peremptorily challenging by Nature and Education
(to use their own Words) an equal Right with their Fellow Subjects, (complying
with the Law,) to bear Offices, both Civil and Military, in the Government:
Nay, so bigoted are many of their Followers now become under their Discipline,
as to impose upon their Children, (as also upon our Members, if they will match
into their Families,) tying them up in their Conjugal Contracts, to adhere to
their separate Way of worship, a good Expedient to advance Hypocrisy, but not
to promote Christianity or Sincerity.

Certainly so long as we see them thus restless to seduce our Members, and bold
in their Attempts, and Endeavors to share in the Government, on Terms contrary
to Law, which is, in effect, to pull down the Fences and Bulwarks of our
Religion, and Government together, we may well conclude, (without breach of
Charity,) that the Lamp of their Loyalty to their Majesty's will burn no longer
than it is fed with the Oil of Intetest; and that, when their Designs are ripe,
they will again make use of the carnal Weapon to overturn both our Religion and
Government together.

For he that has but half an Eye, may easily discern the same Methods, and
Engineers (formerly made use of) now secretly endeavoring so to poison,
divide, and dispose the People, (if not timely prevented,) as to engage us
again in the same Civil War; from which, let us all earnestly pray, Good Lord
deliver us.

Therefore to countermine those deep, dangerous, and dark Designs of our
Enemies, and to undeceive all honest and well-meaning Persons, that have been
imposed upon by those subtle Politicians, I here offer a brief Spacimen of
Religion, as I have learned it under the Discipline of our National Communion;
which I humbly submit to an exact Scrutiny of the most censorious Adversary;
not doubting, but (if seriously considered,) it will distinguish it self in
every pious, and honest Mind, from all false Persuasions; together with some
short Observations from thence; and some brief Directions for the Subject's
Guidance in their Choice of our Pulick Magistrates, and Officers,

As that alone which will secure both our Religion, and Government.

Of Religion in General.
Religion then in General, is the Obligation we are under to God, the supreme
Original of Being; and therefore implies all the Services we pay him, and all
that Obedience we give to any Law for his sake, and with respect to any Divine
Attribute, (that is) to the Perfection of his Nature.

This (in the general Notion of it) is natural to Man, and is indeed the
specific Difference of humane Nature, rather than Reason; because those
inferior Creatures, who (governed by a divine Instinct) do in many things seem
to vindicate, or show some kind and degrees of Reasoning, yet they make no
color of Religion; and therefore for deficiency in nothing so much as this, is
Man, when he neglects Piety and Devotion, become like, or rather degenerated
below the Beasts that perish.

Religion, I say then, is natural to Man as Man; for that there is (which none
dare deny) a supremely excellent, and perfect Being, the Author of all things
besides, to whom their Government does belong; and to whom therefore Worship is
due; is a Truth, not only demonstratively argued from the Works of Creation,
and Providence, Romans 1. 20 but a Truth impressed on the Nature of Reasonable
Creatures, inseparable totally from them, and consequently, to be reckoned
amongst these Connate Notions which the Soul of Man both of things; which the
Scripture styles, The Law written in the Heart.

They who deny this, do shake the Foundation of all certainty in Knowledge; for
that depends on some Common Standard, in whose allowance all are agreed.

The Sense of a Deity therefore, and the venerable Regards arising from it,
which we call Religion; I conclude to be natural to Man, a Notion, by our Maker
wrought into the very Fabric of our Mind, an essential Beam of that Coeval
Light the Soul is endued with to discern things.

And from this Natural Principle, or Venerable Awe of a Divine Power, springs
as naturally in the same Mind an Awe and Veneration of Government; as the
shadow of that Supreme Being, in a Divine Authority impressed on Rulers and
Governors, as God's Vicegerents in the lower World; which Natural Seed is
cultivated, and improved by Discipline and Nurture, into greater Perfection.

The universal Consent of all Nations, in all Ages, confirms this Truth, and
proves Religion (take it in the general) was not a Politic Invention of Man;
though it be the best Prop of Government, and Cement of Society.

And therefore, amongst intelligent Creatures, Religion is the first Law of
Nature; for that must needs consist in the first Obligation to a Rule, a Rule
(directing our Duty) being the proper Notion of a Law; and if so, then the
first Obligation must needs consist in respect to that thing, wherein supreme
Dominion and all other Perfections are seated, and that is in GOD alone.

Self-Conservation (speaking of Mankind) is but a Secondary Law of Nature, tied
up in Religion; for it is all the Reason in the World, that the first Law of
Nature should primarily respect the first Cause, (GOD Himself;) and be chiefly
terminated upon him in that we call Religion, as the Secondary Law of Nature,
is chiefly terminated upon the Creature; which we call the Conversation of it
self.

So far therefore, as our own Safety may be hazarded for the Preservation of
our Religion, we are obliged to prefer our Religion before our own Safety;
though, in truth, God has so wisely linked these two together, that our
Religion, preserved with what hazard soever to our selves, will insure our own
Safety: He that loses his Life for my sake, and the Gospel's shall find it,
says our Savior.

This Natural Religion, or venerable Sense of a Deity, and Veneration toward
our Governors, is but (at least in this degenerate Age) a saint Seed, till it
meet with some farther active Principles or Dispositions in us, to nurse it up,
and give it Culture.

And there are but three active Principles in Humane Nature, capable to receive
this Seed of Religion into their Bosom; that is, Love, or Fear, or Worldly
Design. And then,

1. Love, as it is the radical Affection of Humane Nature, terminates in God
alone, as the supreme Good, the adequate Object, and Center of its Rest: And so
is the genuine, and proper Principle of the Gospel, and ought to be that inward
Frame or Affection of Mind, from which all our Services to God in Religion
proceed; and where this Principle is predominant in a Church, there is the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

And this inward Frame or Disposition of Mind, from which our Religion should
proceed; as it is the chief thing regarded in God's Eye, so ought it to be the
^^^ghtiest Consideration of our own; because upon the Issues of this depends
our Acceptance with God, our well grounded Peace of Conscience, and our
everlasting Welfare; and they that are religious from this Principle, may be
styled Lovers of God and Religion, for Goodness-sake, and such, may be said, to
delight in the Law of God, and walk in his Ways.

2. Fear is the proper Principle of Superstition; for those that, in their
Religion, are chiefly acted by Fear, are dragged to their Devotion, as the
Heathens were to worship their Demons, for fear of harm from them.

3. But Worldly Design, devoid of either real Love or Fear, is the proper
Principle of Hypocrisy, or that which bears the Name, but not the Nature of
Religion. And Such as are acted by this Principle, become most loathsome in the
Sight of God, though often adored, because undiscovered by Men.

For the Roots of Hypocrisy may be as various, as Worldly Designs are,
Ambition, Vain Glory, Time-serving, Compliance with prevalent Custom, Riches,
Advantages, to be Leader of a Sect, Head of a Party: Nay, it may be Envy and
Malice, to sow Discord; for the Apostle tells us, some preach Christ out of
Envy.

The Root of Superstition is Fear without Love; that is a Dread of Harm, if the
Divine Power (or what is so apprehended to be, as the Object of our Worship,)
be not appeased by such and such Services: This brought so many dreadful
Sacrifices to the Altar at Tophet, and all the Heathen World over, and is the
slivish Principle obliging so many Corporal Severities, affected and
uncommanded Austerities, superstitious Repetition, and muttering Fopperies, as
telling over Beads, at set times enjoined by the Priest, (Sacrifices to bribe a
Deity,) and quiet the Murmurs of Conscience, so much practiced in the Church of
Rome.

Now these three natural Seeds, or active Principles, Love, Fear, and Worldly
Design, that thus nurse up Religion into Beauty or Deformity, do arise from the
various Apprehensions we have of the Object of our Worship, which ought to be
the true God.

For if that be apprehended (as he really is) transcendently good, and amiable,
willing and ready to be reconciled to Offenders; then the great Impression it
makes on the Mind, is LOVE, which cherishes Religion into Beauty, Perfection,
and cheerful Obedience.

But if it be apprehended as dreadful only, and able to do hurt, under the
Attributes of Sovereign, but independent: Will and Power; then Fear is all the
Temper it gives to the Mind; and this ferments the natural Seed of Religion
into Superstition, or a slavish Devotion, so (as I said before) to worship God
as the Heathen did their Demons, for fear of harm, and to pacify the Murmurs
of Conscience: For such Votaries, though they believe the being of a God, yet
in their Hearts wish there were none.

But if there be few, or no Apprehensions of Divine Attributes in the Mind to
beget a real Love or Fear; then the Soul of Man is at liberty to make use of
Religion, so far as serves Worldly Design, and this principles it with
Hypocrisy, the Monster of the Age we live in, to be of one, two, or all
Persuasions to serve a Turn, or carry on a Design.

So that Hypocrisy is nothing but Atheism dissembled, under a Veil of
Religion; and Atheism is nothing but Hypocrisy unmasked.

Now if there be a God, the real Object of our Worship; (as we all pretend to
believe there is;) doubtless our Religion ought to be real, and not
hypocritical: For all Things are naked and open to his Eye.

And if our Religion be a perfect, and acceptable Service; doubtless it ought
to be cheerful, and not slavish, as Superstition is, which proceeds only from
Fear without Love.

If Goodness then, and all Perfection, be essential Attributes of a Divine
Nature; (that is,) if Sovereign Power and Will be inseparable from Goodness in
God, and not its overmatch, as some would think; then God's Power is
comfortable, and not dreadful, till his Goodness be abused and offended; so
that all our Fears, and hard Thoughts of God do arise from our own Disobedience
to his Will made known, which nothing can remove, but our Repentance and
Obedience: For as his Mercy is over all his Works, and he would not have any to
perish; so he is just, and cannot approve of Iniquity in his Creatures; and
when in obeying his Will, we have an inward Sense of his Goodness and Love
toward us, it begets in us a Love toward him.

So that Love is the proper and genuine Principle of that Religion, which is in
its own Nature perfect, and to God most be acceptable, as is evident from the
first and great Command, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
Soul, and Strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self.

And as this Love of God is always attended with an awful Veneration toward
him, as our Father; which is a Child-like Fear of offending him:

So this Love of our Neighbor ought to be perfect Charity, and universal to
all Mankind; especially to such, as are Members of the Catholic Church; and
not limited, restrained, or confined to any Herd or Sect, nor Mercenary; but as
the Sun shines, giving out his Rays without expecting any Return.

It Is true, the Mind that is conscious of offending, by Disobedience and Abuse
of God's Goodness, has its Eye always Bloodshot with Guilt and Fear; and
therefore can behold nothing in God (for the present) but Power, and the
Severities of his Justice; nor arrive at any Opinion of God, but as powerful in
order to Punishment. And such as continue thus in wilful Disobedience to the
Will of God made known, do gradually harden themselves, till they degenerate
into Despair of Mercy, from whence proceeds Hatred of God and Goodness, which
is final Impenitency.

And this is the Case of the Devils themselves, who can now frame no
Apprehensions of God, but what are terrible, as appears by the Product of their
Faith, which is to make them tremble.

Before the Gospel the Mosaical Occonomy (or Worship) was not Superstition but
Imperfection. For the Law made nothing perfect; but is as a School Master to
bring us to Christ. And Fear was that natural Temper which was impressed on the
Mind, under the Mosaical Discipline, as a main impulsive Principle to the
religious Observation of it. And for that Reason we find Religion generally in
the old Testament expressed by the Fear of God. Jacob calls God Almighty the
Fear of his Father Isaac. And we may-assert, that Fear continues the
predominant and active Principle in our Devotion, even now under the Gospel,
until God in Mercy gives us new Grounds of Hope for Pardon on our Repentance,
as he has done to all Mankind by his Son, whom he first promised, and in due
time sent him into the World, for this very end, to principle Men afresh with
the Love of God, which their Sin and Guilt had extinguished.

For which End, we find the Proposals, and Delivery of the Gospel, are made
after the sweetest way of Invitation, as if it were in a wooing way of
Entreaty: We, as Ambassadors of Christ, (says the Apostle,) as if God by us
did beseech you, we pray you to be reconciled unto God. Upon which Account,
Religion, through the whole Book of the New Testament, is expressed by the Love
of God. And St. John tells us, He that fears, (that is,) he that is chiefly
acted by this Principle of Fear to Religion,) is not made perfect in LOVE,
(that is,) he has not yet attained to that inward Frame, or Affection of Mind,
(LOVE;) which, of all others, is the most generous, and acceptable Principle of
serving God. And it is from this Principle alone that we are enabled to hold the
Faith in the Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace.

The Truth of both which do plainly appear from the Words of the Apostle, Romans
8. We (Christians under the Gospel,) have not received the Spirit of Bondage
again unto Fear, as the Israelites did at the giving of the Law in a tremendous
manner on Mount Sinai; but we have received the Spirit of Adoption, (the filial
Disposition of Children, excited in us by the pleasing Invitation, and paternal
direction of the Gospel,) whereby we cry Abba Father.

Which Love of God, in this merciful Act of Redemption, appears more fully to
Men than it did before in Creation and Providence because it is super-added
thereunto, like a second Beam of Light conjoined to a former, shines to all
Eyes with a greater Lustere, and therefore draws all hearts with a warmer
Affection.

All which is summed up by the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, c. 3.
v. 17, 18. That we being rooted and grounded in Love, might be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and height and
depth, and to know the Love of Christ which passes Knowledge; that is, to knew
the Imensuy of that Love of God discovered in Christ Jesus, super added to all
the other Instances of Divine Goodness in Creation and Providence.

Now from what has been said, we may judge our selves in Matter of Fact; and
all other Opinions in Matters of Faith, pretending to promote Religion in the
World; whether we be sincere Christians, to worship God from this Principle of
Love; or superstitious, to be dragged to our Duty from a slavish Fears, or
Hypoarites to serve him for Worldly Design only: That is, in plain English, we
have here a Test to try our Sincerity, whether we be true Christians, bigoted
Idolaters, or downright Knaves; for I take in, these three comprehend all
Professors of Religion.

But that which we are here principally to observe, is this; That there is (as
has been said) a natural Principle in the Soul of Man, is a coeval Light born
with it, which we may call an Holy Awe of a Divine Power, from which springs in
the Minds of Subjects, as naturally an Awe and Veneration toward Government,
as a Shadow thereof in a Divine Authority, impressed on Magistrates and Rulers,
as God's Vicegerents, appointed as well for the Defense and Security of their
Religion and Government, as of their Lives, Liberty and Property.

Which natural Seed receives its Culture, and is nourished up to greater
Perfection from that Religion, under whose Discipline we receive our Education;
which if it be Orthodox, and Sincere, disposes the Minds of the Subjects of its
Communion to such a ready Conformity, and cheerful Obedience to their Religion
and Government, as to be willing to sacrifice their Lives, and all they have,
for the Honor and Safety of their Religion, their Prince, and their Country.

This I know to be true; as I had the Happiness to be born about the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the Royal Martyr, of Parents, who brought me up in
the Discipline and Nurture of our National Church: And I remember very well,
that when a Child, and in Company with other Children, I have had such a
venerable Sense of my Duty toward my Prince, and such an Awe upon my Mind at
the very sound of his Name, as if Solomon had that Moment whispered in my Ear,
Curse not the King, no not in Eccles. 10. 20.
thy Thought.

But it is as plain, and our own Experience puts it out of doubt, that this
religious and loyal Principle, thus at first inseminated in the Mind, and
afterward by a Sincere and Orthodox Religion, cultivated and nourished up to
greater Perfection, may be as certainly vitiated, corrupted, and changed by a
Jesuitical Discipline, founding Dominion in Grace, the old Holy Cheat, whose
predominant and active Principle, notwithstanding all their Pretenses, is
Ambition and Worldly Design; and their whole Discipline runs counter to that of
our blessed Redeemer, who renounced all Dominion in this World, commanding his
Disciples to render Honor and Tribute to Temporal Rulers and Governors.

And with these their subtle Baits, the Jesuit and Sectary (as our own woeful
Experiences make good) do as naturally poison Subjects, and dispose them with
as keen a Zeal to Separation and Rebellion, as our Orthodox settled Religion
and Discipline, did before to a loyal Conformity and cheerful Obedience.

In order to which they first in secret most falsely and maliciously represent
our Public settled Worship and Discipline, as superstitious and a Relict of
Popery, though all know, and our worst Enemies have allowed it to be the best
tried Bulwork against Popery in Christendom. And further to gain Proselites to
themselves, they most maliciously measuring its Purity by the Scandal and
Offense given by some of our Clergy, and the Vice and Immorality of the worst
Members of our Communion: And the better to promote their Designs, they
display, and lay open, and aggravate the Miscarriages and Infirmities of our
Magistrates and Rulers, nay of our Princes themselves, and all their Ministers,
and Counselors, sparing none, though they be the very Pillars and Support of
our Religion and Government, to render them odious and low in the Minds of the
People, who from thence, as from their Oracle, are easily disposed to speak
Evil of Dignities, and to vilify, and revile our Governors with the most
contemptible Language, the very Harbingers and Forerunners of downright
Rebellion.

For it is but dubbing themselves the People of God; which it is the Interest of
their Preachers to tell them they are, and their own Interest to believe;
though they come far short in the whole Course of their Lives, of many whom
they call the Men of the World, in true Piety and Morality.

And after that, they cannot dip into the Bible, but one Text or another will
turn up for their purpose. If they are denied a Share in the Government,
(though on Terms contrary to Law) they judge themselves stripped of their Right
by Nature and Education, to use their own Words, and hold it lawful, by Force,
to take it from them that oppose them.

And if they are punished for Rebellion, they look on it as Persecution, and
themselves as Martyrs, and their Sufferings as a Mark of their Election: But
when they succeed, and flourish in their prosperous Villainy; then God works
Miracles for their Deliverance, and the Saints are to possess the Earth.

We may perceive by their late railing Pamphlets, they begin to revive their
old Methods, to stir up the Rabble, and to tickle the Ears of the Vulgar; for
they find solid and serious Treatises are too weak Artillery to accomplish
their close and secret Designs; and therefore what they cannot do by Reasoning,
they think to compass by Satyr, and Railing; that they may at least hedge in a
Stake amongst the Rabble; to whose Ignorance, all things are Wit, which are
abusive. And though the most Saint-like among their Party, dare not openly
excuse such Contempt of our settled Religion, and Government; yet they are
pleased with it, and in secret grin at it, with a pious Smile.

Thus we see the Sectary, as well as the Papist, is born with Teeth,
scurrilous, and foul-mouthed, from their Infancy; so that if Spiritual Pride,
Contempt of Superiors, and Slander be Marks of Orthodox Belief, we may
conclude such as these to be -- the most visible Church in the Christian World.

From all which, we may conclude, and for our satisfaction therein, appeal to
every unbiassed Mind, That it is impossible for any Government in the World, to
support, or secure it self long, against such secret, and subtle Enemies, in
its Bosom, without a settled, orthodox Religion established, and inseparably
annexed unto it.

Which is as essentially necessary to the Body Politic, as wholesome Food,
Nurture, and Physic, is to the Natural, to preserve, and fortify its
Constitution, against the Contagion, and virulent Poison of Jesuits, and
Sectaries: And to Train up, and Discipline its Members (as in a sacred
Nursery,) for a continual Supply of sound Pillars to bear up Posterity.

And that our Religion Established in our National Church, is such an orthodox,
and sincere Religion, let the worst of our Enemies be Judges.

As it commands, and commends all that is good; forbids, and condemns all that
is evil; most powerfully excites to a holy Life; has Charity for all that
profess Christianity, (though of different Persuasions,) if holy, and peaceable.

Is founded in the pure Evangelical Principle of Love; the Center of Unity, and
Cement of Christianity; and not in a solitary, slavish Fear, the Principle of
Popery, and Superstition; nor in Hypocrisy, that low, and base Principle, of
worldly Design, Ambition, and Rebellion, which is indeed downright Knavery.

Therefore, as we ought, and as our holy Religion does both teach, and oblige
us, to prefer our Religion, our Prince, and our Country, before our own Safety;

How careful ought we to be in the Choice of our Public Magistrates, and
Officers, as not only the Prop, and Pillars; but the very: Guardians of our
Established Religion, and Government, against the Malice, and subtle Designs of
our implacable Enemies, the Jesuit, and Sectary.

Wherein, if you discharge your Duty, you must of necessity observe these
following Rules.
I. IF you desire to preserve your Established Religion, and Government, you
must be sure to choose such Men into Public Office, and Employment, as are
entirely affected to both; for it is impossible for any Man to be faithful to
either, that is not constant to, and zealous for both. He that is so partial in
his Affection, as to come to the Public Worship in the Morning, and go in the
Evening to a Conventicle, will soon grow indifferent which side to take, and to
serve his own Turn, will readily warp to either, as Interest shall bias him;
Interest being the proper Bait of our Adversaries, to undermine, and overthrow
our Church and Government, by warping our Pillars that should support it; and
by choosing such flexible Timber, you answer their End, betray your Trust, and
do their Work for them.

II. It is both just and laudable in all Corporations, to choose such Persons as
have already born Office, and are in Seniority next in course to succeed,
unless some visible, and apparent Cause be assigned, to render them incapable;
as the best Means to heal our Divisions, and restore Union among us: For the
contrary Practice began our Heats, Animosities, and Dissentions, as the
post-poning of Sir Richard Ford to Sir Samuel Starling, sufficiently testifies.

III. Lastly, Mark, and avoid those busy, seditious Agents, who Devil-like set
us together by the Ears, to strengthen An eminent Instance we had herein, when
Mr. M. M. an Independent-Oracle, led a Troop of his Disciples through the City,
to choose Sir R. P. a Member in Parliament for Middlesex.
their own Party; I mean those Sychophants, who, though they dissent from, and
despise our Established Religion; yet can fawn, and flatter, and run up and
down wheedling our Members by Awe, Interest, or Influence, to incline, and
dispose them to choose such Persons as may most favor their Faction, and be
their most serviceable Tools, to pull down our Fences, and betray our Religion,
and Government.

Therefore brand such Incendiaries, as Treasonable Spies that deserve no
Favor; but the Severity of Martial Law.

And from such, and from all false Brethren, let us earnestly Pray,

Good Lord deliver us.
FINIS.

