A WARNING UNTO Apostates and Backsliders, That formerly have made a Profession
of the Truth, but walk not answerably thereunto.

But are crucifying to themselves afresh the Son of God, and putting him unto
open Shame, and thereby are treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgments of the Lord.

Also A Visitation and Warning To all Workers of Iniquity, that they may Repent
and Turn to the Lord with speed, before his Dreadful Judgments be poured forth
upon them.

By Richard Stubbs.

Printed in the Year 1673.

A WARNING UNTO ALL Apostates and Backsliders, That formerly have made a
Profession of the Truth, but walk not answerably thereunto, etc.
HAving been Convinced of God's Everlasting Truth, which is Christ Jesus, the
Light of the World, which lightens every one coming into the World, which is
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, a Quickening Spirit; the which Light and
Spirit, a measure thereof is given unto all, and appears unto all, whereby the
Lord is clear of the Blood of all that perish in sin; for their Destruction is
of themselves, as the Lord has said in Ages past, Your Destruction is of your
selves, but in me is your Help: For the Light of Christ, or Grace of God, that
brings Salvation, has appeared, and does at this very day appear unto all in
their Hearts and Inward Parts, which is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents
of the Heart, and makes manifest sin, and is of a Divine and Heavenly Nature,
and has no Fellowship with Darkness, but leads out of Darkness, and teaches
all that give up to be taught by it, To deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present Evil World.

And hereby the Works of Darkness, and the Old Man with his Deeds come to be
put off, and the New Man to be put on, which is renewed in Knowledge after the
Image of him that created him; and here no provision is made for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lust thereof: and so let none live in Rioting and Drunkenness, nor
be Overcharged with the Care of this Life, nor Cumber their Minds with the
many things, whereby many are entangled and ensnared by the Net of the Cunning
Hunter, who goes about seeking whom he may Devour; and as many as are ensnared
by him, are off their Watch, and are not waiting in the Light of the Lord in
their own particulars, and so are neither sensible of the Lord's Presence, nor
yet the Workings of the Evil One, whereby many live as without God in the
World, and so are Dead while they Live, and so are Unprofitable to the Lord,
having not a Sense of the Lord's Presence, being gone from his Appearance in
their own particulars, and so cast the Law of God behind their backs; and as
many as disregard and reject that Light in their own Consciences, which appears
against sin, they reject the Lord, and cast his Law behind their backs; and so,
when the Presence of the Lord is not minded, nor his Light taken heed unto,
then Darkness prevails, and the Worker of Iniquity enters, and sows his Seed,
as it was said, While Men slept the Enemy sowed his Tares: But this is the Day
of God's Harvest, wherein he is bundling up the Tares for the Fire of his
Wrath, and making a Separation between the Precious and the Vile, and is
gathering the Wheat into his Garner, where the Enemy cannot enter: And the Lord
is a sure Refuge to as many as believe in his Light, and stay their Minds upon
him, and is a present help in time of Trouble.

I say, When sin appears, when Iniquity would prevail and bear Rule, then by
all that believe in Christ, the ^ight of the World, is the Standard of the Lord
lifted up against the Man of sin, and in the Sttength of the Lord are his
Temptations repelled, and beaten back; and so the Lord is known and witto be a
present. Help in time of Trouble by a Remnant that at this day have their Minds
in some measure turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
the Power of God.

But I was captivated and overcome of the Evil one, by not waiting upon the
Lord, nor having the Loins of my Mind girded up unto the Light, that shines in
the Heart, and appears against Evil; nor having my Mind exercised in the Light
of Christ Jesus (in my own Heart) at all times; so for want of this, a light
and airy spirit begun to prevail, and grew up, whereby the Faithful and True
Witness lay slain, as I may say, in the great City, which spiritually is called
Sodom and Egypt, where also the Lord was crucified, and is crucified and
pierced at this day, as in Days and Ages that are bypast and gone, by all
those that art eating and drinking with the Drunken, and live Wantonly upon
Earth: For spiritual Sodom is within in the Heart, and spiritual Egypt is
within all those that keep the Seed in Bondage, and that will not let it arise:
And so all they that are walking contrary to the Light in their own
Consciences, which appears against sin, they are crucifying the Lord, and
grieving his holy Spirit.

But Blessed be the Name of the Lord forever, who is abundant in Long suffering
and Mercy, and is not willing any should dye in their sins; for, whoever dye in
sin, whither Christ goes thither they never shall come: But the Lovingkindness
of the Lord is extended, and his Light has descended, and the Lord has
reached forth a Hand of Love, and Arm of Salvation, and vouchsafed Help to the
Helpless, even to as many as take heed to the Light in their own Hearts, and
stay their Mind, upon the Lord, do witness the fulfilling the Promise of the
Lord, That they should look upon him whom they had pierced, and mourn over him:
And blessed be the Lord forever, for his Mercy and tender Loving Kindness;
there is a Remnant at this day, who have turned the Eye of their Minds unto
Christ, the Light of the World, whom they have pierced in their own particulars
(as well as others) and have mourned over him, and are now in some measure
walking in the Light of the Lord.

And Blessed and Magnified be the Name of the Lord forever and for evermore,
who has in measure inclined my Heart to wait upon him, that so I may be
enabled to withstand the Appearance of Evil, and the Temptations of the Evil
One, who by his subtle Workings and cunning Devices, seeks to ensnare and
entangle as many as are off their Watch, and not minding the Appearance of
Truth in their own Hearts, which never tempts any Man to Evil, nor consented
unto Sin: but the Evil is judged and condemned by the Light which shines in the
Hearts of all, to discover Sin, and to lead out of Iniquity, and so to Christ
reconciling Man unto God again, who is an Enemy unto God by reason of Wicked
Works; for Sin separates between God and Man, let their Profession be what it
will; without Holiness of Life it is impossible to please God: the Profession
of the Truth it self will little avail any without the Possession thereof, it
will but increase their Condemnation; but they that walk in the Light, and mind
the Appearance of Christ Jesus in their own Hearts, these come to have
Fellowship with the Lord: And here I speak not of things at a Distance, or
because it is thus written, but what I find in my own particular to be true.

And as a Holy, Harmless, Innocent Life comes again to increase and grow up: So
Favor with the Lord and Communion and Fellowship with the Light of Jesus, and
also with as many as walk therein again comes to be witnessed, and so in a Holy
Innocent Life stands the Communion of Saints, and here the Forgiveness of Sins
that are past is known, and the Resurrection of the Body out of Sin witnessed,
even from Death unto Life, from the Death of Sin unto the Life of
Righteousness, the which is lost by Sinning against the Lord, and walking
contrary to the Light; for so I must call it; for in it is no Darkness at all;
I never yet found any, though many through the Darkness of their Minds and
Hardness of their Hearts are ready to charge the Sins and Backslidings of them
that profess the Truth and Light upon the Truth and Light it self: and so many
are saying, We may see what your Light is; And so are speaking Evil of a Thing
they know not, and so are Blaspheming God, and his Tabernacle, and them that
dwell in Heaven.

But unto all such I testify and declare, and it is my Testimony for the Lord,
that the Light which condemns Sin in the Heart, never yet did, and it is my
Belief never will lead into any Sin; but when I was off my Watch, and was not
waiting upon the Lord, to be ordered and ruled by him, then I was sometimes
eating and drinking with the Drunken, and so was crucifying to my self afresh
the Son of God, and putting him unto open Shame, even as Ages have done and are
doing, that are eating and drinking with the Drunken, and living wantonly upon
the Earth, and are crucifying the Just in their own particulars: And herein was
I captivated by Sin, and Peace with the Lord I knew not; but Tribulation and
Wrath from the Lord seized upon me because of Sin, for I was disobeying the
Lord, and so in that State, as I may say, was shut out from the Lord's Presence
and Favor, and at every Entrance was placed a Flaming Sword, which the Lord
has placed for the Destruction of the Man of Sin, and for the cutting down the
Disobedient Nature, and none can enter or come to enjoy Peace with the Lord
again, but as that which has separated and been as a Partition Wall be taken
out of the Way; and so an Entrance is administered again, as the Man of Sin
comes to be slain by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God which is
Quick, Powerful and Sharper then any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
Dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and
Intents of the Heart.

And so at this Day, Blessed be the Lord, there is a Remnant that know the Word
of the Lord to be as a Sword with two Edges, that cuts every Way, even to the
dividing between their Souls and that Spirit of Darkness that would not have
Christ to reign.

And also know the Word of the Lord to be as a Fire, even as a Consuming-Fire
in their own Particulars, and so come to know the Briers and Thorns to be burnt
and burning up, that so Way may be made for the Seed to come forth to the
Praise and Glory of the Lord, that so his Name may be renowned and magnified
above and over all (the Powers of Darkness) whole Majesty is most Excellent and
his Glory to be exalted above and over all that is Mortal, and over all spirits
of Darkness, and over the Prince of the Power of the Air that now rules in
those that rebel against the Light of Christ Jesus.

And a Remnant that have believed in the Light, and in some Measure are walking
therein, do know the Way of the Lord to burn as an Oven which burns up the
Wood, the Briars, and Thorns, and so in some Measure are come to witness the
Man of Sin to be destroyed, even by the Appearance of Christ the Light in the
Heart, and by the Brightness of its shining forth, whose Glory and Brightness
shall yet shine forth, even to the Abasement of all Worldly Glory and
Greatness, and to the Dazelling of the Eyes of the Heathen; for the Lord has
determined to exalt his Truth, and set his King upon his Holy Hill of Sion, and
as many as cleave unto the Lord shall live and reign with him; but whoever
denies him, shall be denied Admittance into Heaven; and the Joy and Peace which
is Spiritual, and that abides forever, they shall never come to witness, who
vilify the Light of Christ Jesus; and whoever rebel against its Holy Command
and Heavenly Operation, all such forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and hew
unto themselves broken Cesterns, that can hold no Water; But unto as many as
wait for his Appearance, and obey his Holy Call, they come to witness the Day
of the Lord to burn as an Oven, and all that is Unrighteous to be consumed or
consuming, and the Unclean Spirit to be driven or driving out of the Land; and
so come to know the Heavens to pass away (with a great Noise, and the Elements
to melt with fervent Heat, the Earth also and the Works that are therein to be
burnt up in this Day of the Lord's Appearance) in their own particulars, and so
are not like the Professors, who are looking for a Day which consists of 12.
Hours, or so, wherein all the Outward Fabric of this visible World, and things
therein, should be on Fire, but are come to witness, and in their Measures to
testify unto the World, that the Day of God is come, wherein he is setting
Fire to the Earthly Part in Man, and the Works that are therein wrought, that
so he may make Way for the Seed of the Everlasting Kingdom to take root
downward in the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women, that so the Fruit of
Holiness and Righteousness may be brought forth to the Praise and Honor of him
who is carrying on this Blessed Work in this the Day of his Appearance; and so
know in Measure the New Heaven and the New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness;
and the Tabernacle of God is with Men, as he has said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and they shall be my People, and I will be their God.

But so long as I was captivated by Sin, though professing the Truth, yet Peace
with the Lord I knew not, neither was there any Stedfastness in my going, but
was hurried up and down as with a Tempest by the Prince of the Power of the
Air, that now works in the Children of Disobedience, who are either Strangers
to the Light, or have turned their Backs upon it, and reject it: As the Lord
has complained in days past, of some who cast his Law behind their Backs, and
would none of his Counsel; and so by Sinning against the Lord, I was treasuring
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgments of
the Lord, which will certainly come upon all the Workers of Iniquity, that are
Disobedient unto the Manifestation of God's Holy Spirit in their own Hearts and
Consciences; a Measure of which Spirit and Light God has vouchsafed unto all,
which reproves all, and waits upon all, and invites all to come unto him and be
saved; and so if any perish in Sin, their Destruction is of themselves; for the
Lord waits upon all, that he may be gracious; that that appears against Evil
and Sin in the Hearts of all, if it be minded, believed in and waited upon, it
will lead out of Sin.

And having known the Terrors of the Lord, and the Indignation of the Almighty,
because of Sin and Transgression, and for Sinning against the Lord, I do warn
all, and exhort all to mind the Day of their Visitation, and not to slight
God's Love; but while it is called to day, harden not your Hearts against that
that reproves, but bow to the Appearance of Christ Jesus in your own
particulars; for this is the Day of God's Love, wherein he is stretching forth
a Hand and Arm of Love and Salvation unto all.

So let all bow unto the Scepter of Christ Jesus, that so Salvation and
cleansing from Sin on this side the Grave thou may come to witness; for as
the Tree falls so it lies, and there is no Work nor Device in the Grave,
whither we are all very shortly going; therefore mind the Lord, and walk in the
Light of the Lamb, and obey the Lord in all things; for every one must receive
according to his Works, and according to this Deeds done in the Body: for the
Lord will not condemn the Righteous, nor clear the Guilty, though the
Professors of this Age hold forth and believe such a thing, and so are wresting
Scriptures to their own Destruction; and they say, That though we are polluted
in our selves, and full of Wounds and Bruises, yet God looks upon us in Christ
Jesus as righteous, and that he will look upon Persons that are polluted with
Sin, as in themselves, yet to be Righteous as in Christ at the same time, while
polluted with Sin as in themselves, and so are imagining a Righteousness by Way
of Imputation, as they call it; but this Device will not avail any; but all
must really come to witness Christ's Righteousness wrought in them, and the
Unrighteousness wrought out, and so to walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, and so come to witness the Strong Man that has kept the House to be
dispossessed, and his Goods to be spoiled by one that is Stronger then he,
which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is the Wisdom of God and the
Power of God to as many as believe in him, and obey him in all things.

Now this is a Business of the greatest Importance and Concernment, inasmuch as
the Soul is of an Immortal Being, and must live or be Eternally either in Joy
and Felicity, or else in Woe and Torment forever and evermore; a Condition never
to be altered, never to be changed; therefore let all and every one of us mind
the Work which lies before us, and work out every one his own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, for it is God that works in us to will and to do of his
own Good Pleasure; and let not any of us spend that little time we are yet to
remain (in these Houses of Clay) in Vanity and Folly, in Rioting and
Drunkenness; but mind the Grace of God that brings Salvation, and appears unto
all, and teaches all that are willing to be taught by it, to deny Ungodliness,
and Worldly Lust, and to live soberly and godly in this present Evil World.

Now the Evil One, who is called the Devil, and Satan, the Enemy of Man kind,
endeavors to keep all Hearts and Minds upon Visible, Fading, Perishing things,
which are but for a very short Season, and the Glory and Beauty thereof must
perish and fade away; and so presenting the Glory of this present World, and
the Delights therein, endeavors thereby to keep all from worshipping and
serving the Lord in Spirit and Truth, and so out of the Sense of an Eternal
State and Being, and from listening to the Voice of Christ Jesus, which is near
at the Heart, that waits upon all, to lead out of Sin, and so to bring into
Fellowship with God again.

But so long as I was captivated by Sin, and was not walking in the Light of
the Lord, so I came to stumble and fall; for he that stumbles stumbles in the
Night, and they that are drunk are drunk in the Night; and so here I was not
regarding the Voice of the Lord, nor walking in his Fear; but was rebelling
against the Light, though the Lord by his gentle Corrections did speak once,
yea twice, yet I regarded not his Call, but was even as a Bullock unaccustomed
to the Yoke, and instead of receiving Correction, I was oftentimes ready to
murmur against the Lord, and repine at his Fatherly Chastizements, though the
true and faithful Witness did oftentimes arise in my Heart, and was a swift
Witness against every thing that was Evil, and this did show unto me that I had
sinned against the Lord, and therefore his Hand was stretched out against me,
and the Lord followed me with his Judgments, and his Judgments are Righteous
altogether, and this was the Lord's Love, Blessed and Magnified be his Name for
ever; for before I was afflicted I went astray, but now in some Measure am
obeying the Voice of the Lord, and herein Peace is witnessed, which is not to
be found in the Way of Sin.

And oftentimes I did resolve in my Mind to be more faithful to the Lord, but
not looking unto him, so Salvation from Sin I fell short of: So Sin prevalled,
and I was led Captive by the Evil One, by not giving Heed unto the Light of
Christ Jesus, which shined in my Heart, and appeared against Sin.

But as my Mind came again in some measure to be retired, and waiting upon the
Light, which reproves for Sin, so I found Strength in some Measure to withstand
Sin; and so, as many as wait upon the Lord will be kept out of Defilement, and
Sin, and Pollution, and so in perfect Peace with the Lord; for there is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, that walk according to the Guidance and Direction of the
Spirit, a measure of which is given unto all to profit withal, which Spirit of
Life and Light is given to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be God's
Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, and none need say in their Hearts, who
shall ascend or descend to bring him up again from the Dead, or bring him down
from above? for the Word is nigh, even in the Heart and Mouth, that we may hear
it, and do it.

But not giving up in all things unto this divine Light which appears in the
Heart against Sin, which Light never consented unto Evil: I say not waiting in
this, the Destroyer entered, and took Possession, and usurped Authority over
both Soul and Body, and so both were defiled, while he whose right it was to
reign, and unto whom both Soul and Body should have yielded Subjection; I say,
he stood without, knocking at the Door of my Heart, and this was his Love, and
this was his Kindness, and this ingages me to love his Appearance; for the Lord
waits that he may be gracious, notwithstanding the many repulses he meets
withal, yet his Patience is lengthened out, and a hand of Love is stretched
forth and extended even to those that rebel against him, that he might have
the Government of Man and Woman whose right it is to rule.

But I was resisting his Appearance, and the Beast-like Nature was seeding over
the Just, the Innocent, the Harmless Life, which as I may say, lay in the
Manger, the Inn being taken up with other Guests, and so I was sleighting the
Lord's Visitation of Love, and grieving his Holy Spirit, and crucifying to my
self afresh the Son of God, and putting him unto open shame, and hereby was
laying a Stumbling Block in the Way of others, through the subtle Wiles of the
Evil One, who goes about seeking whom he may devour, entangle and ansnare by
his subtle Stratagems and Devices whereby he lies in wait to deceive, and by
being overcome of his Temptations, have I provoked the Lord, and laid a
stumbling Block in the Way of others, and been prejudicial to the Salvation of
others, which causes me thus to write, that I may ease my self, and clear my
Conscience in this matter, for I have been regardless of my Words and Ways,
and sometimes was eating and drinking with the Drunken, and so have been a
Partaker of her Sin, and so partook of her Plagues, which will first or last
come upon all, and seize upon all that sin against the Lord.

And by sinning against the Lord, I thereby exposed the blessed Truth of God to
be Contemned and Vilified, and the Professors thereof to be Reproached; and
hereby have given Advantage to the Enemies of God's Truth, and Divine Light,
who do of late, as formerly, seek Occasion against this blessed Light; and are
risen up of late in great Rage against the Truth and the Professors thereof, as
if by their Dialogues, as the Title thereof implies, they would Unchristian the
whole Body of Friends, who have believed in the Light of Christ Jesus, who is
the Head of his Church over all, God blessed forever and evermore; and so they
have Blasphemed God, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven.

And also, I was Hardening others in Wickedness by sinning against the Lord,
and so strengthening the Hands of the Wicked. and rejoicing the Hearts of those
that live wantonly upon the Earth, and are Enemies to the Cross of Christ
Jesus, and are crucifying the just Principle in themselves, which if they would
let arise, it would disperse and scatter all those thick Mists, and that
Darkness which has spread over Nations and People (in this Night of Apostasy)
as it was said, Let God arise, and his Enemies shall be scattered, and he shall
consume them with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the
Brightness of his Coming: and blessed be the Lord forever, a Remnant, whom the
Lord has drawn unto himself in some measure with the Cords of Love, are come
to witness his Light to shine out of Darkness, whereby the Man of Sin comes to
be weakened and worsted, and so the Lord comes to reign in Sion, and to turn
away Ungodliness from Jacob, and so Peace with the Lord comes again to be
witnessed.

And also, I was Sadning the Hearts of the Righteous by Disobeying the Lord,
wherefore the Indignation of the Lord was against me, and his Righteous
Judgments followed me, and his Wrath begun to burn very hot against me, and the
Terrors of the Lord, as I may say, even distracted me, that I was even at my
Wits End, because I had sinned against the Lord, and was bound even Hand and
Foot, as I may say, and cast into Darkness; and my Understanding was darkened,
and Wisdom was withheld from me, even Wisdom as a Man, because I was gone from
the Presence of the Lord, and was not waiting upon him for Counsel and
Instruction, insomuch that at last I was even an Astonishment to my self: and
when I begun to consider my Ways and Doings, I saw, that the Hand of the Lord
was lifted up against me, because I was not watchful over my Words and Ways,
but was running out into Looseness and Vanity, and was sometimes eating and
Drinking with the Drunken; and I became even as a Prey to the Devourer, and
Wasting and Destruction was in my Paths, and Peace with the Lord I knew not;
for I was sinning against him, and grieving his holy Spirit, and so the Lord
took no Pleasure in me, as he has said in days past by his Servants; If any
man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him; and so I became a
Reproach among the Heathen, and a Scorn unto Fools, and was Unfaithful to the
Lord, and was not a Faithful Steward in what was committed to my Charge, and
was not Honoring the Lord as I ought, nor answering his Requirings; but was
doing that which was Dishonorable unto him, and to the Truth which I did
profess, and was not waiting in the Light, whereby I might have witnessed a
profitting in the Fear and Wisdom of the Lord: For, the Fear of the Lord, that
is Wisdom, and a good Understanding have all they that wait in the Light of
Christ Jesus in their ownhearts, that so they may depart from that which is
Evil; that will both discover sin, and give Dominion over it, as it is believed
in and obeyed, and then the Willing and the Obedient will eat the Good of the
Land, and this is the Portion of them that obey the Voice of the Lord: And
thus, so far as I have been obedient, have I witnessed Peace, and in the Lord's
Presence is Life, but out of his Presence is Death and Darkness, Distress and
Anguish, but at his Right Hand are Rivers of Pleasures for evermore.

But now the Rebe Ilious and Disobedient, which will not how to the Appearance
of Christ Jesus in their own hearts, but live in Pride and pleasure upon the
Earth, and so are rejoicing in a thing of naught, the Glory whereof shall soon
fade and vanish away, and are crucifying and piercing the Just, and disobeying
the Lord, they must dwell in a dry Land, and Torment and Woe must unavoidably be
the Portion of all they that will not come unto the Lord, and submit to his
Government, whose Government is a Righteous Government, and his Law is the
Truth.

And so let not any slight the Day of God's Visitation; for this is the Day of
God's Love, wherein he is stretching forth the Arm of his Love and Mercy to
gather people out of the crocked Ways and by-Pathes unto himself; to which end
the Lord appears, and shows unto man his Sin and Iniquity, which keeps the Soul
in Bondage and Slavery, for so I have found it to be: I say, That that reproves
man for sin in the inward parts must be minded and obeyed by all that desire to
have Peace with the Lord: for this same Light, which many are vilifying and
reproaching, is Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, and is that Great Prophet
which Moses spoke of in days past, saying, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things; and whoever
will not hear him, shall be cut off from among my People: And so, let every one
come to hear this Great Prophet, and obey his Voice, that so the Land may be
cleansed of Evildoers; For when the Righteous bears Rule, the Land rejoices;
but when the Wicked bears Rule, the Land mourns (just so) And here I speak not
of things at a distance, or because it is thus written, but what I find in my
own particular to be true; blessed be the Name of our God, who is Light, and
let him be exalted and magnified above and over all forever and evermore.

And so knowing the Terrors of the Lord because of sin, I would persuade all to
wait upon the Lord, and then the Wicked shall not bear rule, but be judged and
condemned by the Light, and withstood in the Power and Strength of the Lord;
and so all to wait upon the Lord in the way of his Judgments, though the
Flaming Sword turn so that the Transgressor cannot enter: yet wait upon God,
and flee not his Righteous Judgments: for the Sword of the Lord is only drawn
against the Transgressor in man, and as that comes to be cut down and burnt up:
so an Entrance comes to be witnessed again and Peace with the Lord ^o be known;
and this is the Way of Sions Redemption, as it is said, Sion must be redeemed
through Judgment, and her Converts through Righteousness, and so Peace with the
Lord will be known; for the Lord will speak Peace to his People; but let not
any turn again unto Folly, and Peace will be witnessed by all they that lay
hold of God's Everlasting Strength, as the Lord has said by the Prophet
Isaiah, if any one will take hold of my Strength, and make Peace with me, he
shall make Peace with me. Now Christ Jesus the Light of the World, is the
Wisdom of God, the Power and Strength of God, and whoever takes hold of this
divine Light which shines in the Heart, and appears against Sin, they take hold
of Gods' Strength, and will witness Peace with the Lord, as they keep unto it:
and says my Soul, Return thou never again unto Folly, but abide in the Light,
and walk therein, and wait upon the Lord in the Way of his Judgments: For Sion
must be redeemed through Judgment, and her Converts through Righteousness.

And so here is not a putting the Day of Judgment afar off, as the Professors
of our Age do, till after Death, or they know not when: but behold the Judge
stands at the Door, that which reproves, that which convinces of Sin in the
Heart, is that which must judge both Quick and Dead; for the Father judges no
Man, but has committed all Judgment unto the Son, and that which appears in
the Hearts of Men and Women against Sin, and all manner of Evil, is the Son of
Righteousness which does appear in the Hearts of Men and Women, and does give a
Discovery of every one's State and Condition, as really as the Natural and
Created Light and Sun appears in the Outward World, and gives a Discovery of
Persons and Things; So really does the Increated Light and Spiritual Appearance
of Christ Jesus shine in the Hearts of all whereby all as they come to receive
of his Life, and partake of his Virtue, do as really grow and flourish in
Holiness, and are fresh and lively to the Lord, as any Outward Tree or Plant
grows, that receives Influence from the Outward Sun.

And so this Son of Righteousness will arise with Healing under his Wings to
them that fear him, and love his Appearance; For he Rejoices in the Habitable
Parts of the Earth, and his Delight is with the Sons of Men: But now here is
the Reason why People and Nations are not healed, but Pride has overspread
the Land, and Oppression bears rule, and Drunkenness, and Swearing, and War,
and Bloodshed; and here is the Abomination that makes Desolate, and this is
the Cause why Iniquity abounds: For though most are in a Profession of
Religion, some in one Way, and some in another; yet they have not God's Fear
before their Eyes, and so are not mindful of the Lord, nor obedient to his Holy
Commands, nor doing unto others as they would others should do to them; but
their minds are run out into the Earth, and are gone a whoring from the Lord,
and so are not following the Lord, nor obeying his Voice, but provoaking the
Lord to pour out his Vials of Wrath and Vengeance; and behold the many Vials of
God's Fury and Displeasure, which have of late been poured forth: And has not
the Lord even overthrown and destroyed some, even as he overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah? and has the Remnant that escaped Repented, and given Giory to the
Lord? And at this very day is the Lord pleading with the Inhabitants of the
Earth by Fire and by Sword, and his Hand is stretched forth still, and the Lord
has sent forth his Angels one after another with Vials of his Wrath and
Indignation, and has poured, and is pouring them out upon the Inhabitants of
the Earth; yet where is that Repentance and for saking of sin the Lord
requires? And though many have been spared with their Lives, though they have
been burnt out of their Houses, yet as Proud as before, as Vain and Wicked as
before, and so are abusing God's Mercies, and provoaking him to his very Face;
and for these things the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the
Earth; because they Repent not of their Deeds, therefore the Vials of God's
Wrath are yet preparing to be poured out because men are not preparing to meet
the Lord by Repentance: And the Lord has determined to make a short Work in the
Earth, and to cut his Work short in Righteousness, and will yet plead with the
Inhabitants of the Earth by Fire and by Sword, both inwardly and outwardly; and
because the Lord will do thus, let all that make mention of the Name of the
Lord break off sin speedily, if it may be a lengthening out your Tranquillity
and Peace, and meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, and bow before his
Presence; For the Lord will put an End to Sin, and finish Transgression, and
bring in Everlasting Righteousness: and therefore says the Lord, Come out of
her, my People, and be ye separate, touch no unclean thing, and I will receive
you; but all that will not come out of Babylon, and be separate, but partake of
her Sins, they must partake of her Plagues: I speak here of Mystery Babylon,
the Mother of Harlots, and of all the Abominations of the Earth.

And having a sense of these things upon my heart and spirit, I do warn all,
and entreat all, to come unto the Son of Righteousness, which shines in the
heart, and appears against sin; and as many as are sheltered here, and are
gathered under the Wings of God's Power, here is safety, and no where else to
be found. And this is the Day of the Lord that does burn as an Oven, and all
the Proud, and all that do Wickedly, and will not turn to the Lord shall be as
Stubble, and shall be burnt up; and so the Determination of the Lord is, to put
an End to sin, and to exalt his Truth over all, and to bring swift Destruction
upon the Workers of Iniquity. Therefore Repent quickly, and break off your Sins
by Righteousness, lest the Lord swear in his Wrath, that you shall never enter
into his Rest, and tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Now remember this, all you that have drawn back from the Lord, and for saken
your first Love; and return unto the Lord before it be too late; for your
Account will be dreadful, and his Spirit will not always strive with man.

And remember these things, all you that are taking your fill of Pleasure, and
spending your precious time in Plays and Pastimes, and Pride, and Vanity, in
Rioting and Drunkenness, and are in the Pollution of the World, and are
gratifying the Flesh, and living Wantonly upon Earth, and Crucifying the Just
in themselves; let your Laughter be turned into Weeping, and your bravery of
Attire into Sackcloth, before the fierce Indignation of the Lord break forth,
and there be no Remedy. Therefore now turn unto the Lord, before your Day be
over, and your Sun set, and while you find any thing striving in your hearts
against Sin, against Pride, against Drunkenness, against Covetousness and
Earthly mindedness; I say, while you find any thing striving in your hearts
against sin, embrace that that appears against sin, love it, cherish it, and
you will find a Growth and Increase in Holiness; but if you reject it, if you
slight it, and rebel against it, it will set upon you, and gross Darkness will
overtake you, and you will come to be a Habitation for every Foul and Unclean
spirit, and never come to know a Habitation in God, nor a Place of Rest when
Time shall be no more: But Woe and Torment forever and evermore will be the
Portion of all those that Rebel against the Light of Christ Jesus in their own
hearts, and will not Return unto the Lord.

And so having pretty well eased my self, and cleared my Conscience in this
Matter, I have little more to say at present, only to warn all, and entreat all
(to mind the Light of Christ Jesus, that reproves man of sin) even those, I
say, that hitherto have been Quarelling and Contending against the Light, and
have, as it were sounded an Alarm of War in the Ears of the people to Battle
(either by printing or otherwise) against the Light of Christ, the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the World, and against the Followers of the Lamb;
but behold, the Lamb and the Saints must have the Victory: And though many
Weapons have been formed against Sion, yet none shall prosper. And what though
the Heathen rage, and the Wicked (who are gone from the Presence and Appearance
of God in themselves) imagine a vain thing, yet the Lord sits in the Heavens
and laughs at them, he will have them in Derision; and the Evil that is done to
Sion, it will be upon Babylon; for it is a Righteous Thing with God, To
Recompense Tribulation to them that Trouble his People: Therefore Repent of all
your Blasphemy and Rage, and turn unto the Lord, before it be too late, and
slight not God's Love.

And whereas in this Book those concerned as Authors of that Dialogue are
charged as being guilty of Blasphemy and Rage against God and his People; if
they shall object and say, This Charge is not sufficient to prove any such
thing: I refer them to those Books, which have of late been published
concerning them, wherein their Blasphemy and Rage, their self-Contradictions,
Lies and SLanders are sufficiently proved, and also their Injustice (to the
People of God called Quakers) manifested. And as to that particular wherein my
Name is brought to public View, I say it is a Lie and Slander.

And whereas he has said, I denied that Christ which was born of the Virgin
and died at Jerusalem, and called him Antichrist: I do declare and testify
that I do confess and unfeignedly believe that that Christ which was born of
the Virgin, and was crucified at Jerusalem was and is the true Christ, the Son
of the Living God, whom the Father has sent into the World, and that whoever
believes in him, shall not perish, but be saved from Sin, and obtain Eternal
Life by him.

And now let all and every one of us mind the Appearance of Christ Jesus, that
discovers and reproves sin when no Eye outwardly sees, for on this wise have I
known God's Appearance against sin, and his Righteous Judgment because of
Iniquity. And let none content themselves with a bare Profession of the Truth
it self; for this will not bring Peace to the Soul without the Possession and
Life of Truth it self; and herein stands the Fellowship and Communion of the
Saints, it is in Obedience to the Lord: and so let all and every one that makes
mention of the Name of the Lord depart from Iniquity; and let none cumber their
Minds with the many things, nor yet mind things too high for them; for hereby
the Evil One will have an Advantage against you: Therefore wait upon the Lord
for Counsel and Advice in all things, and so we shall be preserved from the
many Snares and Intanglements, which they are subject to who have their Minds
abroad, and are gadding and going aftray from the Light So let us all give heed
to this Light, that we may serve the Lord the remainer of our days in
Righteousness and true Holiness, that so we may lay down our Heads in Peace,
and forever be with the Lord.

Southwark, this 10th Day of the 7th Month, 1673. Richard Stubbs.

THE END.

