THE SUBSTANCE OF A LETTER Sent to the MAGISTRATES OF COLCHESTER.

OR, A Hue and Cry SENT AFTER A Ridiculous and Scandelous Paper, put forth by a
cheating, wicked, and deceitful Woman, that subscribes her self SARAH HAYWARD
and is there in Prison, being apprehended, examined, and committed the 22. of
the 2d. Month 1666. being then found in diverse lies and contradictions upon her
Examina^ion.

Given forth for the clearing of the Innocence of the People called QUAKERS.

Printed in the third Month, 1666.

To the Magistrates of the Town of Colchester.
FRIENDS,
AS to the scandalous Paper put forth by that wicked, lewd, lying Woman, who by
our means is detected for her wickedness, and is now your Prisoner: we say we
know little of it to be true, nor does it at all reach us, for we have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but do rather reprove them,
and we are as desirous the wickedness and rottenness of others that have gone
under the disguise of Quakers, should be made manifest, detected and discovered
as hers. But we desire also you would not very readily yield and prostrate your
belief to one that has so egregiously forfeited her credit and reputation with
you, by being found before you in so many notorious lies and falsehoods,
especially when her accusation of others is but to excuse herself, and to
extenuate her own vileness, and to divert you from further searching and prying
into her miscarriages; and also the persons whom she so accuses are at a
distance from her and not here to speak for themselves, and all of them except
two or three as well unknown to us as to your selves. But had she known such
^vils by them it had been far more honest and honorable for her (before her
apprehension, and then it would not have savoured of revenge and malice) to
have declared those things to the Nation, to have made the guilty manifest,
rather then to have gone about deluding and cheating of simple people, or so to
have caused the way of truth and righteousness to have been the more
reproached, by her evil practices and lewd Conversation; and if any that have
passed under the name of Quakers have fallen from the power of truth which should
have preserved them from sin and evil, or others professed a name with us only
in deceit and hypocrisy, yet was that no ground or warrant for her to run into
evil also; we desire she may receive a just recompense of reward for the
wickedness she is found guilty of, and we doubt not but the same hand of
justice has or will find out others, to punish them for their faults also, (if
any such has been) in the several places of their abodes. As for our parts we
can truly say our attaching of her was not the effect of any passion or enmity
we had to her person, but to her lewd wicked practices, which we have heard of
for above three years past. As in many places borrowing Money, and pretending
she would bring it or send it again in a few days but never did. And sometimes
pretending to leave Gold in pawn, and instead of Gold pieces would leave
Shillings sealed up, telling people there was so many pieces of Gold. And
sometimes borrowing Scarfes, Hoods, Riding Clothes, promising to leave them at
some remarkable Friends house, and did not. And much more such wicked and
ungodly actions too tedious to relate*
Such as she is has caused the way of truth and righ^eousness to be evil
spoken of, and the name of God to be blasphemed, whose condemnation slumbers
not, whose latter end is worse then their beginning, and for whom it had been
better they had never been born. And yet if ye consult with Scripture ye will
in all ages and generations find there has been such as has turned from the
way of Righteousness into crooked and by paths; for in Abraham's Family, there
was an Ismael as well as an Isaac, in Isaac's Family an Esau as well as a
Jacob; among the Twelve a Judas; in the Church of Philadelphia those that said
they were Jews, and were not, but did lie, and were of the Synagogue of Satan;
and in the Church of Corinth an incestious person, and in several other
Churches of the Gentiles, those that drew back unto perdition, that went out
from them being not truly of them, for had they been of them they would have
continued with them as the Apostle testifies: But, supposing the matter to be
true, which we believe is much of it lies and falsehood, if twenty persons or
more in 16. years experience have turned aside and drawn back unto perdition,
in whose soul the Lord will take no pleasure. As that is no new or strange
thing, so it shall not afright or deter us from walking in the way of truth and
righteousness, in which we have found peace and satisfaction to our souls; but
rather invite and exci^e us to walk the more accurate and circumspectly, and to
make straight steps to our feet, least any among us also fall into the same
snare of the Devil, apd that was the use the Apostles made of the Apostasy and
backs^ ding of some in former ages, Let us take heed least there be in any of
us an evil heart of unbelief, etc. And labor to enter into that rest least
others falling after the same example of unbelief come short of it, Heb. 4. 11.
And although we have affirmed and do still affirm, that the light with which
every man is enlightened with, being believed in, obeyed, followed, is
sufficient to save, and does lead to the light of life, yet we never did nor do
we at this day affirm, that it saves or preserves any from siu and evil further
then they are led and taught by it, and are obedient to i^; for to those that
rebel against it the light is their daily condemnation, it is the savor of
death unto such; and as Job speaking of the Twilight to the thief or murderer
its as the shadow of death unto them; for although the Grace of God which
brings Salvation which has appeared unto all men, teaches to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, yet they are not obedient to it, but receive it in vain,
that turns the Grace of God into lasciviousness. And as to her accusations we
say in general, they touch us not, we challenge the worst of our adversaries to
declare and make manifest what evil they have found by us, and we hope through
Grace to make it manifest to all men that we are not of those that draw back
unto perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul, and we also
hope through the same Grace to hold fast our profession without wavering, and
to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men which watch for our halting by
our good Conversation.

And whereas she challenges us to accuse her if we can of any incivility she
acted among us while she walked with us, we answer, had she lived in the truth
unto this day, which she says she once lived in, (though we have none but her
own words for it) there had been no cause for the several accusations which are
brought against her at this day, and many more will be brought against her as
she well knows, which is the true reason why she conceales her right name and
has passed under several names, and also the place of her abode, which we
desire she may be detained until she does reveal, and also till a testimonial
do come from the said place, that her report therein is true, (being she has
told you that her dwelling house is against the white Lion in Southwark, and it
has not been found so) and this we hope you will judge reasonable, and so let
it be manifest, you are a terror to evil werks and workers and bear not the
Sword in vain. And whereas she says she once walked innocently and
unblameable, we answer, we know not that, but were it so -- that will no more
excuse her, then it will excuse the fallen Angels, of whom Jude speaks, who
keeping not their first estate, but lost their pristine habitation, and are now
reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the judgment of the great
Day, for it is not what we were Years or Weeks past, or what we formerly
could witness of the Lords presence and preservation; but what we can witness
the Lord is to us, and what he is in us to day, that must speak us peace and
satisfaction: So in that which sets Truth a top of all deceit and deceivers. We
rest your Friends.

Colchester, 4th. of the 3d. Month, called May, 1666. Jo. Furly, Junior.
George Wetherly. Daniel Deacon. Solomon Furmely. John Pike. Nicholas Prigg.


POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the giving forth of the said scandalous Paper, it has been received by
some honest and faithful Men of diverse Counties; whose Testimony concerning Her
Paper is as follows: That many things therein contained are notoriously
false, as if need require may be made appear, diverse honest and faithful Men
and Women being by her accused whose innocence is apparent in the Country where
they live, and those things that have an appearance of Truth we need not to
deny, having denied the Persons by whom such things were acted long ago, many
of them long before those abominations were acted by them, and though diverse
have turned from the way of Truth, and others have taken up the profession of
it for a Cloak of their ungodliness, and thereby to accomplish their own ends
and designs as she has done, who are no more to us then she is: yet this will
not render the way of Truth odious to wise and sober Men, nor be sufficient
cause for any to judge the worse of those who according to the Principles of
truth do hold their integrity, and keep faith and a good Conscience; so as none
have cause to be elevated, or glory over us who are innocent, or to villify the
way of truth owned by us, either from her slanders against some, or pollutions
of others, who are denied by the innocent People called Quakers, neither would
the Magistrates or People of England, be dealt so by, or generally accused,
because of the scandalous lives and enormities of many of their Priests and
members, which would fill Volumes to repeat; And therefore considering how
deceitful and false this said Woman has appeared, and is like further to be
manifested by her cheats and falsehoods, which through most Counties of this
Nation she has acted, we hope that the Magistrates of Colchester will appear
more ingenious, and more prize their own reputation, then either give credit or
way to her revilings, or have a hand in the divulging of them; for that if her
Paper should be further divulged in the Nation, diverse innocent Persons therein
slandered and calumniated with others that know their innocence will be
necessitated to testify against her; her Paper and the abetters and promoters
of it: so we wish all to be moderate and ingenious in such causes; and for as
much as she has been much talked of through the Nation, of many pranks and
deceiving tricks acted by her in Corners and By* places among simple people;
for the prevention of the like for the future, let all take notice of the
Description of her Person, as follows.

A tall woman somewhat long vizaged, freckled face, pock-broken and red hair,
and flaxen colored brows, a pretty full eye, and very confident, impudent and
subtle; but as for name or place of abode, she has gone by so many, as Sarah,
Mary, Susanna, etc. sometimes Brierley Cole, whitehead, Travers, Hall,
Robinson, Wilson, etc. sometimes of Bristol, London, Stratford, Southwark,
Chelmsford, Ipswich, Whitby, Newcastle, etc. that it is in vain to mention any,
or describe her by any one, one more then another, her certain Name and Country
being yet unknown, even to the Magistrates themselves.

THE END.

