Mulierum Amicus: OR, The Woman's Friend; Plainly discovering all those Diseases
that are Incident to that Sex only, and advising them to cure, either 1. By
those Receipts prescribed. OR, 2. By certain Secret Arcanums and Specifical
Medicines.

The Author hereof Living at the Sign of the Golden Ball and Flower-Pot in
Mark-Lane in Tower-Street, and is Lycensiate in Physic, and Student in
Chemistry; known commonly by the Name of Nich. Sudell.

Printed for the Author, and is to be sold by J. Hancock in Popes-head-Alley,
in the Year 1666.

Courteous Reader.
BE thou man or woman, thou must know that to further the knowledge and
understanding, and to supply with medicines for diseases, those that know not
what I have writ, nor were capasitated to do as now by this they may; are the
Persons whom in special I intended it for. And therefore if thy attainment be
so high, and thy ability reach so far as this directs to, thou art not the
person for whom this pains is taken; yet in some respect it may not be
unprofitable nor unserviceable unto thee, though I must confess to others more,
to whom I commend it, and advise them to consider what they read in order to
practice to themselves and others, according as their wisdom shall think fit.
And I entreat all not to condemn, disdain, or enviously to quarrel with this
little Book, the end of which its coming into the world, whatsoever the work
may be, was to do good.

Farewell, and love your Friend, N. S.

To the truly Virtuous, and most accomplished Lady, The Lady Bloodworth; Wife
to the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Bloodworth Lord Mayor of the City of London.
TOGETHER, With the Noble Ladies and Gentlemomen, Wives to the Right Worshipful
Knights and Gentlemen, the Sheriffs, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, and to
either of them, the Author hereof wishes happiness and well-being, here and
hereafter.
Most Noble Ladies and Gentlewomen.
SOlomon the wisest of men, tells us, there is a time for every purpose. That
this is a fit time for my purpose is unquestionable to me, the season calling
for doing good; and according as my station is, I would be found improving my
talent.

But possibly, my being a stranger, though not to all, yet to the most of you,
may cause some admiration of this my Dedication; but before you judge me in
this case, I beseech you peruse these ensuing lines that I present you with,
and then, if my crime be beyond your clemency to pardon, I must submit to your
censures; but if not, passing over my presumption and failings, I hope this my
first endeavors in this nature will be favored with your good will, (...) and
acceptance; besides, my Ladies and Gentlewomen, there is a fourfold
consideration which emholdned me to offer this my single Quiller unto your
protection and acceptance.

1. By reason of the weakness of the Author. Though the matter herein be of
weight and concernment, and I doubt not but will be to the service and
advantage of many; but my self being of no great name in the world, never
endeavoring it, possibly though the book were never so profitable might not be
so esteemed: That therefore it may be of more general service, and be prized as
it deserves, I took the boldness to put your names at the front hereof, knowing
that those gardens, flowers or Galleries, that you delight to gather and walk
in, is enough to oblige and encourage others, and that your generosity,
ingenuity and authority will add a luster to these my mean labors and
endeavors; neither let any despise nor undervalue these lines, because of my
acknowledgment of my own weakness, considering that he that is wise in his own
conceit, there is more hope of a fool than him, and the way to be wise is to
become a fool; but let them read before they judge, and I dare warrant, without
it be of them who know more, to whom this is not intended, neither my self for
writing, nor you Ladies for accepting shall receive any thing, save thanks and
respect.

2. In regard of the fitness of your Persons, for indeed works of this nature,
are not fit to be presented to all persons, though of your own sex, unless
there be that sobriety, and those qualifications that such a work of such a
nature does require. The Proverb is, It is not good to cast Pearl before Swine.
There is many a choice Pearl in this little book; and that they might come or
be cast before such as know what Pearl is, and the virtues and use thereof, I
were ambitious to lay it before you, not questioning or doubting of those
choice and enriched endowments as are suitable to such a subject, and thereby
will become profitable and advantageous unto you, which brings me to the third
thing, and that is

3. To further your knowledge (a things doubtless desired amongst you) that
those things which you understand and see not (through the Pride and Malice of
men) you may apprehend and perceive, 1. What you are. 2. What liable unto. And
3. What assistance you have.


1. That you may the better apprehend and perceive what you are; that is, how
you stand distinct from man, and that in the one particular in special, the
womb, I have showed you what it is, to what end created, the figure of it, the
form of it, the nourishment of it, and the supporters of it, and no more may be
expected from me here, not intending anatomical lectures, or endeavoring after
that which, as a good man says, is too wonderful for me.

2. What you are liable unto; for although the womb be a gallant piece
curiously wrought by the best of workmen (if I may so say with reverence) yet
it is subject to innumerable company of diseases and calamities, which I have
endeavored to unfold unto you by dividing it into three parts, giving you the
diseases that are incident to either, in the easiest and plainest method I can.
And then.

3. That you may perceive what assistance you have; for as I have told you the
womb is subject to very many infirmities, so there are very many supplies and
remedies, God having provided in his love in that case, as well as laid
punishment to show his justice in the other; and that which has most troubled
me, is, that many good women have suffered in many distempers, though things by
or easy to be had, by reason of their being ignorant of the virtues of them,
might have been made and given either by themselves, or some good Gentlewoman
their neighbor, and been relieved. Now in this you will find to every disease,
a certain receipt or medicine for the same, with directions concerning it, and
they none of the meanest; so that you may plainly apprehend that you have a
plentiful supply in all cases, though notwithstanding possibly in some cases,
and to some persons, the medicines there directed to, may not always cure; yet
in that case I leave you not destitute, having mentioned several secret
Arcanums and specifical medicines in my hands in order, by Gods blessing, to
cure the most inveterate diseases which probably might have been also
communicated, only chemical operation is required in most of them.

4. To further your ability to do. Only to know is not so commendable nor so
sufficient as to do, also in order thereunto I humbly offer you supplies to
help you. 1. To compound medicines. 2. To direct medicines. 3. So supply others
with medicines.


1. In order to help you in the composition of medicines. I do not only tell
you such a Mineral, such a Vegetable, such an Animal, is good for such and such
a disease, but I discover unto you how they must be ordered, compounded or
mixed, and with what and when, as also the several quantities both of the one
and the other, that so the medicine may not be defective, but complete to all
intents and purposes, whereunto a medicine is applied or administered.

2. In order to help you to a direct medicine. It would be little or no
advantage, especially in some particular medicines, for you to understand the
making of such and such a good medicine, if withal you were not able to give
directions as to the taking of the same; as what dose must be given, what time
it must be given, and how it must vary, at what time, in what disease, or to
what person, with the observations that ought to be both before and after the
taking thereof; therefore in this regard also I have not been wanting, but
have annexed to the receipts, what ought in order to their taking be observed
or taken notice of.

3. In order to supply others with medicines, besides the delight that most
Ladies and Gentlewomen have in looking into Physic and medicines. I doubt not
but also charity is as a spur unto many, that so they may not do something to
please their senses only, and in some measure serve themselves, but to to help
and redress the griefs and maladies of their poor neighbors, which are not
able to help themselves other ways. Those noble spirits may here be further
furnished in order to such a good work, which to provoke unto, if my small mite
shall be found concerned, and they receive good thereby, I should be glad and
rejoice.

Thus courteous Ladies and Gentlewomen, I have in a plain style, without
Eloquence or Complement, (that not becoming such a work) Apologized unto you
and it is all I shall say in the case at this time; only I beseech you to
pardon me in respect to the subject, being necessary and weighty; inrespect to
the method, being easy, though plain; in respect of the language, being as
sober as the case would allow; in respect of the brevity, being full, though
short in some particulars; and to accept of the pains of him, who as now in
this case, so at all times, and in all cases, is ready to assist and serve you.
In testimony of which, I subscribe my self

Your humble Servant and ready helper in time of need, N. S.

WOMEN'S DISEASES DISCOVERED, AND Their CURE offered.
GOD was wonderful in the Creation, but most wonderful in the Creation of Man,
and out of him Woman; Man being the most curious piece, and woman no way
inferior, in that being made complete like unto man, save only with some
difference in both, respecting generation; which parts in women, as they are
distinct and peculiar, so they are accompanied with distinct and peculiar
diseases, of which I treat.

And those are called women's discases, which come from the defect of that part
distinct from men, viz. the Womb the Mother or Matrix, which was appointed by
God to be the field of Nature, to receive the seed of man and woman, for the
procreation and continuation of mankind; the parts of it are two, Os uteri, the
mouth; and fundus, the bottom of the womb.

In figure it is like a pear or Cupping-glass, having no distinct cell, as the
womb of beasts have: It is framed of two membrances; the external springs
from the Perisonleum; the internal is full of small holes, where the womb
covers the Intestinum rectum, and by those small holes the course or menstrual
blood issues.

For no^tishment, it has both veins and arteries springing from the Vasa
preparantia ramus hypogastricus, and from H^p^gastricae. The sinews
appertaining to (...) from the sixth conjugation, and are small.

It has also four Ligaments, (...) above, and two below; the two uppermost are
loose and soft, that they might admit dilatation with the womb when a woman is
with child, or constriction when she is not.

The two lowermost are nervious, round and hollow, and go down to the groyn, by
the production of the Peritonceum, fortified by the Glandules, and this causes
that pain that women sometimes feel after conception in the inside of the
thigh. And by these vessels, arteries, veins and nerves, the womb has consent
with all the rest of the body, occasioning, as Democr^^us to Hippocrates by
letter signifies, six hundred miseries, and innumerable calamities, of which we
shall briefly treat, passing what might be said concerning the adjuncts, viz.
Cunnu^ and Testicles, or stones of women; they having such things as well as
men, only differing in situation, quantity, frame, substance, temperature, etc.
Having therefore given you a definition of the womb, I know it is needless to
tell you the place or situation of it, all knowing that: I come now to speak of
its diseases and cures.

Observe therefore with me, a threefold division of the womb, viz.

The Vessels. Body of the womb or cavity. Parts serving for the noblest act of
generation.


Each of these three have their several diseases.

First, From the distemper of the vessels of the womb, and the preternatural
causes.

Come, 1. Chlorosis, or Green Sickness. 2. Stoppage of the Courses. 3.
Immoderateness thereof. 4. The Whites. 5. Rage or madness of the womb. 6. The
Mother fits.


Secondly, In the body or cavity of the Womb are, 1. Inflammations. 2. Ulcers.
3. Scyrrhus. 4. Cancer. 5. Gangrene. 6. Dropsy. 7. Falling down. 8. Shutting
up thereof.


These hindering generation but by accident.

Thirdly, The diseases which are, in respect of conception, generation,
breeding and bringing forth, are, 1. Barrenness. 2. Acute and chronical
diseases of women with child. 3. Abortion or miscarriage. 4. Difficult bringing
forth. 5. A dead child. 6. Secundine, or afterbirth retained. 7. Immoderate
flux-blood. 8. Suppression of blood. 9. Acute diseases of women in childbed.


Of all which in order, and as plain and brief as may be, only I must premise
three things; First, that you may not expect to have me so large as to give you
an account of these diseases in a general way, as their differences, causes,
signs, prognostics, etc. only the definition of the disease, the signs and
cures thereof, and that the most principal, thereby informing your judgments,
as to do your selves right, which is the end of my writing.

Secondly, That you may not expect this Book to be stuffed with multiplicity of
receipts or needless medicines, but the principal of the Galenical Art, so far
as Authors make manifest, and I have proved.

Thirdly, Neither may you expect these Arcanums and specifical medicines spoke
of, to be at this time made manifest or public, having reasons sufficient to
the contrary; besides, that many of them are Chemical preparations, and none of
them made without fire, and the help of Chemical utensils or vessels, but shall
reserve them as yet to my self, only always ready, either to give or sell such
quantities, and at such prizes as the persons may be capable to give, and the
medicines deserve: And indeed, they are very cheap considering their efficacy;
which things I was more than ordinary concerned to study, being my medicines
hitherto, though acknowledged to be very excellent and choice, yet complained
of by some for their dearness; which although I have now endeavored to remedy,
yet not so far as to detract from the worth of the things.

These persons complaining, not considering the great charge, trouble,
excellency and worth of Chemical preparations above others, but thinking hard
of giving four, six, or ten shillings for a small bottle of some Spirit, Tinct,
Elixar, or other medicine, not examining who is the greatest gainer, whether
they that furnish them possibly with three, four, five, perhaps six quarts for
the same money, or we, they only making it by decoction, etc. we by
calcination, sublimation, liquation, salification, precipitation, purification,
so separating the pure from the impure, administering only the most pure part of
any Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable, they both together; yea, not only so, but
the best many times lost by their way of compounding; or if not so, yet the
body of the thing being not opened according to Chemical Art, does not operate
effectually. But of this no more here.

Having thus premised, I come now to the business it self, and I begin with
these distempers of the vessels of the womb; and the first is, Chlorosis or
Green Sickness; and according to promise, I shall observe this method, viz. 1.
To give you the definition of the discase, or tell you briefly what it is. 2.
To give you the most principal common signs of such and such diseases, thereby
helping your judgments that you may look for Cure. 3. To give you some choice
and notable Receipts, in order to Cure that disease you find your self to lie
under, or are creeping into.


In all of which, God direct my Pen in writing, and cause you to be humble and
sober in reading.

1. Then the Chlorosis or Green Sickness; it is also called the White fever,
the Virgins disease, the white Jaundies, etc. and may be defined thus.

An evil habit of body from the obstructions of the Veins, of the Liver,
Spleen, Mesentery, and especially the womb, whereby the whole passage of blood
is hindered, which abounding in Virgins when they begin to have their Courses,
and being hindered by its natural course, by those obstructions, turns to the
upper parts and oppresses the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Midriff, and other parts;
destroying natural heat, and bringing evil concoction in the bowels; and is
known by these signs following. 1. The face and all the body is pale and white,
and sometimes of a lead color, blew and green. 2. Swelling face and Eyelids,
especially after sleep, the legs also soft and loose, especially about the
Ancles. 3. Heaviness and idleness in the whole body. 4. Difficult breathing,
especially when they move themselves, or go up a hill or stairs. 5. Palpitation
of the heart, and beating of the Arteries of the Temples. 6. Often great Head
ach, sometimes before, and sometimes behind, according as from whence vapors
ascend. 7. For the most part a swift Pulse. 8. Sleep very sound, sometimes till
noon. 9. Loathing wholesome Meat, covering that which is not convenient to be
eaten. 10. Stoppage of the monthly Courses, which shows the disease to be at
the height.


Now to help you in the Cure of this discase, consider it lies in three things
chiefly, viz. In opening obstructions, in correcting the distemper of the
bowels, and in strengthening the same, which to do I advise you to use these
ensuing medicines.

1. Give this Purge in a morning, with those common observations which are used
in taking Physic. Take Rosin of Jalap ten grains, Diacatholicon and Conserve
of red Roses, of each half an ounce; Crem. Tartar twenty grains, Salt of
Mugwort four grains: mix them altogether, and give this Bolus upon the point of
a knife, etc.

The next thing is Bleeding, and concerning the place, observe this: That if
the body abound with gross and evil humors, you then take the arm first; if
not, the foot; only remember, that when the lower veins are opened, it be done
toward the full of the Moon, when the Courses use to come down: or if they have
not yet appeared, when the party is most afflicted.

Soon after her bleeding make this medicine, and administer it every morning
the first thing, causing her to exercise after it for several mornings
together, the quantity of three ounces, forbearing meat or drink for two or
three hours; the medicine is this.

Take of the filings of Steel four ounces, Eryngo roots, and Elicampane, of
each one ounce and half, flowers of Broom, Rosemary, Betony and Epithimum, of
each half a handful, red Coral, and shavings of Ivory, of each six drams,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamons, Saffron, of each two drams, White wine six pints;
Steep these things, being bruised or beaten, in the wine for eight days,
keeping it close stopped and in a gentle heat in hot water or embers; then strain
it, and use it as aforesaid.

And in the mean time supply her with Conserve of Mugwort, the quantity of one
ounce once a day, before Supper with six grains of Crem, Tartar; and by Gods
blessing the Cure will be performed; but if not, then we must come higher, to
Diuretical and Diaphoretical medicines, which never fail: Such of which I am
always provided with, for the good and benefit of all; which Arcanums and
Specifical, medicines are not at this time to be made public, no not to the
Sons of Art.

And so I conclude my discourse concerning the Green sickness; only my advice
further is, that the Parents of such persons as have this disease, or others
who are concerned, would prudently and timely provide marriage for them; much
of the Cure of this disease lying in Carnal Copulation, as experience has and
does teach every day more or less, the vessels of the womb becoming thereby
much enlarged, etc.

2. Stoppage of the Terms or Courses.

The terms are said to be stopped, when in a woman ripe of Age, which gives not
Suck, and is not with Child, there is seldom small or no evacuation of blood by
the womb, which uses to be every month.

Signs are manifest; but because it comes either from natural or preternatural
causes, I shall lay down some distinguishing signs, whereby you may discern
whether they stay, from being with Child yea or no, or from some other
preternatural cause; and herein I shall be serviceable to all good women that
shall well mind, and seriously consider what I write.

1. If the Courses stop by Conception or being with Child, there is retained
cominonly the natural complexion; but others usually are pale and ill-coloured.

2. The Symptoms which women with Child have at the first, do daily decrease;
but in other stoppage of the terais, by how much the longer the terms stop, by
so much the more the Symptoms increase: mark it.

3. In women with Child, after the third or fourth month, there may be
perceived the situation and motion of the Infant, by laying a warm hand upon
the inferior belly; in others there is a tumor to befelt; but it is phlegmatic,
not hard, neither is it proportionable to the womb.

4. If a wise and ingenious Midwife touch the inward mouth of the womb, it will
not be so close shut as it is in women with Child, but rather hard contracted
and full of pain.

5. Women with Child are commonly merry and little disturbed; but when terms
are otherwise stopped, they are sad and forrowful.

Cure, Supposing the suppression of the the Courses by obstructions of the
veins of the womb.

You may begin the Cure with Blood-letting, if it do plainly offend either in
quality or quantity; only be advised where and when.

Then proceed to the use of these things one after another, which are
prescribed for the Cure of the Green Sickness; but if their disease be so
rebellious as not to give way to the former Remedies, my advice then is, that
you Purge with this following.

Take Pil. Arabica. which the Apothecary will help you to, two scruples, and of
Oil of Amber four drops mixed with it; be in your Chamber that day, and
drinking Posset, as is ordinary in taking Physic.

Two or three days after make this medicine following, of which give four
ounces every morning the first thing, and every night the last thing, viz. Take
Gromwell seed, Aniseed, Misselto of the Oak, of each six drams, Ditany of Creet
and Cammomil flowers, of each two drams, Saffron and Cinnamon of each one dram;
beat what is to be beaten, and steep all night in two quarts of good white
wine; in the morning boil it a little, keeping it close covered, then strain it
and use it, begging Gods blessing, obtaining which undoubtedly it will answer
expectations. All these being principal receipts amongst the Galenical tribe.
But if these do not produce such effect as may be and is expected, despair not;
for there is yet other things in our hands which is out of your reach, being
Chemical preparations, that will undoubtedly reach and answer all intentions,
desires and purposes, the blessing of God concurring. And let not others
through their Pride and Covetousness, nor your self, by your ignorance and
wilfulness upon any account, be kept from using those things that the God of
all grace has provided for you; for a though slanderously by a veiled
generation of men, Chemical medicines are accounted and reported dangerous,
which is the great Bugbear, with which they would fright people, that so they
might keep up their babble; I do affirm, I am willing at any time to justify,
God bearing me witness, that I never made or prepared a Chemical medicine in my
life, neither shall I, but what has been, and may safely, and without the
least danger, be given unto little Children. And so I come

3. To the Immoderate flux of the Courses, a disease which is not without
detriment to many good women.

Women's monthly Courses being moderate in quantity, and flowing in due season,
are natural; but if they exceed in quantity or come too often, or stay too
long, they are to be accounted immoderate, and besides the intent of nature,
etc.

Signs are manifest by the definition, however its known by 1. Ill bearing of
the Patient. 2. Decay of strength. 3. Want of appetite to meat. 4. Indigestion
of humors. 5. Ill habit of body. 6. Color of the face like a dead Corpse. 7.
Swelling of the legs, and other most grievous maladies caused by decay of
natural heat.


Cure. It must begin by blood-letting in the arm, not all at once, but by
degrees, and so she must bleed plentifully as much as her strength can bear.

And if the Patient can bear the same, a Vomit will be convenient, especially,
if the party be prone or apt to vomit: which may be done with warm water a
pint, and Syrup of Squiles two ounces, tickling the throat immediately after
with a feather. After which let this following medicine be given every morning,
and every night, the first and last thing.

Take the rind of four sower Oranges, Bistort and Tormentil, of each one ounce,
the outward rind of the Mulberry-tree, two ounces, Plantain and Sheepherds
Purse of each a handful; slice and bruise those things that require it, and
boil for a full hour in six pints of water; then strain it, and add Syrup of
Quinces four ounces, the Dose is half a pint as aforesaid.

Outwardly apply a Plaster to the belly, spread upon leather, and bound on, of
the ointment called Vnguentum Comitisse, its to be had at the Apothecaries.

Let them drink Beer and Milk often wherein is quenched red hot Steel; and
before Diuner, for sometime together, let them take old Conserve of red Roses
one ounce, with one dram of the powder of Egg-shells, which said things not
often fail, sometimes do; and then we must come to our higher Arcanums and
specifical medicines, with which I am provided, and have cured many, not only
old in years, but old inveterate fluxes; to the praise of God I speak it.

The next thing is the Whites.

A woman is said to have the whites, the woman-flux, the flux of the womb, or
the white menstruals, when excrementitious humors do flow from her womb either
continually, or at least without any certain order or course of time observed
in their flowing, being sometimes white and phlegmatic, sometimes pale or
yellow, sometimes greenish and waterish by the admixture of serous humors: Also
this disease is wont for the most part to seize upon grown women, and those of
riper years; yet are not Virgins all free from the same, so that some have done
ill in affirming that such Maids as are troubled with this disease have lost
their Virginity; my reason is this.

If Virgins have the veins of their wombs so large that their wonted courses
can flow through them; why may not the whites drop out of the same passages,
seeing they are many times more thin and fluxive than the blood it self, which
is an experienced truth, and daily Practice teaches as much, viz. That the
most chaste and perfect Virgins in the world have had this infirmity, etc.

Signs. The disease is easily known by the relation of the party, and is
oftentimes attended with diverse symptoms, etc.

1. Paleness of the face. 2. Want of appetite, sometimes with fickness of the
stomach. 3. Short breathing and weakness. 4. Swelling of the Eyes. 5.
Pensiveness and sadness. 6. Several pains, as the Head, Heart, etc.
Cure. Omitting Blood-letting in this case, the first thing is to cleanse the
body of the peccant humors; and therefore give this following Vomit in the
first place, viz.

Infusion of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, Syrup of Squils half an ounce, mixed,
and give it in a morning fasting blood-warm give Posset, and keep warm after
it, etc. The next day save one take this Purge; Rosin of Jalap ten grains,
Cinnamon in fine powder half a scruple, mix them and take it in a little
Chicken broth, and drink of the broth afterward; take it in a morning.

After this, all those things spoke of in the immoderate flux of the Courses
may be given; unto which I shall only add a decoction made with Lig. vita,
Sassafras, China, and red Rose-leaves, sweetened with syrup of Coral, Quinces,
or Spearmint, of which let her take daily half a pint for a month together.

But possible some good woman or other may judge my pains in this disease might
have been spared, many having had it for many years without hurt or danger; to
such I would say, not without damage: for though in one respect this disease
may be called good, because not attended with danger of Death; yet observe, it
may be accounted bad, yea a very bad and stubborn disease, forasmuch as the
flux of evil humors having once taken this course, is very hardly turned out
of its channel, because the womb is the draught of the whole body; so that if
this infirmity get head, it may and commonly does bring many other Evils upon
the Patient, viz.

1. Barrenness. 2. Falling down of the womb. 3. Exulceration. 4. Cachexia, or
evil habit of body. 5. Dropsy. 6. Consumption, etc.
And therefore having those Evils attending it, I think it concerns me to
endeavor to remove it as other diseases; to which purpose, I have, as for the
rest, made provision of other things, if those directed to shall fail. And so I
pass to the next, and that is

Rage or Madness from the Womb.

Womb-fery is a sort of madness, arising from abundance of Seed, being
Acrimonious and hot, transcending the bounds of Nature, thereby causing a
vehement and unbridled desire of carnal imbracement; which desire dethrones the
rational faculty so far, that the Patient utters wanton and lascivious
Speeches, etc.

Signs may easily be gathered by what is said; but because it is wont to
discover it self gradually by little and little, I shall briefly relate its
progress; in the beginning, whilst the party injoys their understanding, they
are more sad and silent than ordinary, but sometimes with a wanton rolling eye
and ruddy countenance, especially when mention is made of matters belonging to
bodily lust, for then both Breath and Pulse changes, which has occasioned
sometimes some whispers from me to compose themselves, to some inclinable to
this infirmity. Afterward, when the disease is exasperated, they begin to
scold, weep, and ever and anon to fall out laughing; they speak many things
without time and reason, out of which no certain sign can be gathered: A while
after they repent of their solly, until another fit take them by reason of the
inordinate motion of the peccant matter, which observes no certain period in
its fermentation, etc.

Cure. The cure of this disease tends to correct the hot distemper of the
bowels, especially of the womb, and the blood, and seed; likewise to evacuate
the sharp humors, and seminal matter offending.

In order thereto let blood pretty plentyfully, and reiterate the same if the
person be plethorick or abounding with blood; then give this Purge.

Take of the Pill Lapis Lazuli half a dram, oil of Amber mixed therewith four
drops; make it into several Pills, and take them in a morning fasting, drinking
Posset Drink after it, according as usually is done in taking Physic; give
this twice a week for a month together; and in the mean time let the party
take of this following Electuary twice a day when she takes no Pills, viz.

Take Conserve of the flowers of Water Lillies, Violets, and Agnus Castus of
each one ounce, Conserve of Roses and Lettice, of each two ounces, Coral
prepared half an ounce, Syrup of Violets enough to make it into a body. Whey
drunk often and plentifully is good in this disease, and Issues made in the
thighs and legs. But in regard of the immediate cause, seeing the evacuation of
the sharp and corrupted seed may cure this disease; my further advice is, that
at the beginning of the disease, before the Patient begins manifestly to rave,
or in the space between her fits, when she is pretty well, to marry her; for so
the womb being satisfied, and the offensive matter contained in its Vessels
being emptied, the Patient may peradventure be cured: but if the party cannot
so conveniently be married, or her condition bare not that estate, all lawful
means must be used by rubbing or tickling by a skilful Midwife, that so an
evacuation of the over abounding Sperm may be. -- And if still this disease
continue, you may understand other things are to be done with expedition; and
therefore as for others, so for this I am not with some secret Arcanums and
Specifical medicines tried and experienced to several effectually, to my
content as well as those concerned, both in money, Credit and Honor, few
reaching this disease but my self as well as the other madness, which men also
are liable to, etc. But then next

Is the Mother-fits or Womb-sickness.

When seed and menstrual blood are retained in women, besides the intent of
nature, they putrify, corrupt, and attain a venomous quallity, from which,
according to Galens Doctrine, vapors are elevated and carried to diverse parts
of the body, occasi^ning several Symptoms: the chief going under the name of
Mother-fits, the womb sometimes being elevated also. The signs such as show the
disease approaching, and such as show the disease strengthened. 1. Signs that
show the disease approaching are these: 1. A noise in their lower belly. 2.
Belching, or inclination to Vomit. 3. Wearinesses, yawnings and stretchings. 4.
A sad look, pale face.


Secondly, Signs of the disease strengthened.

1. A sense of strangling, as if they had swallowed a great morsel, and it
stuck in their throat.

2. Stoppage of breath, and suffocation increased.

3. In conclusion, all their vital and animal actions are deprived, diminished,
or ab^^^^d.

4. And from hence springs Ravings, Convulsions, and other grievous symptoms;
but this disease being pretty well known by almost every old woman, I shall say
no more as to the signs; but come to the Cure, which is double.

1. In the Fit. 2. Out of the Fit.
Cure. In the fit, those vapouts which cause it, are to be discussed and drawn
back from the part affected, the humors contained in the womb which send up
these vapors (it would be well if we knew which way) must be voided, and the
womb, if removed out of its proper seat, restored to the same again.

In the fit therefore, let the lower parts be tied hard and rubbed well, and
let her smell to sum made of burnt leather, brimstone or feathers; also oil of
Amber may be put about her nostrils, and three or four drops taken inwardly,
which is very excellent, especially if you give it in Orange flower water.

Tobacco blown into the mouth or nose is very good, or snuffe-Tobacco blown up
into the nostrils. And as these things must be applied according as mentioned,
so you must use Musk or Civer, and with a little Cotton put it into the
Privities; for as the Iron follows the loadstone, so does the womb follow all
sweet and delightful smells, but shuns all odious scents.

You may also give her Aq. Hysterica, Mother or womb-water, two or three
spoonfuls once in one hour; its to be had at every Athecaries; and if with
those things it abate not, then give this Clister, and apply Cupping-glasses
upon her hips, viz.

Take of the herb Mercury, Pelitory-wall, Mugwort, Peniroyal and Rue, of each a
small handful; Caraway seeds, Cummine seeds, and Bayberries, of each two drams,
boil all to a pint and an half, and in the straining dissolve Hiera Picra, and
confect: Hamech of each four drams (they are both to be had at the
Apothecaries) and so administer, remembering that it be retained some while, but
not too long.

Secondly, when the fit is over, care must be taken to prevent the return
thereof, which may be endeavored by the ensuing things. Let her take once in
fourteen days, season of the year and condition of body not forbidding, half a
dram Pil. Arabica, with three or four drops of oil of Juniper Berries mixed
therewith, drinking Posset Drink and keeping warm that day. And in the mean
time keep a Plaster upon the Navel made with Gum Galbanum, with two or three
grains of Musk in a little wool or cotton in the middle.

And let this following powder be taken frequently, one dram at a time made
into a Bolus with syrup of Mugwort, viz. Take Gentian roots, white Ditany, and
Tormentil, and round Birth-wort, Chimelion Thistle, Bayberries, Juniperberries,
Coriander-seed, prepared, Aniseed, mastick, Bole-Armoniack, Terra sigillata, of
each two drams, bring them all to fine powder and mix them; then powder also of
the best Saffron two ounces and put to it, and so take it as aforesaid.

Note. That if the woman be with Child, you must have a care of giving things
too venturously inwardly; but rather attempt the getting her out of the fit by
your outward medicines, for fear of miscarriage, and use the midlest of those
stinking things externally also.

One thing more which I would not omit, that is, a beneficial word to those who
have husbands, and can have the same; that is, that as soon as the party is out
of her Fit, to admit of carnal conjunction, and that especially if the disease
seem to come from retention of seed, which may be known, if the Patient be
young, of sanguine complexion, merry, cheerful and spiritous, when in the
hearing of any discourse tending to lust, diet high, and live easy, and having
not had embraces in that nature for some time, etc.

I have been the larger upon this disease, because I know it is common and very
troublesome, and obnoxious and hard to be totally cured: And perhaps some who
may be concerned therewith, have taken many more medicines than these, and that
possible along time too, and yet never the better; to such and all others I
would say, that sometimes and in some cases, multiplicity of medicines rat her
hinder than further cure; use these with prayer and thanksgiving according as
you are directed, they being principal and choice receipts, and where you have
so done, if your desires are not satisfied in order to help, you may know that
God being rich in grace, and of great compassion toward his poor creatures,
has not left you destitute of further supply, by helping some persons in such
an Art, as is capable to open the bodies of Minerals as well as Vegetals and
Animals; and I do affirm, that this disease being of any standing, is not
totally to be cured by any other medicine but such as the Mineral Kingdom
afford, unto which most will subscribe, and I have several times proved; in
which respect shines the efficacy and worth of Chemical Preparations above and
beyond Galenical medicines. But that only by way of digression.

Secondly, I come now to speak of the diseases in the Cavity of the Womb, and
in order I begin

1. Of the Inflammation of the Womb.

Inflammation of the womb is a tumor or swelling in that part, or some part
thereof, springing from blood, that is shed into the substance thereof.

Signs. 1. Swelling heat and pain in the region of the womb, with a continual
feavour.

2. Suppression, or diminution of the courses, and their paleness or yellowish
color, with pain in their coming forth.

3. In the absence of them certain stinking and rotten stuff sweats through the
vessels of the womb, and bedews the watergate; wherein if search be made,
there will soon be a discovery of the disease: For

4. The inward mouth of the womb will be found to swell, to be drawn inward,
and subject to pain, if touched, and the veins of the womb will appear red and
inflamed.

5. Heat and pain sometimes in the Groin, Privities, Bladder, strait gut, and
Loins, according as sometimes one, sometimes another part of the womb is
afflicted.

Cure. Cure consists in drawing back the course of the blood to the womb, and
diverting it another way; that which is therein must be resolved, and if the
swelling tend to supperation it is to be furthered.

A Glister being given, blood must be drawn from the arm, and repeated twice,
thrice, or four times, according to the strength of the Patient and greatness
of the inflammation, you may also for revulsion sake rub and tie the
upper-parts. If the body seem to abound with evil humors, Purge with Electuary
Lenitive, once taken every night.

Anoint outwardly with Galens cooling ointment and oil of Roses, and use it as
often as is necessary. But because this disease comes not often, and must be
chiefly directed to as the eye sees occasion, I shall say no more, it being a
very dangerous disease, and requires occular inspection and manual operation of
the most ingenious Physician or Surgeon; in which sad and dangerous disease
as in others, I offer the best of my knowledge and skill; and sometimes means
is successeful, if the inflammation come to superation; but then I have observed
that usually Ulcers follow, and then they commonly pine away with a lingering
Fever, or fall into a Dropsy.

But Secondly, Ulcer of the womb.

Although there may be an Ulcer of the womb without an inflammation following
thereof, as namely, from any thing than may cause an erosion, fretting or
gnawing the substance thereof, yet after a superared inflammation of the womb
usually follows Ulcers, and the signs thereof are these.

Signs. 1. Pain, or biting in the womb or its neck.

2. Voiding of snotty matter or quitter out of the womb.

3. If the neck of the womb be the place afflicted, then it is to be known by
the parties hand, the Midwives finger, or genial embracements, in which there
will be troublesome pain.

4. If the bottom of the womb have an Ulcer, then the pain is felt about the
share, and the excrements flow most abundantly.

5. If the Ulcer being single and benign, the quitter is little white and not
stinking, but if malignant and eating, the quitter will be greenish, lead
color, coming away with great pain and stink.

6. If it shall arise of the Lechers Pox, Gonorrhs will usher it in, or attend
upon it, and other tokens of that foul disease will appear.

Cure. The Cure lies in hindering the flowing of such humors as either beget or
cherish the Ulcer, to cleanse and heal the same.

Blood-letting in this disease is not requisite, except an inflammation be
joined therewith.

Give therefore twice or thrice a week one ounce of Diacatholicon, a known
Electuary at night, drinking Posset in the morning, or broth made thin, which
is more proper.

But if the Patient be in such condition that she may and nothing forbid, give
in the first place a vomit of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, syrup of Squils half
an ounce, which you may repeat at some times distance, after either of which
give this vulnery decoction.

Take Egrimony, Burnet, Knot-grass, Plantain, of each two handfuls, Yarrow and
Mugwort of each one handful, China roots, Birthwort roots, Bislort roots, of
each half an ounce, Lignum vitae two ounces; boil all, being shred, pounded, or
sliced, in three pottles of water, to two pottles; strain it, and drink half a
pint every morning and evening, sweetning it with a little honey, etc. It is
also excellent in this disease to drink often warm milk with Sugar of Roses,
and a little honey mixed therewith. There are several other things in order to
cure this disease, as Injections, Cataplasms, Ointments, etc. But because they
are to be used and altered as there is occasion, which I must not lanch into
here: I must omit this, being work wherein we cannot direct with Pen, as we may
by Tongue, at delivery of our medicines upon a most strict examination; and
therefore I pass that, and come to

Thirdly, Of a Scirrhus of the Womb.

It is a hard tumor without pain, bred of thick blood, and hardened in the womb.

Signs of such a swelling bred in the womb are.

1. A hardness felt in the region of the womb and heaviness also.

2. A sense of some weight bearing down, especially when the sick woman stands
as though the womb would fall into the watergate, which is not felt when they
sit or lie down.

3. There is no fever nor pain (wherein it differs from an inflammation) or if
any, it is very small, etc.

But now I know the question will be, how shall this disease be known for a
Mole or false Conception?

For general satisfaction in this cafe, I aiming at your better judgment and
information concerning your selves. Observe

1. That this tumor or swelling usually is brought by women's taking cold, or
drinking cold things, when they have their Courses flowing.

2. In a Mole if the courses flow, they flow disorderly, but in this disease
they keep their order: And

3. In a Mole a woman's dugs strout with Milk; but in this disease they are
extenuated and lessened.

Cure. Bleeding in this case, first in the arm, then the foot, and afterward
with leeches upon the Hemorrhoid veins will be necessary and profitable,
ordering him when, and place where discreetly.

Then purge three days in one week with these Pills following. The first day

Take Pil. tapis lazuli half an ounce, oil of Amber three drops, make them into
Pills, and swallow them in a morning, expecting them to work. The next Dose

Take Pil. lapis luzuli two scruples, oil of Juniperberries four drops. And the
next Dose

Take Pil. Arabica two scruples, oil of Assafoetida four drops, etc.

In the mean time the Patient may freely drink a little Mul'd Sack or burnt
Whitewine, only let the spice used be Cinnamon, to refresh and comfort her;
after which, to make an issue in one or both legs will be convenient. Outwardly
you must anoint with this following ointment.

Take of the gums called Bedellium, Ammoiacum and Galbanum, of each equal
quantities, dissolve them with a gentle heat in Vinegar, then strain it, unto
which put oil of Lilies, sweet Almonds and Roses, of each equal, Mucilage of
Fenugrick-seed extracted with White Wind, one ounce or two, according as the
quantity you make; Hens* Gooses and Ducks fat, each equal, Hogsgrease a little,
Wax and Turpentine as much as will suffice, use it with well and tender
rubbings in with a pan of coals. These things being used in time and order,
doubtless by Gods blessing will prove succesfull.

Other things there are if these fail, which as they are too high for you to
make, so beyond your capacities to administer; therefore I pass this, and come
in the next place: which is

Fourthly, Of the Cancer of the womb.

A Cancer is a hard swelling of the body or neck of the womb, which resists
the touch, and causes a vehement pain as it were pricking and cutting the part
affected; and if it be ulcerated, it sends forth matter and quitter, sometimes
yellow, sometimes black and stinking.

Signs. It may be known by the definition of the disease before rehearsed, and
no other signs adjoined, only we for full satisfaction sometimes make use of a
womb-perspective instrument made on purpose for our use, in such and some other
cases of this nature.

Cure. This disease is accounted incurable; being so you may not easily be
persuaded of help and cure, though you are offered the same. Some persons, to
get moneys in hand, will promise any thing. Being therefore so dangerous a
distemper, I shall forbear any instructions to you concerning this, only
drinking of whey a good quantity and pretty often, with two or three drops of
Spirit of Vitriol in every draught, has been found effectual: after purging
and bleeding is necessary.

A palliative cure therefore only is expected; to which end and purpose, and to
give ease of that cruel pain, I am not without medicines, but I dare not say
positively they will cure this disease perfectly, especially, if an Ulcer
preceded, or that be ulcerated. Danger being here, and daily advice being
requisite of either an able Chyrurgion or Physician, I rest it here and pass to

Fifthly, Mortification or Gangrenation of the womb. A gangreen is the
corruption or mortification of a part, beginning etc.

Signs these. Signs of the beginning of a gangreen are. 1. An unusual heat felt
about the part. 2. Horror and trembling upon the Patient. 3. Languishing and
quick beating pulse. 4. Often faintings and swooning. 5. The neck of the womb
is discovered to be soft, lead-colour, black and carrionlike, and may be pricked
or cut without sense. 6. It sends forth a stinking carrion-like smell.


In order to Cure. In this most grievous and mortal disease, because you are
not proper subjects in these cases I must be silent, only I have helped you by
the signs delivered, that timely you may if fearing these things look out for
help.

And let me tell you, I am not without Authority to assure you that women have
been cured of this disease, sometimes the gangrenated place falling of it self
by application of proper medicines; and sometimes has been cut off by suitable
instruments, and the women's lives saved, the blessing of God concurting with
both remedies and operation.

Sixthly, Of wombs, wind, water-swelling or Dropsy of the womb.

It is a blowing up of the womb, sometimes to a greater bigness, sometimes
less, causing the belly to swell as in other Dropsies and being with Child.

Note. There is a twofold Dropsy of the womb, one from wind, like unto that
called Timpany, another arising from a wheyish and watery humor answering to
the Dropsy of the belly called Ascites.

Signs. In laying down which, looking upon it as very necessary, I shall
enquire into a threefold question.

1. How this particular Dropsy of the womb, may be known and distinguished
from that of the whole body.

2. How this particular Dropsy of the womb, may be known and distinguished
from a woman being great with Child. And

Thirdly, How this particular Dropsy of the womb, may be known and
distinguished from a Mole.

In answering these three questions, you may gather the distinct signs of this
peculiar Dropsy of the womb subject only unto women.

1. How may this particular Dropsy of the womb, be known and distinguished
from that Dropsy of the whole body.

Answ. It is distinguished from an universal dropsy of the belly, in that the
wombdropsie swells chiefly the lower part of the belly, whereas the universal
dropsy distends equally the whole belly in all the parts thereof.

Again, in the womb-dropsie paleness and falling away of the flesh of the whole
body are not so soon discerned, as in the universal dropsy, in which also for
the most part there is evident thirst and dryness of the tongue, which are not
found in the womb-dropsie.

Again, in the womb-dropsie some wind breaks out of the womb by fits through
the privities, or else a little water comes away sometimes, which evidently
declares that wind or water are contained in the womb.

Quest. How may this particular wombdropsie, be known and distinguished from a
woman great with Child.

Many good women were deceived in this case these last two years, and I am
afraid more will be this year; I speak to my own knowledge, and have to several
told them what, after some time they would, and not before, embrace for truth,
who at their reckonings expiring came furtherto enquire; which trouble of
enquiry, if you mark, I save you, by what follows in answer to this question.

Ans. When a woman is big with Child the swelling is not so even and depressed,
but it is sharp, buncheth out, and seems greater about the Navel than elsewhere.

Secondly, In greatness with Child after some months women are for the most
part somewhat better than they were; but the dropsy of the womb, the further
it proceeds the worse it grows.

Thirdly, In greatness with Child the child is manifestly perceived to stir
after the third or fourth month, which is not in the womb-dropsie. Yet observe,
(and this is that which deceived so many.) It falls out sometimes, a certain
palpitation or motion is perceived in the womb in this disease, but it is
distinguished from the moving of a Child thus.

The moving of a child is more even and equal: the moving of a child is
perceived in diverse parts of the belly; that motion felt chiefly in one part
thereof: the motion of the infant in greatness of child, inlargeth it self
weekly more and more, and is to be caused by a warm hand or cloth more than
ordinary.

Fourthly, In women with child women's dugs swell, but in the dropsy of the
womb they sometimes are extenuated and become smaller, if not, they continue at
one stay.

By these signs well heeded any understanding woman may give a near guess,
whether she be a true Mother, and would have it saved, or of no concernment,
and so would have it destroyed; for as the Mother by her affection signified to
Solomon whose child it was, so this by its motion and other signs signifies of
what lineage or generation it is, and so accordingly may be dealt withal.

3. Quest. Is, How the womb-dropsie may be known from a Mole or
false-conception.

Answ. That in a Mole women find a kind of heaviness in their wombs, which is
not so felt in womb-dropsie; and when they lie on one of their sides they
perceive the weight of the Mole to roll like a stone to that side.

Again, in a Mole, violent flux of Courses come, sometimes by fits; namely,
every third or fourth month, which happens not in the womb-dropsie.

Again, in a Mole, the dugs swell and sometimes have milk, which is not thus in
a womb-dropsie. I have been the larger in these things, because I judge them
worth your knowledge, and are of a great concernment to you.

Now then, if you by these signs and tokens find your selves to have the
womb-dropsie at any time, and are sure you are not with child (for blood cries
high) then for the removal of it use these things following with prayer and
supplication.

First then, give this Vomit.

Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, syrup of Squils half an
ounce, mix them and give it in a morning warm, drinking Posset sometimes after
it, etc.

A few days after give Pil. Arabicae half a dram, oil of Juniper berries three
drops mixed. Let her swallow in them days between the Vomit and the Pills six
Pepper corns every morning fasting. After one days rest after the Pills, take
this following.

Take roots of Smallage and Madder, of each two ounces, Savin, Feverfew,
Peniroyal, Germander and Mother-time of each one handful, Carraway and
Carrots-seed of each half an ounce, Saffron and Cinnamon of each one dram, boil
all together, being sliced, bruised and stirred, as they require in
Mugwort-water three quarts to two quarts, strain it, and add to the remaining
part honey or Sugar sufficient to make it pretty toothsome, the Dose is a
quarter of a pint every morning fasting, using exercise after it.

Drink every night going to bed a small glass of Doctor Stevens his water,
outwardly the belly must often be anointed with oil of Dill, Rue, Wormwood, and
Southernwood.

Glisters also are to be administered, made of the decoction of Wormwood,
Peniroyal, Rue, Centaury, in which Glisters dissolv two drams of Elect.
Theriaca Diatessaron. These things being duly used, and the disease not
overcome and expelled, other things there are which you cannot be directed to,
the use of them being out of your Element; yea, and other medicines there are
also, some of which I have in my custody, which will assuredly by Gods blessing
extinguish this disease totally, and I have sufficiently proved the same in
these last years; which as I am willing to mention, so also I am as willing to
part withal for the good and benefit of poor creatures.

Look to this disease as timely as you may, and many of those inconveniences
that do attend it may be prevented. But

Seventhly, Of the falling down of the womb.

When the womb loses its natural situation and falls downward to the water
gate, the disease is termed the falling down, or slipping forward of the womb;
except sometimes by its coming forth too far; and by the distemper of the air,
this disease is more unhandsome and troublesome than mortal; and besides, has
only this ill convenience that does attend it, it hinders conception.

Signs. Signs whereby this disease is known are evident to the sense. For

1. The womb is found sticking in the watergate, like a Hen or Gooses Egg.

2. It is attended with a perceivance, with a weight pressing upon the
watergate, especially when the Patient stands upright.

3. When they sit or go to stool, a vehement pain is felt about the privy parts
and the hanch-bone.

4. Urine comes away by little and little and makes the womb smart as it comes.

Cure. A Glister being given to discharge from excrements, and water being made
to discharge the bladder, the womb is to be restored to its proper place; after
this manner let the woman lie along upon her back with her things wide asunder,
and her knees drawn upwards, then let her or another with her or their hands
thrust her womb inwards, and force it gently still upwards into the neck, so as
to turn it inwards as it goes, till all is returned within the cavity of the
belly which should contain the same. But observe, that if the womb-fallen be
swelled so that it cannot enter the cavity of the belly, the swelling must be
in the first place removed, which may be done with a decoction of Beets,
sprinkling it a little after with Vinegar and Salt; the swelling being abated,
and the womb reduceable, let it be anointed with Mucilage of Comfrey roots, or
with an infusion of Gum Tragaganth, being anointed, strew it with powder of
Bistort root and Mastick beaten very fine, and so put it up.

After it is replaced, the woman lying in her bed a little bending with her
thighs gently stretched out, resting or being cross one another, let her abide
in this posture sometime, and put in at the water gate a little Wool, Cotton or
sponge wet in red wine, and use sweet scents to her nose, and stinking to her
privities: And then every day let her take of this powder following one dram at
a time in red wine, forbearing for a time carnal imbracement and hard exercise.

Take Bislort roots in powder one ounce, Myrtle leaves and Garden Parship-seed,
of each two drams, shavings of hartshorn half an ounce, red Coral two ounces,
mingle them being well powdered, and take as aforesaid.

Observe, of this disease you must not expect help suddenly; and the more
patience is required if it be caused (as sometimes it is) by the unskilfulness
of Midwives, and hardness of labor.

Notwithstanding I know the disease is curable, and some have been helped by a
secret I have not long since attained unto, together with some other things
done and given, as directions tending thereupon; though in a bad case the womb
coming out of the body as big as my fist, and they no longer at ease than they
went continually with a truss.

Therefore if those instructions shall fail that I have given you, you may
remember there is notwithstanding provision made for you through Gods goodness,
for your well-being.

Eighthly, Of the womb shut up, or imperforated. Virgins that have their wombs
closed up, are said to be imperforated, like a Cask of liquor having no hole to
put in a spicket.

Now the closure of the womb is wont to be in three places, viz.

In the inner mouth of the womb. In the neck of the womb. And In the outward
mouth of the womb, next the watergate.
Signs. This disease, according as the place that is afflicted, is more hard,
or more easy to be discovered.

If the closure or stoppage be in the outward orifice of the privity, it is
discerned by seeing and feeling.

If the closure or stoppage be in the mouth of the womb, it is not discerned
till the courses begin to break out; for when the time of their monthly
purgation is come, pains and gripings are felt in the region of the womb at
certain periods of time, with a sense of weight, yet no flux of courses
follows. Here note the conjecture will be more probable, if the Virgin be of a
good habit of body, not troubled with obstructions.

The disease persevering, their wombs swell so that maidens seem to be with
child, and sometimes their whole body swells, and seems sometimes to be black
and blew color through the abundance of blood; and until I made a narrow
inspection in these things, I my self, as well as several others have sometimes
mistrusted some maidens honesty, when there has been no real occasion.

But if the closure or stoppage do possess the neck of the womb, it is
perceived in the first carnal conjunction, because it does not admit the
mansyard.

Note, for a right and true understanding of this disease, a skilful Midwife,
man or woman is required, who by their hand can give a near guess thereof.

And some supposition there is of this disease, when the man's seed does
plentifully slip away as soon as it is cast in; though sometimes that is
occasioned also through some preternatural humor abounding, and having recourse
to those parts, causing the womb to be more moist than it ought to be, thereby
hindering it from retaining, what it ought in order to conception to embrace.

The closure or stoppage of the inner orifice of the womb is accounted
uncurable, by reason no instrument can reach the same, howbeit it has been
attempted sometimes with good success.

But the other closures or stoppages are accounted curable, and many have been
helped, and afterward been well embraced by their husbands, and as other women
conceived, and brought forth Children.

But directions in this case you may not expect, the chief cure lying in handy
operation; neither need you dread or fear the work, it being of no great
difficulty or danger, being managed by a skilful Artist, and the blessing of
God concurring.

And so I have ended the diseases of the cavity of the womb.

And so I come now in the third place, to say something of those diseases which
are in respect of Conception, breeding and bringing forth.

The first is,

Of Barrenness.

This word barrenness in this place is to be understood in a large and ample
signification, so as to comprehend all kind of impotency, and every impediment
of conception; namely, when a woman at such an age, in which she ought
naturally to be capable of conception, and using the company of a man, does not
conceive.

Here note four things. 1. That a woman in her genital imbracements, ought
conveniently to receive the man's seed into her womb. 2. That she ought to
retain the same for a convenient season. 3. That she ought to cherish and
preserve the same in her womb. And 4. That she afford fitting materials from
the Embrio or first-conception, and duly to augment the same as need shall
require.


Now if the woman receive not the seed, if she retain it not, if she preserve
and cherish it not, if she nourish it not so as to increase and grow; these are
impediments to conception, and therefore for your sakes for whom I write. I
will not spare to give you the signs of barrenness, according to these four
sorts of causes propounded, because in what I do in this particular I aim at
the good of others as well as my self.

1. Therefore I have told you that a woman in her genital imbracements ought
conveniently to receive the man's seed into her womb.

Signs. Hindering of reception of the seed is not hard to be discovered; for
observe, it is occasioned by 1. Tenderness of age, as also over elderly state.
2. Evil constitution of those parts which border upon the womb, viz. 3. When
women halt or have crooked legs, their Crupper-bone deprest or are over fat.
4. Hatred between man and wife, and so I may bring in crooked conditions, as
well as crooked legs. Look to it women. 5. Particular diseases also may hinder
the reception of seed, as tumors, ulcers, obstructions, closures or stoppage,
and these may be known by search of the genital parts, by an ingenuous man or
woman skilled to that purpose.


Secondly, I have told you that she ought also to retain the seed for a
convenient season.

Signs here are evident, the woman being sensible thereof.

Having a very moist and slippery womb, etc. But the next head will explain
this.

And because that requires more exquisite search and knowledge, I pass this and
come to

3. I have also told you, that a woman ought to cherish and preserve the seed
in her womb; the causes therefore of corrupting the seed in the womb, thereby
hindering its nourishment and cherishment are four.

1. A cold distemper of the womb. 2. A moist distemper of the womb. 3. A hot
distemper of the womb. 4. A dry distemper of the womb.
The true and general signs of each of which, I show you

1. A cold distemper of the womb is hereby known.

1. The woman longs not after carnal imbracements, and feels little pleasure
therein.

2. Her face is soft, whitish and cloudy.

3. Her feeling is dull about her share, loins and thighs.

4. She voids thin and crude seed, and with little pleasure.

5. Her courses are stopped or come very sparingly, being pale and discolored,
and keep no constant orderly time, etc.

2. A moist distemper of the womb is known.

1. By the lax flagi, and soft habit of the woman's body.

2. Her much spitting and waterish stomach.

3. Frequent and almost continual flux of whites.

4. Plenty of courses also, but thin and watery.

5. No appetite to fleshly conjunction.

6. Heaviness of her loins, apt to miscarry and plenty of urin, etc.

Thirdly, A hot distemper of the womb is known.

1. By the manly and strong habit of the woman's body,

2. By a ruddy countenance and black hare, both of head and eyebrows.

3. She is frequent, disposed to be angry and thirsty.

4. Her urin little and courses few, but sharp, doing sometimes damage to the
secret passages.

5. Their privities itch, and they are prone to carnal imbracements, and
suddenly void their seed.

Fourthly, A dry distemper of the womb is known,

1. By the small quantity of the courses.

2. Drying, itching and chopping of the mouth of the womb.

3. Little excretion of seed in genital imbracements.

4. Trouble sometimes arising from overmuch carnal conjunction, as also
leanness.

If the seed be corrupted, and barrenness caused by witchcraft, all other signs
will be absent, which are wont to declare the natural and manifest causes of
barrenness; there will be likewise some alienation of minds between the married
couple, of which neither of them can give any handsome account: neither can
either of them but seldom shoot forth their seed, and when they do, it is not
without labor and difficulty.

Diet or poison that extinguish seed, if they have been taken, may come to
knowledge by diligent questioning of the woman and those that usually are about
her.

Lastly, Malignant diseases, such as are of power to extinguish the seed, as
Leprous, Manginess, the Whores Pox, and such like, are known by their proper
signs.

Note that those couples who are of one constitution, and so consequently (if
not altered by means) their seeds, both thick, or both thin, both hot, or both
cold, have seldom children.

Now to know whether a woman be naturally barren, is a certain hidden
disposition and very difficult to unfold, Authors have left many ways to try;
yet finding no certainty in them, I was resolved to have past them in silence;
but considering that some might wish otherwise upon the reading hereof, I shall
set down three ways, that whoever is so disposed may try them, and accordingly
speak.

1. Hypocrates says, if a woman conceive not, and thou would know whether
she will conceive or not, let her either receive some fume, or put the body of
Galbanum softened at the fire, tied up in silk with the thread to make fast
about the thigh, or Garlic; if she smell, or her head or mouth smell of the
same thing, she is pronounced fruitful.

Note. It must be done at night, and the trial to be next morning.

Secondly, Amatus Lusitanus, commends this following as a most true sign; he
takes a drain of a hairs runnet which dissolved in warm water, he gives the
woman to drink, being in a bath of hot water and fasting, if the woman do then
feel pains in her belly, he says she is fruitful, if not, that she is barren.

Thirdly, others commend the urine of the woman to discover and manifest this
doubt using it thus, being put into a convenient vessel, steep Barley therein,
which Barley if it grow within ten days, they count it a sign of fruitfulness,
if not of barrenness, and some do pour the water upon Bran or Fenugreek, and
take it for a note of barrenness if any worms breed there.

And these be all to this purpose. Those that have an occasion, and are
disposed to try, they may without damage, danger, or any great charges. But
sometimes it so happens, though the woman most usual, that the man is the
reason of non-conception or generation; which we shall diligently consider and
lay down some manifest tokens of discovery, for it would be in vain in that
case to prescribe medicines and directions to the woman, she being not the
proper subject.

Barrenness proceeding from the man (for I must not favor my own sex no
further than it may be with convenience) may be known.

1. By the diseases of the genital parts, as inability to raise his yard, want
of seed, swelling of his stones, running of the reins, etc.

2. By his being faint hearted and womanish by nature, and be slow in casting
forth his seed, and that be cold.

3. If he want a beard, and have little or no lust to carnal imbracements and
perceive very little pleasure therein.

These are signal tokens and discover unto us barrenness in the man, as well as
the other in the woman.

I come now to the curative part; only I must mind you of this, that you may
not expect here variety of medicines, according as the disease proceeds from
this or the other cause, which the signs aforesaid discover, no, that would be
too large, but only such a medicine as is suited and fitted in order to this
business for all sorts of barrenness, only in that barrenness from the wombs
closure it to be understood, something else is to be done there before the
medicine be used.

Cure. Take Eryngus roots and Satyrion of each four ounces, Ameos seed, Rocket
seed, Water cresses seed, of each two ounces, Filbert-kernels, Pine-kernels,
and Pislachios of each one ounce, two pair of the stones of a Bore-pig, Mace,
Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger of each two drams, beat, bruise and slice, as they
ought to be, and then put them into a pottle of Muscadine mixed with a quart of
old Sack, cover it close, and let it boil softly to the loss of a quart, strain
it, and let the woman drink a quarter of a pint three times a week going to
bed, and in the morning following let her company with her Husband; and
observe, that as soon as her husband is passed from her, she immediately cross
her legs putting a warm cloth next her body, and lie a full hour afterward,
and never to taste her husbands benevolence in that nature, but of those
mornings which follow after the drink.

Many more directions are to be given in this point, only necessary it is that
the parties may be known, because directions of this nature must be varied; as
there may be occasion either in the one or the other.

And certainly, if women were so wise as to admit or look out, there are but
few that are barren, but might by Gods blessing be helped; thereby we hope to
bring joy to Parents, and a better life of love between party and party, which
sometimes occasions great differences, or at least clouds happiness; for the
general tone is, Give me Children or else I die.

And herein I speak the more confidently, because never yet any one failed of
cure that came to me upon this score, that were willing, diligent and patient
in taking my medicines; whereof that aforementioned was ever one, and observing
those rules and directions that I laid before them.

Secondly, Of acute and chronical diseases of women with child, the acute and
chronical diseases of women with child are the same in essence or nature, and
have the same signs with the like diseases in women not with child, or in men;
wherefore I must not run out here to the signs of those diseases that are
incident to women with child, or to speculate there upon, they being to be
found else where.

But although the signs as aforesaid either in the one or the other differ not,
yet the cure of the aforesaid diseases in women with child does remarkably
differ in point of Diet and Physic, and especially those two grand remedies,
blood-letting and purgation. As for matter of diet, a more fuller and larger
diet may be allowed unto a woman with child under a disease, than to others,
and that in regard of the infant; yet care must be taken also that the diet do
not exceed, so as to heighten and augment the fever; however remember that
error in this point, which is in point of fullness is the more tolerable, for
recovery is chiefly to be expected from the strength of the mother and child.

As for bleeding and purging, they are allowable, and frequently practiced by
me, and many other ingenious and sober Doctors, with very great and
satisfactory success; the error about it I refute at the latter end of my
book, and therefore here shall only say further.

That the time when, and the quantity, which are the things of enquiry in this
case; for at sometimes there may be more blood taken than at othersome, and so
likewise at some times there may be a bigger Dose given than at other some.

But in these cases I shall be silent, because I would not encourage any woman
whatsoever to these things without the advice of a sound, judicious and
conscientious Doctor, fearing, they miscarrying, they should endeavor to hide
and wrap their action in that nature, and attribute their sin upon that
occasion to this little book of mine, which I writ for contrary ends and
purposes, viz. their good happiness and advantage in this life.

But then thirdly, of abortion or miscarriage. Abortion or miscarriage is the
bringing forth of an imperfect or unripe child, and consequently, a child dead
in the womb is not counted an abortion till it be excluded; so whether a live
or dead child be brought forth, not being ripe, nor having attained to the just
term of growth which it ought to have had in the womb, it is to be termed an
abortion or miscarryed child.

Signs. The signs of present abortion are manifest of themselves, but such as
go before abortion or miscarriage, and do prognosticate the same, are these. 1.
An unusual heaviness of the loins and hips. 2. A lothness to stir, with loss of
appetite. 3. Shivering and shaking coming by fits. 4. Pain in the head,
especially about the roots of the cyes. 5. A straitning of the sides, and of
the belly above the Navel. 6. The flaging or failing and extenuation of the
Dugs. 7. Plenty of milk roping from the dugs voluntary argues miscarriage. 8.
Frequent pain and almost continual about the reins and loins reaching toward
the share, with a certain endeavor of going out or pressing down of the womb.


And observe, in this latter sign flowing from the womb, if any pure blood or
wheyish matter, or water follow the aforesaid pains and endeavor of coming
out, miscarriage is not far, and at that time notice being taken the situation
or posture of the child is changed, for whereas it lay high and possessed the
middle of the woman's belly like a Sugar Loaf bearing out, it is now gathered
round like a football, and rolled down toward the watergate, and then
sometimes, though not always, there follows grievous symptoms, as shivering,
trembling, palpitation of the heart, swooning and abounding in bleeding, etc.

I have been the larger upon those signs, because I would willingly instruct
women for their good; for by these truly and wisely observed, miscarriage and
all those dangerous consequences which attend it may be prevented by timely
using remedies suitable and fitting; which brings me to the cure, etc.

Cure. The cure consists in preservation, for that which is past cannot be
helped. And

The preservation from abortion or miscarriage has two principal parts or
heads.

The one concerning the woman before she is with child, the other when she is
with child.

Before the woman is with child, all evil disposition of body which are wont to
cause miscarriage must be removed, as fullness of blood, badness of humors, and
peculiar diseases of the womb, etc.

Concerning all which advice must be taken of some able Doctor with suitable
medicines; for this would be too large a field for me at this time to walk or
take a turn in. But then

When she is with child, how to prevent her miscarriage, I shall here insert
that which may do good and be serviceable.

Besides then that medicine which I have already given for the stopping the
overflowing of the courses, which is excellent in this case, being taken as is
there directed, I shall ad^e,

Take Kermes berries, and Tormentil, and Bislort roots, of each half an ounce,
Mastick two drams, Date stones and shavings of Ivory of each one dram, powder
them, and mix them into the form of an Electuary with syrup of Coral, and then
mix that with Conserve of red roses and Quinces, of each two ounces; take the
quantity of a Chestnut three times a day, morning, at four a clock afternoon,
and at going to bed.

Hang an Aegle stone, Jasper or Smaragds stone about the neck or a piece of
Coral in Tiffany, make a Plaster with those salves called, viz. Emp. pro
Matrice and Contra Rupturum, of each alike, and apply it to the region of the
share and loins; and to the end that the woman may receive good and benefit,
she must rest her self, and keep her self as quiet as possible she can both in
her body and mind, also she must abstain from genital imbracements, etc.

Moreover this I have observed, that by the best and highest graduated means
that could be gotten, sometimes miscarriage will not be prevented without
blood-letting; therefore sometimes to some persons, to prevent from this evil,
blood-letting is absolutely necessary; yet I dare not say but I have helped
many without bleeding, by some secret Arcanums and specifical medicines safe to
be taken, that my industry in the Art of Chemistry has made me master of, God
blessing my endeavors.

But thirdly, of hard childbirth.

Hard travel in child bearing, is such as keep not the due and ordinary laws of
nature, taking up longer time than ordinary, and accompanied with more vehement
pains than are usual, and other more grievous symptoms.

Signs. Hard travel is known both by the childing woman, and by the assistants;
but especially, by the Midwife.

1. If the woman continue longer time than ordinary in labor, as two, three,
four, or more days, whereas a truly natural childbirth ought to be accomplished
within the space of twelve or twenty four hours at farthest.

2. Its a sign of a hard labor, if the woman's pains be weak, and are long
before they return, and that more especially if her pains be more about her
back than privities.

3. If the woman be weak, and the child weak, moving slowly, or be either too
fat or too lean, usually there are hard labors, or be crooked also.

4. Sometimes hard labor is occasioned by the diseases of the womb.

5. Sometimes from the greatness and false situation of the child, and

6. Sometimes also hard labor may be guessed at, if the water flow from the
woman or part of it, before its true time, which ought but immediately to
proceed the birth; for this signifies that the afterbirth is stronger than
ordinary, which can hardly be broken, etc.

Cure. In pity to poor women in this case (though occasioned by sin.)

I shall lay down some choice and excellent observations and medicines in order
for their good; not at this time at all meddling with any directions to, or
manual operation of the Midwife.

The observations are these.

1. Let the woman lay off all her rings, yea, and those that are about her also.

2. Let her forbear eating any thing that is astringent or binding, especially
at that time.

3. Let her endeavor to be as cheerful and lively as possible she may, for
sleepiness and sottishness do slacken the endeavors both of mother and child.

4. Let her also keep her mind free from fear, passion, sadness, anger, wroth,
etc.

5. Let her have a Midwife of whom she has a good conceit, and let no woman be
about her, that there is the least cause or suspicion of prejudice or
non-affection.

6. Let her not stir unseasonably, nor agitate or move to and from unduly,
fearing it may prevent the child issuing in a fitting posture.

7. Let her have her husband, if she require or desire it, to come into the
room to her, as often as the man may be rightly constituted, and the nature of
the work will permit; I do not know whether a man kissing his wife at that time
have any virtue in it or no, but this I know for a certain truth, that many
good women, some I could name, have suffered abundantly in this case, yea and
some so much, that their lives have been lost thereby; for being denied this
privilege, they dying, if not undelivered, yet not till all is gone and spent
that should afterward revive and comfort her, and she nearer to the grave than
a bed.

I lay down this the rather, because there has been such evident good success
upon the man's presence in several deliveries even immediately, that it is a pity
it is not, if serviceable to the woman, wisely and discreetly put in practice
no oftener: And besides, because I know no substantial reason or ground either
from Scripture, History, nor nature, why a man rightly and duly qualified,
should not have and enjoy that privilege at convenient seasons to visit his
wife, as in any other dangerous sickness or distemper.

Weigh what I say well before you judge.

8. Let her keep her breath and retain her strength till the right and true
time of travel comes. This I intimate, because there have been many, I have
known some, that have suffered upon this account; especially young women, who
think they are bound, and that it is their wisdom to do as the good wives bid
them, and its common amongst them though but straggling, degenerate and wild
pains, to bid them stop their mouths, hold their breath, and strain downwards:
whereas indeed such pains should be let pass without such observation, and the
woman not put to spend her spirits and strength till it may do her good, viz.
when the water is complete and judged ready to, or has broke, then let her
strive and strain what she is able and not before, fearing if she do, when that
time comes, her strength and spirits may be impaired, and for want thereof the
child may not immediately follow the water, and so those places which then, and
by that were made moist and slippery, will afterward become dry and more
straightened, and so consequently longer time, for the birth of the child and pain
of the mother may be expected; therefore observe it.

The next thing is the cure or help by medicines.

I shall lay down three, with this observation, that none of them be given till
such time the Midwife assures the water is complete or broken. The first is,

Take oil of sweet Almonds and Whitewine, of each two ounces, Saffron and
Cinnamon, of each twelve grains, Conf. Alkermes half a dram, syrup of Mugwort
one ounce, Chemical oil of Asasoedita two drops, mixed, and make a potion.
Another is,

Take Ditany of Creet, Birthwort roots, and cakes of Myrrh, of each ten grains,
Saffron and Cinnamon, of each twelve grains, Conf. Alkermes half a dram,
Cinnamon water half an ounce, Orange flower and Mugwort water, of each one
ounce, Chemical oil of Juniper berries four drops, make a potion. Or

Thirdly, Take of Chemical oil of Amber twelve or fifteen drops in a glass of
wine, or Chemical oil of Cinnamon, four or five drops in a glass of wine. Or

Chemical oil of Saffron seven or eight drops, or extract of Saffron five or
six grains in a glass of wine. Or

Balsom Natural six drops in one ounce of syrup of Savine, etc.

And these or any of these, are very good things and proper administrations,
being given as before directed. Indeed there is one thing more, which I at
present forbear to name, for good reasons best known unto my self, which indeed
is an infallible remedy to give women speedy and easy labors, being given as
is and shall be directed: Concerning which I am bold to say, that many women's
and childrens lives might be saved in a year, by the taking of the same, it
being an experimental medicine, fit and worthy to be had in every Ladies, and
Gentle-womans, and Midwises Closet, to give and administer to them that are not
able to give to themselves, and for all big-belly'd women, and especially those
who use to have or fear hard labors. I say it again, that by Gods blessing
nothing but great things in this case has been done by, and may be expected
from it: And although it be scarce to be had, and the preparation sometimes
difficult; yet I am, and have been, this twelve month, endeavoring to make my
self master of a considerable quantity, and my la(...) has not altogether been
in vain. And ^o I come to the next thing; only I must mind you of two things,
one of which should indeed have been done before; accept it now, i. e.

Sneezing either naturally or artificially by medicines, is sometimes very
good, and may not be forbidden to a woman laboring with a living or dead
child. To comfort the woman, she may take now and then a little burnt wine with
a blade or two of Cinnamon, a little Alkermes, and sweetened with syrup of
Gilly-flowers: what I have further in this case is to Midwives, to whom I shall
dedicate a Tract alone, and be willing therein to learn them something that are
willing to learn, that so they may officiate themselves, and do the work
without the assistance of a man at such times, as there is not absolute
necessity. But till then, and there is information in the point, Let me advise
all Midwives not to juggle nor bogle in their work, or stand upon terms of
honor to the loss of mother or child, or both, as it has been sometimes to my
knowledge.

But things being out of their reach and capacity, let them submit wisely and
discreetly to them who are more able; and let not the presence of a man in such
a business as this is, scare or amaze a woman, but let her submit her self in
the fear of God, in which fear le^ the man work and operate; and the blessing
of God attend all such operations, etc.

Fourthly, The next thing in order is of a dead child.

In fore travel of childbirth, by reason of great and long labor, the child
is oftentimes killed, and sometimes before a woman's pains come upon her,
through some preternatural accidents, etc.

Signs. 1. A dead child is known when the motion thereof cease, which either
the mother did feel, or the Midwife perceive by her hand laid on, or either
warm and strengthening things, which were wont to awaken and rowse up the powers
thereof, when they were in a slumber or stupefied.

2. The mother finds a greater sense of weight, with which and pain of the
belly they are troubled.

3. When the woman turns from (...) side to another, she perceives the child to
roll or fall from one side to another like a stone.

4. The lower part of her belly feels very cold, their eyes hollow, face pale,
dugs flaggy, and at length a stinking moisture like water and blood flows from
the womb, their belly is blown up with vapors, a filthy smell of the woman's
breath, and the body all over smells unpleasingly. And

5. Mark this, if the afterbirth be excluded before the child, it is a certain
token that the child is dead in the womb.

Cure. For cure hereof, it consists wholly in the exclusion or extraction of
the dead child; and because handiwork and operation is to cooperate with
internal medicines, I forbear to mention any, supposing he whose employment it
is to do the business, is of my mind, to make use of his own remedies.

However, all those things may be given as hopeful ones, in the case of a dead
as well as a living child; I mean those things I spoke of in order to help a
hard labor, in the chapter foregoing.

Men fit for either of these two difficult works, as to clear a dead child from
a living woman, or to take a live child from a dead woman, as is sometimes
done, and is possible; they had need be men fearing God and eschewing evil,
always minding and laboring, in the discharge of their trust or work, to keep
a conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward man, remembering that
saying of the Holy Ghost, That all things are naked and open unto the eyes of
him with whom we have to do.

5. Of the afterbirth retained.

In a natural birth, commonly the secundine or afterbirth is excluded
presently after the child; yet sometimes it is retained in the womb or part
thereof, notwithstanding the Midwives care, by which means the mother is in
great danger of her life.

Signs. Signs of the afterbirth retained are needless, it being apparent of it
self; yet sometimes a bit or piece thereof is severed from the whole and
retained, which is not so easy to be known, but may be known and apprehended
1. Because the womb after the birth does yet labor to cast something forth,
although these endeavors are not so great as before. 2. There is perceived in
the womb a sense of pain and heat. 3. After certain days, a filthy and
carrion-like smell exhales from the womb.


Cure. These things in wisdom may be given and administered, that are propounded
to help a hard labor, and expel a dead child; to which I shall add this,
which has proved very successeful. Take of the tops of green Lovage, stamp
them, and strain out the juice with a little Rhenish wine, add thereto ten
drops of oil of Juniper berries, and so give it sweetened with syrup of Bawm:
But sometimes so it is, that without the hand of a skilful operator this
disease cannot be moved; therefore I advise not long delay, before such an one
in such a case be made use of, the consequences that attend this distemper
being dangerous, which will be the ready way of cure, they doubtless being
provided with some specifical remedy to help also in the case.

6. Of immoderate flux of childbed purgations.

The immoderate flux of childbed purgations, is not to be estimated from the
quantity or the time of continuance, because that in diverse natures, ages, and
courses of life, it is very different: But from the ill-bearing of the woman,
and her weakness therefrom arising, etc.

Signs. Signs immoderate flux of childbed purgations, is known as has been
said, from the strength of that woman that is dejected through the exhaustion
of her spirits, that issue with the blood, as also from 1. The blood being much
clotted. 2. The Patients loathing of Meat. 3. Being pained under her
short-ribs, and feeling a distention of her belly. 4. Her pulse is weak and
frequent. 5. Her sight is dimed, and she has a noise in her ears. 6. She is
subject to swooning and Convulsions.


These symptoms concurring and agreeing, look out for help speedily, for delays
in this case are very dangerous.

Cure Observe, let her eat a thickning diet, as Panadies, Gellies, Rice,
Calves-foot broth, Pears and Quinces boiled, roasted flesh and not boiled. Let
her have plenty of meat, but a little at a time; let he^ drink be water,
wherein steel or gold is quenched, or in which a little Mastick is boiled. Let
her superior parts be rubbed and bound. Let her bathe her hands in hot wine, in
which a little Alkermes is mixed, and let her belly be moderately well swadled.

These things being observed, but expectations not answered; besides, what is
said before in the immoderate flowing of the courses, which is good here, you
may give this.

Take boodstone four scruples, powder of Bole-armoniack, red Coral, prepared
Pearls, of each one dram, seed of Plantain, Coriander prepared, and grains of
Sumach, of each two scruples, mix all, being reduced into fine powder, of which
let her take one dram, with a decoction made with Knotgrass, and Sheepherds
purse, sweetened with syrup of Quinces.

Let her have a Plaster laid all over her belly, made with Vng. Comitissa.

These things being administered, and the flux not abated, you ought with all
imaginable care, diligence and speed, seek out for further advice and supply,
from them who are masters of higher and powerfuller medicines in this case.

And because I writ for the good and benefit of all my good Country-women, as
also because I have found these things worthy of my observation, you may take
notice touching the sleep of a woman in this case; that while the blood flows
plentifully, the woman must not be suffered to sleep, for many by that means
are taken away, because the natural heat retiring inwards, increases the flux.

But if sleep in such a case cannot be avoided, then take this counsel; that
some body be there by her all the while, frequently feeling her pulse, and
marking and observing her breath.

7. Of suppression of child bed purgations.

The good and happy success of childbearing, does especially depend upon the
convenient and orderly flux of the courses, or childbed purgations, seeing the
impurities which have been collected in the veins of the womb, during the nine
months time of the woman's belly-bearing are wont to be avoided by these
evacuations; but if they be suppressed wholly or diminished, infinite dangers
and calamities arise thereby. As

Acute Fevers and Quinsies.

Phrenzies and Pluresies.

Madness and Melancholy.

Inflammation of the Lungs, etc.

Signs. This suppression is manifest of it self, but, as I told you concerning
their immoderateness, is not to be estimated from the quantity or time of
continuance, because, etc. as there is showed; so here I would have you to note
that the diminution thereof is not to be judged by the quantity that comes
away, because some women have more superfluous blood, and some less: But the
perfect knowledge, as in the other contrary case, so in this, is gathered from
the supervenient symptoms, such as these. 1. A smelling of the belly. 2. A pain
possessing the nethermost part of the belly, the loins and groins. 3. Redness
of the face and difficult breath. 4. Perturbation of the eyes and shivering
fits. 5. Fevers and fainting fits. 6. Stomach sickness sometimes, and loss of
appetite.


Cure. It consists in provoking the menstruals, from which purpose, though
those things are special good beforementioned in he stoppage thereof, yet its
to be observed, they are not here to be given in respect of the different state
of the Patient.

In this case therefore Glisters appropriated to the disease are convenient,
and are in the first place to be made use of; make one thus.

Take Marsh-mallow roots, and Water-lilly roots, if you can get them, otherwise
the other, of each one ounce, long and round Birthwort, of each three drams,
leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pelitory, Mercury, of each one handful,
Linseed and Fenugreek seed, of each half an ounce, flower of Camomil and Elder,
of each half a handful, boil all in Posset drink to a pint, then strain it, and
in the liquor dissolve oil of Dill and Lilly, of each one ounce, hiera simplex
half an ounce, and so give it: And let her thighs be rubbed downwards, and the
toes of her feet be tied fast till they ache again, and if need be let
Cuppingglasses be fastened to her groins and hips, and scarrification if need
require.

If these things fail, she must have a vein opered about the knees, thighs or
foot, or leeches applied to the Hemorrhoids. If the fever forbid not, there
may be given Troches of Myrrh one dram, powdered, with a little whi^e-wine.

If there be a fever, this decoction has been used successefully, viz.

Take French Barley one handful, Liquorish half an ounce, Schenanth one dram
and a half, boil all in Posset Drink to a pint, which makes three doses; one in
the morning; another about ten a clock, and the other about 4. in the
afternoon, taking a little burnt-wine cold with burnt Cinnamon, wherein is
dropped three or four drops of spirit of Sulphur. Purgation also sometimes in
this case, as it is necessary, so may be used, but with great caution; but
certainly a medicine may be had in this case, that answers all intentions, etc.

8. Of after-pains, or gripings after childbearing.

Gripings do so frequently betide women in childbed, that very few women are
free from them, more or less.

Signs are needless be felt sufficiently, and demonstration thereof from the
women.

Cure. According to Authors ought to be varied, according to those several
causes producing this troublesome affliction; and therefore say they, sometimes
these gripings come from plenty of blood, its thickness, sharpness, too much
clotted, and the narrowness of the vessel through which it is to pass forth;
the womb endeavoring new expulsion stirs up pain.

Furthermore, they say these gripings are caused by winds, or by cold received
into the womb, and sometimes gripings be caused by a sharp choleric humor,
each of which requiring a different cure. I am not here to dispute with
Authority, as to the causes of these gripings, only this; I do conceive that
the ill affection of the Archeus of those parts at that time ushers in both the
cause and the effect, so that one only medicine, as I have several times proved
upon different constitutions and parties, has been sufficient to remove, and
that suddenly, those troublesome pains, by Gods blessing; but that medicine
being of a Chemical preparation, it would signify nothing, unless to the Sons
of Art, to whom I write not now; however that I may not leave you destitute, no
more in this than in other cases, I shall give you a receipt or two which have
been found to many of force and efficacy in this case, and indeed are pertinent
thereunto. Having given her therefore oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, three
ounces, with one ounce and an half of syrup of Violets,

And administered a Glister made with milk, Camomil flowers, and the yolks of
eggs, let her take of this powder, viz.

Take Date and Peach kernels, of each half a dram, Nutmegs four scruples,
powder of D^amargaritum Calidum two drams, Aniseed one dram, Cinnamon two
scruples, Saffron ten grains, Sugar, the weight of all the rest; make all into
a very fine powder, and give thereof in wine twice or thrice a day, two drams
at a time.

Anointing her belly two or three times with oil of Dill, Camomil and Rue, of
each alike, doing of it so that no cold may be taken.

9. Of acute diseases of women in childbed. What we said before touching the
acute diseases of women with child, we may now repeat touching the acute
diseases of women in childbed, being of the same essence and signs with the
like diseases in women which are not with child.

Now those acute diseases are for the most part continual fevers, both
essential, and also symptomical, which accompany inward inflammations, etc.

Yet there is a peculiar sort of fever, which almost befalls all women in
childbed, which is called by them the fever of their milk, which is wont to
befall them about the third or fourth day after they are brought to bed, when
the milk begins to increase in their breast; and for the satisfaction of those
who know not, and desire to know: It arises from the reflux of blood from the
womb to the dugs, and the motion and agitation thereof; which kind of fever
needs not any medicine, because usually within three or four days, viz. about
the ninth day after her delivery it is finished by sweat (and from this
consideration it is, that I always, where it may be, persuade all women in this
case, never to rise till the tenth day after being brought to bed) danger then
being over.

As for signs and cures as to this head, the one is needless being the same
with other persons; and the other being dangerous, and the hourly advice
(especially in some cases) and attendance of the Doctor needful, together with
those various symptoms that do arise, you may not expect from me here; not but
that I am willing to direct, but the consequences ensuing diseases in this
case, administrations being not legal, are so dangerous and pernicious; that if
I did subscribe in that nature, yet it must be with no encouragement to the use
of them without advice: for these and such like reasons I forbear intimating
any remedies in this case, and you may not blame me, remembering that sins of
omission are less than sins of commission* yet that you may see I am willing to
enlighten your judgment and inform you as far as I may accept and seriously
view these few and weighty observations.

An acute disease befalls a childbed woman either in the beginning, or in the
middle, or in the end of her lying in. Now mark,

If it happen in the beginning, and the woman be plentifully purged, there must
be no other evacuation; blood-letting is forbid, Nature being rightly and
conveniently about her operations.

But if the childbed purgations be suppressed or flow sparingly, if there be
necessary occasion the inferior veins may be opened, and a pretty good quantity
of blood taken away, because at that time the childbed purgations of blood
ought by the appointment of nature to be plentiful.

Next. If an acute disease happen in the middle time of her lying in, there is
to be considered, whether the Morbifick matter be contained in one particular
place, or whether it be dispersed through the veins, and whether the woman has
been conveniently purged or not in regard of quantity.

If the disease proceed from matter scattered abroad as in fevers, and the
woman not fully purged, the lower veins may be opened, having two good
indications; one is, the Morbifick matter will thereby be diminished; and the
other is, her natural flux or purgations provoked

But if the woman have been sufficiently purged, yet if the disease get ground,
and the natural evacuation be not sufficient for the disease, the inferior
veins must be opened notwithstanding, and so much blood must be taken away as
is convenient, and the disease may require.

And so the further from her delivery, or the more days or weeks from her
labor, if there be a necessity from any diseases or fevers, either essential
or symptomical, the more boldness may be in bleeding, and that especially if
the patient be surprised with any particular acute disease, as the Plurifie,
Inflammation of the Lungs, Quinzy, and the like; and so much concerning
blood-letting to women in childbed.

The next observations will be concerning Purging, comprehended in these
following maxims. While the childbed purgations do naturally flow, a purge is
never to be administered, fearing a diverting of nature from her business.

But if the child bed purgations be not kindly, consider whether their fault
consist in quantity or quality.

If they offend in quantity, so as to be too little, the woman being not purged
sufficiently, or not at all as it were: After all other remedies, fit to
procure these purgations, have been given in vain, and the Morbifick matter
appear digested, ten or twelve days being past since her being brought to bed,
according to the more or less urgency of the disease, she may be purged gently,
but no strong Physic must be given her.

If her childbed purgations offend only in quality, so that a white flux, or
some other unnatural color do proceed from her, the matter being ripe, she may
in the latter part of her lying in be safely and advantageously be purged.

But this must ever be minded and observed, that by how much the longer a
childing woman is distant from the day of her bringing to bed, by so much the
more safely, as in bleeding may she be purged, and so contrary wise.

For experience has taught us, that women wanting their childbed purgations,
if after the seventh or ninth day, they are taken with a looseness, they
commonly escape; but if the looseness seize upon them the first day, viz. on
the second, third, or fourth, for the most part they die; and that is all I
shall offer in observation concerning those two great evacuations, bleeding and
purging, and so end my discourse; only for the better direction of women or
nurses, in order to inform the Physician in the necessary point of time or
knowledge of the disease first seizing the party, I shall briefly answer this
acute and difficult question.

Quest. Whether the computation of the days of the woman's sickness, ought to
be made from the beginning of her disease, or from the day in which she is
delivered of her child.

Ans. If the birth of the child were natural, attended with no grievous
symptoms, and the childbed purgations were as they should be, and the fever
comes some days after, the account ought not to be made from the day of the
child's birth, but from the day the fever began, which was provoked by some
other preternatural cause, viz. Evil humors lurking within the body, or from
some external cause.

But if the childbirth were hard, and besides the course of nature, and the
fever arose after three or four days, we must reckon from the day of the
childs-birth, because then the whole order of the body began to be overthrown,
and the humors to be disturbed, which was followed by the fever, etc.

And thus have I finished my treating of women's diseases, by Gods blessing
whom. I pray that these my plain lines may be as heartily received and
practiced, as I in love tendered and offered them; that he may have honor and
glory by this work, both by the writer and reader hereof.

Unto the latter of which, I further address my self in order to their
information, that I assume the cure of all diseases curable in men or women, of
all such diseases they are incident to as well as men; besides these treated of
before, and children with six sorts of medicines and no more, for all ages,
constitutions and complexions, only the Dose variable.

The possibility and compleatness of it, by reason of those multitude of
medicines that are now in use, may seem strange to most, but to those that
understand nature it is casie, and wisdom to agree and consent to such doctrine
or truths.

And that the world may comprehend and embrace this truth, I am now as treating
of the medicines, so of the possibility and real truth thereof; nay further,
that the best, speedy, furest, and safest way of curing diseases is with a few
good medicines, and not many compositions; but of these things else where.

Only here take the names and operations of these medicines, and so I proceed a
little to show the errors of women in many things appertaining to Physic,
having finished their diseases curable by Physic.

These six sorts of medicines are called, and their operation is as follows.
1. Pull. Febrifuga. Whose operation is chiefly by vomit and sweat, the principal
medicine for Agues. The first inventor thereof, Riverlus Physician to the
present King of France. 2. Ext. Magistrali. Whose operation is chiefly by
stool. 3. Pil. Nigra. Whose operation is chiefly by sweating. 4. Tinct.
Sividalis. Whose operation is chiefly by urine. 5. Laudanum Astringentum. Whose
operation is chiefly binding the body. And 6. Elix. Cordialis. Whose operation
is chiefly to comfort, refresh and strengthen, both vital, natural and animal
spirits, and all the sunctions of nature being temperate in quality, sublime in
operation, and penetrating in working.


Now I would have any one show me such a disease, unto which as proper
remedies, either more or fewer of these medicines may not be administered
successefully if they can.

And that each of them are universal in their classes, or their kind. I shall
sufficiently prove else where.

Besides these (and so I tell you all the chief medicines that I am or desire
to be master of, except some secret Aroanums and specifical medicines proper
only for women before mentioned) I have a noble and precious Liquor which I
call viam vitae, in order to the preservation of health, and so consequently a
prolongation of life fitted for all Ages, Sexes, and constitutions; and no
doubt but happy will those be that use the same with prayer and supplication in
the concernments of their bodily or healthful state, it being also in this
great time of Contagion experienced to be of great force, in the preservation
and cure of the Plague. But this by way of digression, yet I hope not
altogether unsuitable nor impertinent.

I come now according to promise, looking upon this equally necessary with the
other, to refute some errors commonly embraced as truth amongst some women, yea
by some men also, concerning the subject that I am upon.

And herein you may not think that I will undertake the confutation of all, but
only of those which I judge most pernicious and rediculous, and they are these.
1. Some are of the opinion, that the Sex, and whether a woman be with child or
no; may be known barely by the urine. 2. Some also are of the opinion that the
husband breeds his wives child. 3. Some are opinion that it is hurtful for the
sick to change his linen very often. 4. Some are of the opinion that nothing
but hot drinks are to be given to a woman in childbed. 5. Some are of opinion
that medicines Chymically prepared are dangerous. 6. Some are of the opinion
that bleeding and purging are hurtful for women with child. 7. Some are of
opinion that Gold boiled in broths is a great cordial and good for
Consumptions. 8. Some have wrong opinions about their choice of Nurses, etc.


A refutation I intend of all these, read them soberly, judge them wisely, and
practice conscionably.

1. Some are of the opinion that the Sex, and whether a woman be with child or
no can barely be known by the urine.

This is a great error and mistake in women notwithstanding: I know it is
common, especially in the latter case, for women to send their waters to the
Doctors on purpose.

But that neither the sex nor gravidity can be discerned and discovered barely
by the urine, I will demonstrate.

1. Concerning the sex, indeed the urine of a young man and an old man, and a
man and a woman, be different each from other; but mark, it is only in color
and consistance, which seeing they may be changed by diverse other causes, it
will not properly show whether it be man's or woman's; for a choleric woman
after exercise, and the use of hot meats will make higher colored urine than a
phlegmatic man; moreover she which has a fever or some other disease, without
doubt, changes her urine in some respects according to the nature of the
disease, how is it then possible for to discover sex by the urine. I must be
brief, but consider what is said, and it is sufficient to convince, that there
is no certainty in it, and it is but rashness for any to pronounce, or others
to expect any such thing by the urine.

2. Concerning women with child, I would not have you think but that my pains
to discover the same by urine, has not been wanting, but much; and that I am
not without those observations and tokens left by Authors to posterity, but
never yet could I answer my own desires herein; yet I have several times
divined by urine women to be with child, and so it sell out, but I must say
that what I said, nay further, what ever any say in this case, was and is but
conjectural, and there is no certainty nor knowledge thereof in urine which I
demonstrate thus. Although most times, and in most persons with child, the
urine, is altered indeed either in one respect or other; yet we are to
understand, that the urine is not changed by the gravidity it self, but only by
the suppression of the courses, which as it cannot be denied, may alter the
urine by the reflux of blood and excrements into the veins. But that same
change of urine may appear in maids by the stopping of their courses, yea or in
other diseases that arise from the like suppression, as also in obstructions of
other internal parts, so that urine will manifest here no proper or peculiar
thing; besides, if the woman with child be sick, the urine may be so changed by
the violence of the disease, that all the signs of being with child, if there
were any would be obliterate: Certainly if such a thing could have been, those
famous Physicians whose works are the dictators to all pis Prophets, would
never have been deceived in their own wives in this case of being with child,
till it evidently appeared by the infants motion, as they have left for the
observation of Posterity, however in other things the fathers of pis Lectures.

Now I know many will say I have carried mine and others waters, and such and
such a Doctor has told me right, and he can tell.

To this I only say, so can and do I often, but this I say, it cannot barely be
done by urine, as before demonstrated; and what other ways we have to
conjecture by in such cases, I would freely discover, only fearing that the
times and seasons for the discovery of such things are not yet come.

2. Some are of the opinion that the Husband breeds his wives child, a common
error. This is an error common only to England, for ought ever I could read or
understand, and of all errors this seems most worthy to be laughed at, that the
husband should be thought to be sick and troubled with the same symptoms
wherewith a woman with child is wont, having not the same cause to procure it.

It is true, women with child in the first month of their conception are wont
to be troubled with very many and sundry symproms, especially Cacochymick and
impure bodies; but observe this is not without some cause, which usually is
from the retention of the courses, for seeing nature is wont to use that flux,
not only for the purging out of superfluous blood, but of corrupt and vicious
humors also, such blood being retent and kept in, they are likewise retained,
and that blood retained by reason of the smallness of the young one, in the
beginning of her gravidity, is not all spent, for the nourishment thereof does
putrify, and has recourse either to the noble parts, or at least anoys them
with filthy vapors which it sends forth, from whence arise the foresaid
symptoms in the stomach, intrails, belly, head, and the whole body as vomiting,
loathing of meat, unsatiable longing, and lusting, gripings, dizziness of the
head, and such like; seeing therefore the husband has not in him the causes of
these effects, but his wife only, it stands with reason that she only should be
sick; what if the husband be sick when his wife breeds a child, I hope it is
not a Contagious disease, he is not infected by his wife; no, that distemper
may happen through some default of his own body.

Indeed it is no new thing for husbands and wives to be sick together; but it
is a wonder, and hitherto a thing unknown that gravidity, or a woman's being
with child, is a Contagious or catching disease, and that not other women, but
men only, whom nature has freed from this kind of travel, should be infected
therewith.

Besides, it is observed that the symptoms do not happen to all women, or at
least not all to every one, and yet it often falls out, that when the woman is
in good health, the husband is sick, yea sometimes being many miles off; but if
he induce that by his wives being with child, how comes it to pass that she
continues well at the same time; for observe this maxim in Philosophy, That
natural causes do sooner work upon the near, than upon the remote subject.

And for that cause, seeing the woman carries about her such noxious humors,
she should be sooner, yea and more grievously sick.

I know something might be said of simpathy, antipathy, contagion, fascination,
and such like trifles; but if these things be so, I Query; why do not maids and
widows, (who are very often troubled with the like symptoms) through
suppression of their courses infect their bed-fellows and familiars, seeing
there is the same cause and sympathy with some of them. But note, (and in this
maxim I show you one great natural cause, why many being with, and in the
houses of those infected of the Plague this great Visitation, and yet escaped
themselves alone.)

To cause a contagion. Not only the efficacy of the agent, but also a
disposition and analogy in the patient is requisite.

I shall say no more in this case, because by the very relating of it the
absurdity of this error does appear.

3. Some are of the opinion that it is hurtful to change the linen very often
in time of sickness. This error seems to me to spread most amongst the common
people, for they think that the sick by changing their linen are weakened and
enfeebled thereby, which indeed is not true, for it does rather strengthen them
and revive them, only great care must be had in changing of the linen, that
the party catch no cold; for by long keeping of their linen, there are three
inconveniences do happen to the sick, viz. 1. The transpiration of the body is
hindered. 2. Sweat and filth are kept in their shirts, which do putrify and
contract an ill savor. 3. The sweat and filth do obstruct the body, and so
consequently double the heat.


Which three things do much hurt and damage to the sick, especially in
continual fevers, in which for the most part the fever coming as often as it
does by the obstructions of the pores of the skin; and therefore must be
remedied, only let it, as I said before, be done with great care, as to time,
place and season, for yet I would promote truth above error, I would not give
any encouragement to wicked persons in this nature, to do injury to any they
are obliged to, either by conscience or reward to attend; and therefore I
conclude this point with this Memorandum, that sins of omission are accounted
less than sins of commission.

4. Some are of the opinion that naught but hot drinks are to be given to women
in childbed.

This is an error, and occasions those complaints that are frequently made by
women in such cases, viz. that they are grievously thirsty and hot, this being
a maxim received by evil observation, that they may take no cooling thing, but
only drinks actually and potentially hot, as burnt-wine with hot spices,
Cinnamon Water, and such like; and these things, as usually given, are often
pernicious, and always tedious; yet both wine and cinnamon are good and
allowable in such cases. But observe,

There are diverse conditions of women in childbed, for some have in them a
morbus preparative, and the sickly humors being moved with the travel of the
birth, do bring forth in them diverse diseases; but others enjoying a more
perfect health do quickly return to themselves, and by little and little grow
well again without any dangerous symptoms. To the former, strong and hot drink
are very hurtful, for they inflame the inward parts, and amend not the morbus
humors at all, but increase and corrupt them.

And to the latter sort, which otherwise would recover their health, they may
cause fevers and such like diseases; so that although I do not approve of very
hot drink for the reasons aforenamed, and others not here mentioned, yet I
understand also very cold are not to be administered; but those that are warm
and temperate in quality, and such too as may be peculiarly proper in such
cases.

Also in food there is a great error, women most commonly being fed high with
much meat and very good nursing, from the consideration of losing much, and it
must be fetched up again, not considering what they daily lose is for their
benefit and advantage, and not hurtful.

And in this case I shall relate the observation, and saying of that great
Physician Hipp. 2. Acul. Where he teaches that after a large evacuation we
must not presently hasten to a full diet, fearing the multiplying of the
excrementitious humors, and so a fever ensue, and other symptoms happen, but
let them be fed sparingly, till all fear of a fever and other symptoms be
quasht, and she be well purged from her flowers, and then by degrees pass to a
fuller diet, and so strength and health will come without danger by Gods
blessing.

Now possibly it may here be expected, since I am in this field a plucking up,
I should also plant, since I am condemning some things, I should place and set
forth others.

Which thing I should heartily and willingly do, only these things stand in the
way.

1. Fearing few will resent it well, and fewer practice it, discreetly,
diligently and singly, being linked to old customs.

2. For want of which coming under my notion and directions, if any accident
happen, upon what account soever. Ignorance of some and ill will in others,
will bring under condemnation. And

3. For want of room my sheets having gone to the outmost of my intention, and
the business of such concernment, that to lay down any thing of such a nature,
it must not be done without qualifications and cautions.

However, if there be any gentlewoman or others, that out of an ingenious and
right spirit would be satisfied and informed either her self or others,
according to the rules of Art, what diet, meaning both drink and food, a woman
at such a time ought in order to her good recovery, to take and make use of
together, with what else may seem necessary. I am willing, and upon request
shall answer their desires according to the extent of my power and observations
heartily, cordially, faithfully, and exactly, by writing or otherwise.

5. Some are of the opinion that medicines Chymically prepared are dangerous,
and very desperate medicines, and so consequently take no place, women being
with child or in childbed.

A great mistake, and a false report raised by the enemies of that noble Art;
in vindication of which, as I am bound, so I could say much, but here I must
comprize all in few words.

Understand then that Chemical preparations are not dangerous at all, but safe,
and the most suitable Physic that persons in any case can make use of; and
this I prove, because the office of a Chemist is to separate the pure from the
impure, and so the pure part of either Vegitable, Animal or Mineral, given and
administered, whereby diseases are cured more quickly, safely and pleasantly,
which is demonstrated both by the efficacy and Dose of such medicines.

But because I would be rightly understood what I mean by pure and impure, and
to stop the mouth of cavellers, I call that pure which is useful and profitable
to man's nature, and I call that impure which is hurtful and dammageable; and
because in some sense nothing can be called pure or impure absolutely speaking,
I mean comparatively, and in respect of one thing to another; and so whatsoever
pure can be found in any mixed or compound, that is the Chemical Physic which
is made use of by Chemical Doctors, to serve their and their Patients ends and
purposes, and that impure rejected as not fitting to be used.

So that if I should say no more, any unprejudicated person may safely and
certainly conclude that the purer part of any thing is most fit for our bodies,
yea, and the more safer medicine. Being freed from those gross and
heterogenious substances, which are more ready to breed than cure diseases.

But here possible may arise these three questions, which I shall briefly
answer.

1. Whether Chemistry does not deal with the most desperate and poisonous
things that are, as Quicksilver or Mercury, Antimony and Copper, etc.

Answ. Yes, and Gold and Silver too, which are desperate poisonous also as they
may be taken; but what of that, shall a man be afraid of an Oyster, because the
shell is able to choke him; the Oyster is good meat, though the shell be
naught, the Oyster is pure, though the shell be impure; so likewise there is
that in Mercury, Antimony and Copper, etc. that is pure, and not desperate nor
poisonous, but serviceable and of great use for all or most diseases either of
men, women or children, and are safe administrations in general, being internal
cleansers of the whole mass of blood, expelling from it whatsoever the
depravation of digestion and evil fermentation may have contracted and mixed in
it, of dangerous and hurtful humors; and this pure, of mercury, antimony,
copper, etc. Is that which is used as Physic, and no other by chemical
doctors, the dunghill or some other mean employment in that art, and not their
patients tasting of the poisonous or impure part in either of these or ought
else, that is not suitable to our bodies in order to cure diseases. But that
this bugbear may take the less advantage, it is to be understood that chemists
work upon vegetables and animals as well as minerals, though this must be
acknowledged, that the more nobler cures in chronical diseases, have been and
are chiefly conquered by those medicines of the mineral kingdom; and judge you
whether it be wisdom in any to reject cure, though of a snake, so his sting be
out. And so I come to a second question, which may be.

2. Whether the art of chemistry do or can separate the pure from the impure,
and so render those things which otherwise are against us, for us, and those
things that are already for us, more for us.

Ans. Yes, and it is clearly evident, and that from those things which are such
afrightments, viz. mercury, antimony, medicines being daily made and given from
them, that with safety are and may be given to children of a year old. We have
said in effect before, impurity to be that which could interrupt the
perfections of those actions, which do conduct the mixed to the end of its
natural predestination; the question being now how it may be freed from this
domestic enemy which insensibly does creep into the compound. Now as all mixed
are under several genders and differing species, and that there is several
sorts of impurities, so there are several ways in art to correct and take them
away: but because, to evident demonstrations or particularize the parts of this
doctrine, would extend beyond the limits of my intentions, I must forbear, and
conclude that the pure from the impure can be separated from mercury and
antimony it self by, 1. Calcination. 2. Sublimation. 3. Distillation. 4.
Liquation. 5. Extraction. 6. Infusion. 7. Salification. And 8. Mercurification.


Is undeniable, and as must so is granted by the arts greatest enemies. Some
medicines by these ways of preparations being used by themselves. But.

3. Some will further say, the whole age of the ancients wanted chemical
remedies, who notwithstanding cured diseases very well, and it sometimes
happens that Physicians now a days perform great cures without them.

Ans. It is questionable by some, whether our ancients were not eminent
chemists; for Paracels. was not the first by many generations; and of all
those, even to our days now, I find none but used it and esteemed it highly,
though I must confess they had but a taste thereof. But suppose so, men in old
time did feed on acorns and lived long; yet having now found out the use of
corn, we reject acorns, and leave them to hogs. Again, if they did and now do,
it was and is but some times, being befooled by many chronical diseases very
often, and when they do perform any cure, their medicines do it but slowly and
unpleasantly; and there are but few, if any, chronical diseases taken in any
time, but chemical remedies will reach, and safely and speedily cure. Indeed by
reason of many impostors that through ignorance and covetousness, have played
both the fool and knave in these things, some miscarriages might happen; but I
justify none but true sons of art and true medicines, and such are the most
noble medicines the world does afford; and I say once again may profitably and
safely be given and administered to all sorts of sexes, constitutions, and in
all conditions, being made, chosen and administered by an understanding and
discreet hand. Nay, even in this our case in childbed, being in regard of
their condition, the most powerful against all enemies, and most friendly to
nature, commanding the Archeus beyond compare. I need say no more, the fame
thereof spreading almost over all the whole world, and gets much ground and
favorites, even from the most noble, which if there were any such thing in it
as is supposed by some, no doubt but it would have been buried in silence, and
lain in the dust long ere this day. But

6. Some are of the opinion that bleeding and purging are hurtful for women
with child. It is too too common, especially amongst the Countrey-women, that
if they be sick and be with child, they will not admit by no means to take
Physic, or be let blood for fear of miscarriage, which indeed is contrary 1.
To reason. 2. To the Authority of the Ancients. 3. To daily experience.


1. To reason, because a woman that labors with an acute disease, as a fever
or plurisie, etc. is in very great danger, therefore no delay ought to be made
in applying remedies, for we are to understand that the child is nourished by
the mothers blood, if she be sick there is danger, least through that sickness
and the corruption of the blood the child perish; which if it happen, as
sometimes (though not very often) it does, then is the mother in danger, both
by reason of the disease and the dead child; or if not so, yet miscarriages do
generally attend sickness of women with child, and there is no miscarriage
without danger. Now its evident enough, that these evils cannot be prevented
without taking away the cause, and the cause cannot be taken away according to
the testimony of authority, without bleeding or purging, or both; for the same
course that is taken to cure a woman not with child, and a woman with child, is
all one and the same thing, necessary in the one as in the other; for the same
disease indicates the same remedies, and the being with child does not take
away the indication of the disease, but only after a sort alters the quantity,
the quality, and the manner of using them. Letting blood done with wisdom and
discretion, I have observed often does rather revive and strengthen, than
weaken either mother or child, and so likewise purging duly administered; the
noxious part of the purge, if any, not reaching the womb, and that more about
the work of retention than expulsion.

2. To the authority of the ancients. Hipp. commends purging to women with
child from the fourth month to the seventh month; and if he whose medicines
were more dangerous than ours, as appears plainly, did and commanded so,
successefully, much more may it be safe for us, our medicines being now in use
for that purpose more gentle.

3. To experience, for we find daily that women with child are let blood and
purged once and again, and yet no damage, but profit and advantage coming by
it; yea, many times to my own knowledge, women with child have been preserved
from miscarriage by bleeding and purging, using only some specifical medicines
also, and never any caught the least hurt. This then ^s clear, that women with
child may purge and bleed safely and advantagiously, but herein, when, where
and what, be advised, etc.

7. Some are of the opinion that gold boiled in broth is a great cordial, and
good for women in childbed, and to cure consumptions Gold without doubt is of
great virtue and excellency; yea the noblest, the most solid and fixed of all
metals compacted, and of an almost indivisible union in its substance; and
therefore, though it may be very choice and excellent in curing diseases, being
such as is aforesaid, which shows it to be compounded of salt, sulphur and
mercury, brought to the highest degrees of digestion, yet being soused, as
boiled in broth or taken in substance, the broth cannot take any virtue from
it, only possible some dross, it being so very compact as it can be dissolved
with no fire nor boiling; neither can the digestive heat of the stomach, and
the moisture of imperfect chile, in any wise alter the solidity of this noble
metal, supposing no broth nor liquor in the stomach analogous to Aq. Regia.
Therefore those who would have the virtues of gold for their help, must desire
the help of an ingenious chemist, who is able to open the body thereof,
separate and bring him into such a medicine as is nearer to be reduced into its
old body. I hope I have said enough.

8. Some have wrong opinions about their choice of ^urses.

Gentlewomen and others that nurse not their children themselves, are very
difficult usually in their choice of a nurse, and herein they are not to be
blamed, but commended, for a good nurse makes a thriving child; and she ought
not only to be diligent in her attendance, but be young, well be haved, of good
constitution, using a good and wholesome diet, and to abstain from venery. But
in this case I have observed two things, which I think ought not to be so
enquired after as they are, and therefore I shall endeavor their refutation.

1. Whether the nurses milk be old or no, and how long she has given suck,
etc. supposing the milk not to be so wholesome for a newborn child, and
therefore sometimes prefer a nurse that is elder, which has but lately given
suck, before one that is young, if she has given suck longer; and herein they
err, for the woman being young and qualified for such a work, ought to be
preserred far before the more elder, though she have given suck longe^, seeing
that every day the breasts of nurses do afford new milk, because every day new
milk is made, and has the same causes of generation after five years, which it
had the first month; for seeing that the milk does participate of the nature of
its material and efficient cause, and is generated out of these causes only, if
the nurse be healthful, and free from care, anger and sorrow of mind, and seed
on good and wholesome meats; there is no doubt but she gives always good and
wholesome milk, for the milk does partake of the nature of the blood of which it
is made; but in a healthful body nourished with wholesome meats, good blood is
always made, and of good blood is not wont to be made bad and unwholesome milk,
if the body be in health; nor can giving suck it self alter or viciate the
milk, forasmuch as nature ordains nothing that is evil, and it would be ill for
the child every day the nurses milk were made worse by giving suck. When
therefore occasion is offered, I choosing a nurse, let only her constitution,
healthfulness and age be considered.

2. It is supposed by many that a boys milk is fittest for a girl, and a girls
for a boy; and therefore this is another enquiry, supposing the boys milk is
hotter, and therefore fittest for the girl, and contrariwise that the girls
milk is cooler, and so fittest for the boy.

Two things against this.

1. They suppose amiss, that a female is always colder than a male, whenas
experience testifies that some women are hotter than some men, nor can a
choleric woman without censure be judged to be colder than a phlegmatic man:
However

2. They err in supposing the child's sucking can change the temper of the
milk; for seeing (as we have said) the nature of the milk does sollow the
nature of the efficient cause, and of the meats of which it is made, what can
the child do against these? for while it sucks it cannot by contact alone
change the constitution of the mother; therefore as I have said before enquiry
of these natures may be spared, and other things minded and enquired after, as
is already specified.

And thus have I by Gods assistance finished what I intend at this time,
leaving the answering of several questions, or resolving several queries, viz.
What Sex with child of? and whether with child or no? Concerning longing twins
and hair lips, etc. till another season. Read, Consider and Judge with a Spirit
of Wisdom, Meekness, Sobriety and Fear. And so for this work, as for all other
good things.

Gloria Deo tribuanda, non nobis.

Christian Reader Providence having disposed me a former Wise that was very
unhealthful, occasioned my study and search into women's diseases; the advantage
of which, as then, so often since, successefully tried, moved me to this
Publication: Having also experimental Remedies, externally applied, for the
perfect curing of worms, deafness, infirmities in eyes, defectness^^ (...), and
ruddy or pimply faces, if curable, which the p(...) know before hand.

By N. S.

FINIS.

