A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Popish Courant, ANNEXED TO THE WEEKLY PACKET OF Advice
from Rome: Friday October 14. 1681.
In a Dialogue between Trueman and Tory.
Truem. HOw? given his Soul to the Devil? turned a Doctor Faustus?


Tor. So says the Infallible Observator, No. 61. which I rather believe then a
Geneva Bible, and he tells you the Condition too, as punctually as if he had
been a witness to the Contract.


Truem. This is wholly extraordinary; but what If there should be no more Truth
in this, than there was in another of his Observations, not long since of
Doctor Oats lying all along upon the High Altar at St. Omers, and saying he was
taking his Leave of Jesus Christ, it is true, Monsieur Observator does not tell
the Story so much at large as the Jesuit that first invented it, but yet he
fairly hints it as a great Truth: for with the Vomits of the Jesuits he stuffs
his Papers, and from their Topics has for these two years Ridiculed the Popish
Plot.


Tor. Well; If Care have so Mortgaged himself; I Will warrant you old Nick has
taken possession, for I am sure Care has often broke the Condition specified,
and told some unlucky Truths; therefore though I am not Guilty of much good
meaning to the Wretch, yet for the Honor of holy Church, that a miracle may be
wrought, I would Recommend a Receipt for him.


Truem. What to drive the Devil out?


Tor. Yes; On my word it is as easily done as to Cure an Ague with Jesuits
Powder, in a Book Entitled Flagellum Demonum (the Devils Scourge) wrote by the
Reverend Father Jerome Mengus, a Friar Minorite, Printed WITH ALLOWANCE (Sir)
at Lions Anno 1614, you have a hundred of these Divel-Driving-Medicines, each
with its Probatum.


Truem, Prithee, lets have one of them.


Tor. Why p. 51. There is this that follows; but pray mind the Crossings. I
Conjure thee O Devil, by what names soever thou art called, by the living God
and by these Holy Names of God, That at my Command from this Creature of God N.
thou do without delay depart, putting him to no pain, nor doing him any damage,
and without the Hurt of any person Hell, Heloym, Adonay, Saday, Soter, Emanuel,
Tetragrammaton, Alpha and Omega, Agyos, Yschyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Agla,
Jehova, Homousion, Ya, Jesus, Christus, Messiah, Eloa, Eheye. Again, I Conjure
thee by the Blessed Virgin Mary, and by all the Court of Heaven, and by all
things wherewith thou may be bound, That forthwith thou show thy self, O thou
Malignant Spirit, and answer me touching whatever I shall Interrogate thee.


Trum. Nay, If this will not do, I know not what will, -- But without Fooling, I
believe there may be no need of your Catholic Exorcism, for I am told Care
defies the Devil and L'Estrange, and all their Works, and lives in the Peace of
God and the King. That he ever said L'Estrange had a hand in the Burning of
London, or that he removed his Books and Papers, etc. is utterly false; and the
small Eves-droping Tongue-pads that informed the Observator, abused him, 'Twas
well there was other Company that remembered Cares Words, and the occasion; and
'twas a kindness that the Youths did not Swear Treason against him when their
hand was in, Care does not use to keep Boys Company, but they (having it seems
a design) obtruded themselves, and began to Quote L'Estrange, of whom Care gave
a due Character, that he was a very Ingenious Fellow, but he feared, abused
those good parts, God had lent him; to the prejudice of the King (by raising
Causless Jealousies) and of the Protestant Religion: after which a story was
told, that it was reported, a certain Blade near Puddle-Dock, that before the
Fire caused some Hay (not Books or Papers) that was ordered in thither, to be
carried to Holburn; but not a word of L'Estrange's being the man, for on the
contrary Tradition delivers it to be an old Fellow, that was at that time
Stallion to a woman thereabouts. L'Estrange, it is like might have been
mentioned in the foregoing Chat, and so had the Pope, and the French King; but
Care did not charge any of them to have any hand in the Fire; and to tell you
the Truth, though Care does not imagine the Gentleman to be a Fire-Ball flinger
in 1666. yet there are an hundred thousand good Loyal Subjects, that believe
him to be a Pamphlet-Incendiary.


Tor. You Whigs will be tatling, but you see what a Prophecy the Observator
has about Juries.


Truem. Truly a very pretty Reflection on the Honor and Justice of the
Nation, as if all the Popish Traitors had been Convicted Blindfold. For he that
Prophesies of a thing as a Rarity, supposes no such matter has commonly been
before.


LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1681.


