SUNDRY CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING Naturalization of Aliens: WHEREBY The alleged
Advantages thereby are confuted, and the contrary Mischiefs thereof are
detected and discovered.
THERE being much Discourse about Naturalizing Foreigners, and great
Conveniences and Inconveniences being suggested pro and con, as to the
Consequences thereof in respect to Trade, I beg leave, having my self an
Interest in the Trade of this Nation, that I may deliver the Sense of a worthy
Patriot, ( Sir Matthew Hales late Lord Chief Justice of England) who in a
Manuscript, accidentally falling into my hands, affirms, and from the following
Arguments proves, the Naturalization of Foreigners never to have been the
judgment of honest, thinking, but only the opinion of unthinking, notional, or
designing Men, and the inconveniences that follow hereupon never to he
remedied. It is a Subject that very nearly concerns the Good of this Kingdom,
the English having been always tenacious of their Liberty, and Jealous of being
wronged in their Trade by Foreigners, as is apparent by the many commotions
formerly on that account, especially the Ill May Day in the 9th. Year of King
Henry the Eighth (1657.) of which our Historians take especial notice: If it
was thus, when Trade was in its Infancy, it may possibly be much more so, now
the Trade of Europe is chiefly in our hands.

And at this present time the countenancing of a Foreign Trade, (though in a
Sister Nation) to the prejudice of our own Merchants appears to be of such high
and National concern, that both Houses of Parliament (those great Assertors of
our English Liberties) have taken notice of it.

But to wave further prefacing, I come directly to the subject Matter, and
observe.

I. THAT there is no present necessity of any such thing: not from abroad, for
we are not under the fear or power of Foreign Princes that might impose it upon
us. Nor from within, for though we have many Foreigners among us, yet they are
not able so far to give us the Law, as by a bold importunity to command it: The
Natives of this Kingdom very much exceed them in strength and number, neither
do the Natives of this Kingdom, except some few speculative and notional men,
desire, much less demand it; so that we who have above five hundred years
continued under distinct Policy from other Nations, and have enjoyed the
Privilege of our own Kingdom, without communication thereof promiscuously and
generally to Aliens may continue so still without the necessity of
Naturalization of Aliens; and for ought I know, with as much happiness, and
wealth, and honor, as our Ancestors have done before us. And although it is
true, that while the King, of England had their Hereditary Territories in
France, the French of those Territories were in effect by the Union Naturalized
as Postnati in Scotland are with us at this day, yet that is nothing to the
business in hand, namely an universal Naturalization; so that there seems
nothing of necessity in the case, only if there be any thing of reason for it,
it must be the business of convenience, and that in relation to Trade.

II. Therefore the conveniences of Naturalization of Aliens must be considered,
and this certainly must be in relation to Trade: And herein will be these
Considerations following. Namely; First, What kind of Naturalization that must
be which must most advance Trade. Secondly, What kind of advance of Trade will
arise by such Naturalization.

Touching the former of these; certainly the general reason of the advance of
Trade by Naturalizing Aliens must be, because it will be a means to invite
Foreigners to come hither, to bring their Stocks, their Wealth, their Trading,
their Manufactures hither, where they may find as great, if not greater
advantage, than they have in other, or their own, Countries.

The consequence whereof must needs be, that the more ample and extensive their
Privilege is, the greater the advance of Trade will thereby be; because the
Invitation is the greater, and on the other side the more narrow, contracted,
and restrictive, the Naturalization is, the less it will conduce to the advance
of Trade.

The Naturalization therefore must be Universal. First, In respect of extent,
it must extend to all Persons of all Nations, of all Religions, Protestants,
Papists. Jews, Mahometans, Turks, Moors, Pagans, for otherwise it answers not
the Latitude of the Design, if Trade be the Saint that is adored only, other
Considerations must be laid aside, or else the Latitude of the Design is
narrowed. Secondly, In respect of Intention or the Nature of the Privilege, it
must be to all Intents and Purposes, there must be no discrimination in Customs
nor in Hereditary Successions, nor in any other Privileges belonging to
natural born Subjects.

Touching the later, the advance of Trade hereby will be thus,

England is most certainly in the most advansageous place of the World, to be
the Mistress of Trade, both in reference to Europe, Asia, Africa, and America,
the Eastern, Western, Northern, and Southern World, it has the best Ports and
Harbors for Shipping of any place in the World, and not only the best, but the
most numerous, as well as most useful. It has the most advantageous Rivers,
for the transporting into the Body of the Kingdom, and educing out of it all
manner of Commodities, as Thames, Severn, Humber, Tyne, and by diverse others,
and by new Cuts and Sluices there might without much difficulty in comparison
of the Profit, for the communication between the Ports themselves, and the
Ports and Inland Towns. Again, it has Timber for Shipping, is not far distant
from the Baltic Sea, for its supply of Masts and Cordage, has Iron. Tin,
Lead, Leather, Wool, Cloth, etc. for the maintenance of Trade, is excellently
fitted with fishing for the increase of Mariners, has all sorts of Victuals
for the Victualling of Ships, and in Sum is supplied with all conveniences and
accommodations to make it the common Port almost of the whole World. And
besides all this, though it be very populous for a Continent, it is nothing in
comparison of what it might be as an Island or Common Port; there is room
enough for the reception of Millions of People in those vast unpeopled Plains
and Coasts almost in all Countries; the Netherlands that are not much larger
than Yorkshire, yet in respect of their Trade are infinitely more populous than
the most populous part of England, except London, Bristol, Exeter and
Newcastle, and some other Port-Towns.

And therefore were the Country free for all Nations to come into, with the
same advantage as in their own, certainly all these advantages, besides the
pleasantness and temperateness of the Country would invite infinite numbers of
Foreigners, especially the Trading and Manufacturing part of them to come and
settle here; and the Consequences hereof to the Trade and Wealth of the Kingdom
would be such as these.

1st. It would presently advance the Price and Rents of Land by the increase of
the Wealth, the Trade, and the Inhabitants of the Kingdom.

2dly. It would draw over the Trading Merchants and their Stocks hither, which
would in a moment advance the Wealth of the Kingdom.

3dly. It would bring over the Artificers of all Foreign Countries hither, and
the rather considering that here would be the great Magazine of Commerce, and
also a sufficient store of Materials for their Employment, which either are
here native, or would be speedily acquired, as Iron, Steel, Tin, Lead, Wool,
Hemp, Flax.

4thly. And by this means the Natives of this Kingdom would be instructed in
all kind of Manufactures, and which is yet a greater advantage the idle Poor of
this Kingdom which is at present the burden, and will be in time the
destruction of the Kingdom, will become the Wealth of the Kingdom being
habituated, and as it were fermented by the industry of Foreigners, who at this
time, and almost in all ages have been more happy in Manufacture than the
English who have most of their curious Manufactures from the Dutch and French.

5thly. And by this means England will be the commune and nobile Emporium of
the World, their Shipping, Mariners and Trade, and consequently their Wealth,
Power, and Strength immensly increased, for experience and reason tell us, that
whatsoever place is the Seat of Trade, that place must abound with Wealth,
Shipping and Mariners, as is seen at this day, especially in Holland and
Venice, for by these means the Merchandise of all parts of the World, will in
effect become the Native Commodities of this Kingdom, the same being become the
common Receptacle and Storehouse thereof for Exportation into all Places of
the World.

And these be many of the most considerable Reasons that seem to evince the
convenience of this Expedient, and indeed carry a specious Pretext for it.

But for all this I do think that neither the event will answer the
expectation, and if it did yet the inconveniences that accompany this thing
will be too great.

First, Therefore this Expedient seems utterly incompetent for the Ends
propounded, namely, the Increase of the Wealth and Trade of this Kingdom, and
for the Evidence thereof, I shall not use Notions and Suppositions, but appeal
to experience and observation, which in a matter of this nature proves more
effectually than conjectural Notions and Imaginations, and I shall use but
these two Instances.

First, If this were a means to increase the Trade, and consequently the Wealth
of this Kingdom, it would have been the means thereof in some former Ages, and
if it had been so, surely they had had as much reason, both in respect of their
Wisdom, and Prudence, and Interest, to have seen it and allowed it in former
Times; but in all the Tracts of former Times, this was never so esteemed or
found, and therefore we have as much reason to believe that it would not so
prove now.

And that former Times never esteemed or found this Expedient useful for the
increase of the Wealth and Trade of this Nation, is evident in this, that they
ever most strictly kept up the discriminations betwixt Natives and Aliens.
First, The Exclusion of them from the privilege of purchasing Lands in
England, has always made their Purchases forfeit to the Crown, and their Issue
disabled from Hereditary Succession, which in the time of Henry the VIII. was
extended also to the purchasng of Houses.

2dly, The Aliens always even from the first Settlement of the great Customs in
Edward the I. his time, as in all Acts of Parliament for Subsidies since, have
been charged with an increase of Customs above the Native.

3dly, Great care was ever used in Naturalizations by Act of Parliament, which
were rarely granted and upon special Reasons.

It is true, that in all times some particular encouragement were given to
Foreigners to bring in their Arts here, as to the Weavers in the time of Henry
the II. and also to Merchants to bring in their Goods and sell them here, as by
the Statute of the 9th. of Edward the III. for selling by retail in London, and
other Cities, and particularly to the Hanse Merchants, and the Merchants of the
Style Yard by King Henry the III. by King Edward the I. in his Charta
Mercatoria, by King Edward the IV. in enlarging the Privileges of the
Merchants of the Stile-Yard, but still they maintained and kept up the
Discrimination between English and Foreigners, as to the point of
Naturalization and disparity of Customs in general.

2dly, In all Ages Merchants in amity had, and to this day have as great
liberty in point of Trade and Commerce in this Kingdom, except as to the
Purchasing of Lands, and equality of Customs, as the universal Naturalization
of them would give, our Ports are equally open to them (except the late Act for
encouraging Navigation) as they would be if Naturalized, and the convenience of
our Ports are as much now as they would be then. So that if the point of
Commerce and convenience of our Ports are as much now as they would be then, it
is not credible that the giving them privilege of purchasing Lands, which is
collateral to Trade, and the little disproportion of their Customs would so
abundantly increase the Trade of the Kingdom as to matter of Commerce, the
supposed grand advantage, over what it now does.

2dly, But touching the second considerable, I say, that although some possible
advantage might grow to our Trade by such an extensive Privilege, yet the
inconveniences that would thereby arise to the Safety, Satisfaction,
Preservation and Wealth of this Kingdom, would excessively surmount that
imaginary advantage, as will evidently appear by these ensuing Considerations.

1st. It would in a little time surcharge the Kingdom with Aliens, and either
drive out, streighten, consume, or quite blot out the English Nation. If the
Wealth they bring with them were small and inconsiderable, they would be our
Burden, if great, they would be our Canker to eat the Natives out of their
Possessions, and by degrees, transfer our Possessions to Strangers; and so
while by Naturalizing them, we should demonstrate a great Zeal to the increase
of Trade, we should at the same time discover a great neglect, and indeed
betraying of our Country and Countrymen, exterminating them, that we might
increase Trade for Strangers.

2dly, It would presently give an universal disgust to the whole Kingdom, who
would reasonably think that we sold them to purchase Trade, and let any man
look upon the examples of former times, especially in the times of Edward the
II. and some others; no one thing gave a deeper and more general discontent
than the filling of the Kingdom with Aliens, what the inconveniences of such a
general distaste would be, is not difficult to judge.

3dly, What if Wars should arise between this Kingdom, and those Kingdoms from
which the great resort of Aliens should come, can any man reasonably think that
they would not have respect to their Native Countries, where possibly many of
their Relations, and Possessions, and a great part at least of their Wealth
should lodge, or can we think they should wholly be dismissed of their Allegiance
and Subjection to their Native Princes and Governors, if not, then we have so
many Enemies Incorporated to us, who may quickly join with Native Countrymen,
and ruin our Peace and Kingdom, betray all our Counsels, or at least keep us in
that awe and fear, that we must not break with those Countries upon any Terms,
but keep a servile and base Peace with them upon their own Terms, or engage, in
a War with them to our extremest danger and disadvantage. Neither will the
Objection of the Parity of our Condition any way help us, for as the Advantage
of the English Country, and the convenience of Trade here, would most certainly
draw over many Aliens hither, especially out of the populous places of France
and the Netherlands, so the inconveniences of their Countries in comparison of
ours, would send but few English among them, in comparison of their numbers
here; so we should pour in by this means France and Germany into England, to
the streightning and undoing of the Native English, but without reciprocal
disburdening of ours there, till necessity or the want of room or trade in
England, force the English to that miserable exchange.

4thly. It is but a fond dream to think that at least the first generation of
naturalized Aliens would thereupon transfer all their Estates hither, there are
infinite reasons why they should not. First, War may arise between this Kingdom
and the Country from whence they came, and the jealousy of that will make them
secure, at least, the most considerable parts of their Estates in their own
Countries. 2dly. In all probability they will have some estates which must
abide there: Debts due to them, and not gotten in, Houses, Possessions. 3dly.
At least, they will have many of their Relations, as their Fathers, Mothers,
Children, Brothers, Kindred which will still keep them upon a dependence upon
that Country, notwithstanding their Transportation. 4thly. Again, here they
will find Animosities and Heart-burnings by the Native English against them;
upon all which accounts and many more, we may be well assured that most of them
will not venture all in one bottom, but will keep a considerable part of their
Estates and Trade and Relations in the Countries from whence they came: and he
is blind that sees not what the consequence of that will be, namely, that they
will drain the wealth of England into their own Hands and Purses, which they
will easily transmit to their own Countries; that they will make our Country
the Instrument to enrich themselves, and their own Country without enriching
us; that they will trade from hence into their own Country and Plantations upon
better, easier, and safer Terms then the English shall, whereby they will be
able to undersel and undermine the English Traders, who shall thereby be
undone, and not know who hurt them. 5thly. We are mistaken if we think that our
English will be better instructed by them, it is true, if a few come over,
necessity will put them upon employing the English under them, as is done in
Colchester, and some other places at this day; but if many come over they will
keep the Trade and Manufacture among themselves, for though some of us English
have so little judgment and good nature as to deliver over our own Country to
Aliens, yet when they come hither we shall find them more discreet, politic,
and better natured to their Countrymen

6thly. Neither will our Manufactures be better but worse. We have Laws that
Traders in some things must have served their Apprenticeships; but if Aliens
come over, must they be bound Apprentice before they trade? If so, we shall
have but few of the Artificers come unto us: But if not? Then any Alien may
work at any Trade without Control, the Law for Apprentices must be repealed as
to them, and they may work as they please.

And of the same Consideration will be the privileges of our great English
Cities, London, York, Bristol, etc. Where none but a Freeman may by Custom
exercise their Trades. Shall all these privileges be resumed as to Aliens? If
so, the Aliens are put into better Condition than the rest of Englishmen that
are not free of the Cities; and besides, it is very obvious to see what
Combustions may follow, upon such Invasions of Liberties of great Cities: but
if they shall not exercise their manual Trades, there the Aliens are
disappointed of what they most expected: Namely, trading in these places where
the greatest benefit is to be expected; and will not thank us for our
Indulgence. And tho these two last Articles concern Manufactures, and not
foreign Merchandise, yet the Consequence and Extent thereof is large, the
Arificers of the Kingdom are a numerous Company, and those none of the
wealthiest, they will soonest be pinched by this Design, and will complain
loudest. It is true the foreign Artificers are many, and perhaps more dextrous
in their Manufactures, and possibly as well as the Merchants more frugal in
their Expenses than ours are, or (it may be) are like to be; but all the
Consequence thereof, that is probable to ensue, is that they will beat the
English out of Trade and Custom, being able to undersel and underwork them,
which will have this effect indeed, that the Manufacture of England will be
advanced, because delivered ever to Aliens, but the Manufacture of the English
impoverished, and they at length necessitated to become the Journey men and
Servants, the Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water to Strangers that have beaten
them out of their Trade, and eaten them out of their Country; and we must
remember these Artificers are a numerous indigent querulous Company of People,
and if oppressed by Aliens may be troublesome, discontented, and unquiet. We see
with how much difficulty they are restrained from disorder upon smaller
Occasions, even in relation to those few foreign Artificers that settle among
us, what will then become of things when every second House shall be inhabited
and Handy-crafts exercised by Foreigners in many Places? And this the Wisdom of
Parliaments have wisely foreseen, and therefore have not only inhibited the
importation of foreign Manufactures, but also tho they encouraged in some kind
the foreign Merchant, yet have always discountenanced, as much as might
reasonably be, the unlimited boundless access of foreign Artificers, farther
than might be necessary in some particular cases, and places, and purposes, and
members. To bring over a competent number to teach the English, but not a
deluge to overflow and destroy the English Artificers, as will appear by the
Acts of Parliament, and practice of other times.

7. As large as the Naturalization is propounded to be, so large must the
Tolleration of the exercise of Religion be. If the Naturalization be universal
to all people, as Jews, Turks, Moors, Pagans, as well as Christians, of all
sorts of all Professions and Persuasions, such certainly must be the Extent of
the Liberties for the exercise of their Religion. The Jews must have their
Ceremonies, Circumcisions, Synagogues. Turks must have their Mahomitan Service,
and so must the Moors, and also Socinians, Papists, Lutherans, and others. For
since the foundation of the proposal is the politic consideration of the
increase of Trade, and the supposition is that the more universal the
Confluence of foreign Traders is, the greater will be the increase of Trade,
and the more ample and extensive the encouragement is, the greater will be the
confluence. Of necessity, upon these suppositions, the unlimited Tolleration of
all Religions will necessarily follow; for it will be ridiculous to think, that
those People (who are perchance more zealous in their false persuasions and
Religions, than many of us English are of the true Religion) should think
themselves much gratified with a civil privilege in point of Trade, Commerce,
Commorance, and participation of civil Immunities, and yet be fettered from the
free Practice and Exercise of their Religion; unless we please our selves with
that base Hope, that possibly by this means the sense of Religion will become a
matter of Indifferency, and strike sail to profit, or at least with that
unwarranted hope, that true Religion will be more likely to rectify those
false Religions, rather than to be corrupted by them.

And if as an Expedient it shall be proposed that the Tolleration shall not be
universal, but only of the Christian Religion, (though there be much to he said
against the universality of such a Tolleration) yet let such proposers
consider, First. That they will not thereby answer the latitude and extent of
their design, for the advantage of Trade to its full Extent; since a great part
of the trading Men of the World, are Jews, Turks, and Infidels. Again, what
Criterium shall be used that may be practicable for the discovery of such, and
discriminating them from others of the Christian Profession. They may come in
and plant themselves here in considerable Numbers, and keep their Religions
close to themselves 'till their Number swell to such a proportion, as may
defend them in the open profession and practice of that, which at first they
more modestly and politickly concealed till their Numbers, and Wealth, and
Interest, give them Safety and Impunity in a more free and open profession; so
that by this means, in a little time, Men of all Nations will be mingled with
our Parliaments, and Counsels, and public Employments, to the hazard of the
Ruin and Extirpation of the English Nation, Policy, and Government: and Men of
all Religions will be mingled with our Parliaments, Councels, and public
Employments, to the hazard and destruction not only of the Protestants, but of
the Christian Religion it self; or else to the corrupting it to a kind of
mungril Religion, like that of the Samaritans after their Captivity, they
feared the Lord, and served their Idols.

8thly. This very pouring in of Foreigners into this Kingdom, will endanger
the dissolution, or at least a considerable Alteration of the municipal Laws of
the Kingdom, and this has been the experience of this and all other Kingdoms,
which have suffered considerable Inroads of other Nations, either with or
against their Wills, the Inroads of the Danes and Saxons into this Kingdom soon
brought either Diversities or Alterations of Laws, and the Reasons thereof are
evident considerable Numbers of Foregners transplanted into another Kingdom,
bring along with them the Acquaintance and Knowledge and Love of their own Laws
and Customs; which does ordinarily occasion, First, Diversities of Laws, for
when they come in considerable Companies, they many times plant themselves
together, and there mantain a considerable Government and Law among themselves,
which in time prevails and prospers into a Particular Law for that Society and
Tract wherein they plant themselves; and so breaks the Unity of the Law, and in
time of the Government of a Kingdom. Their Solemnities of Contracts, their
Obligations and Rules of Commerce, their Rules of Successions become different,
which in process of Time, rankles into the adjoining Parts and Counties. 2dly,
Dissolution, and alteration, and instability in Laws, for in time these
Foreigners having seated themselves, and grown rich, and potent, will
necessarily mingle with our Councils, yea, and with our Parliament, and ferment
and assimilate our Laws to their own; and it will be, and always has been
found, that diversity of Laws, and too much lubricity, instability, and change
of Laws are the causes of confusion and instability in Government.

Now perchance against these dangers and inconveniences, especially in relation
to the corrupting of Religion and municipal Laws, these, or such as these
expedients or objections may be projected or imagined.

1st. That the true Religion is so reasonable and effectual, that it may rather
reform the false Religions than be corrupted by them.

2dly. That this Tolleration of other Religions here may induce the permission,
tolleration, and favor, of the true Religion in other Countries where it is
interdicted, and thereby a greater advance of the True Religion may ensue in
Foreign Countries, and more than recompense the detriment that true Religion
may suffer by the entertainment of false Religions.

3dly. That there may be such modifications of the indulgence to Foreigners, as
may secure it against innovations either in Religion, Laws, or Government, as
may be feared from an imprudent, unlimited, unqualified admission, perchance
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy might be a fitting Expedient, or an
exclusion of them from Public Offices, or distributing them into several
quarters, might be a sufficient corrective for this Fear.

I ANSWER.
I. To the first of these, it is true, that the true Protestant Religion has a
great advantage of evidence and worth above other Religions, and it has by the
Blessing of God, much prevailed in the World; but we must remember our
Savior's answer to the Devil's temptation of throwing himself down from the
Pinnacle of the Temple, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. God Almighty has
given the Children of Men Reason and Prudence, and it is to be employed as well
in Matters relating to Religion, as in civil Concerns. It were a wildness to
expect that the corrupt Religions should not more probably infect our weak and
corrupted Nature, rather than to think that a true Religion would not receive
Corruption by the mixtures of Persons of corrupt Principles, we see at this
time, Idolatry, Turcism, and Popery has prevailed in six parts of seven at
least, in the habitable World.

II. To the second, I answer, First, How do we know that other Princes will
grant a reciprocal Indulgence unto the Protestant Religion? 2. If they will,
that they will observe and keep it? It will take up a considerable time to be
sure of both these, and till we are sure thereof, we are not in any tolerable
condition to make or receive this Proposition. 3. But if we had sufficient
assurance, they would make and keep such a reciprocal compact, yet the
disadvantage will still be on our parts. We shall never have the advantage to
invite the English into the Foreign Parts of Europe or Asia, as they will have
to invite them hither; England is a fine spot of Ground, a rich and convenient
Pasture, handsomely enclosed by Natural Enclosures, and by civil against the
Incursion of Aliens; namely, the Sea and our Laws, and if this enclosure were
to be thrown open, that our Neighbors should become intercommoners with us
upon the supposed advantage of the liberty of ours with them, where one
Englishman would transplant himself into France, a thousand Foreigners would
transplant themselves hither, and starve the English into a necessity of an
unwilling transportation of our selves into our Neighbor common, and how long,
or how well they would be entertained there, we might perchance hereafter know
to our loss; but be it never so well, we well know it would be to our loss.

III. As to the third, I say, we have no necessity, thanks be to God, of trying
this Experiment: were the Trade of England as well managed as it might be
without this Experiment, we should have no need of searching after such
projects to advance it, and therefore it is extreme folly to make unnecessary
and hazardous Experiments, in hope to cure them by Expedients, which we are not
sure will be either effectual or sufficient for it. If the Sea has broken down
the Banks, it becomes us to use the best means we can by new Ditches and
Provisions to stop its progress, and since we cannot wholly prevent the danger
and avoid the loss, yet to use the best and likeliest means we may to render it
as easy, and as remediable as may be. But it is a madness to break down the
Banks, and let in the Deluge upon hopes of Expedients, to render it less
inconvenient, and to run so great a danger upon prospect of petty notional
imaginations that might as well think to circumscribe it. The Safety of States
and Kingdoms is of too great a moment without inevitable necessity to practice
experiments of such a nature. And the Experiment it self in proposal, is of
such a kind, as is not easily governable; but will be too unruly for the
magement and disposal in point of practice, whatever Men may think in Notions
and Speculations: And when all is done, as it may probably do very much harm,
so it does not appear to any considerate man (that is not fond of his own or
others fancies or novelties) that it can bring any equivalent benefit.

Upon the whole matter it seems, that the Proposal is to be rejected as
dangerous and hurtful to the Kingdom, to Religion, and to the Interest of the
English Nation, as utterly unevident to produce any considerable good to the
Kingdom, any way proportionable to the damage and danger thereof; that this
excellent boundary and rampire, that the Laws of this Kingdom have settled, and
at all times have tenaciously observed against the Inundations of Foreigners,
ought to be preserved as the great Security of the Safety, Privilege, and
Interest of the Natives; and although pro hic and nunc upon emergent reasons, and
personal merit and assurance of some particular persons, acts of Naturalization
have been granted; though very sparingly, and cautiously, and not by the sholes
(as has been too much done of late Times) yet there is neither Wisdom,
Prudence, nor fidelity to the King or Kingdom, to go about to throw open this
Enclosure, either by an universal Naturalization of all, or by any general or
national Naturalization of any Foreign Countries or People.

FINIS.

