A SERMON Preached before the KING, May 9. 1675.

BY JOHN SUDBURY D. D. Dean of DURHAM, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAjESTY.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Rob. White, for Hen. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1675.

PHILIP. iv. 22. All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's
Household.


THis Epistle was written by St. Paul when he was a Prisoner at Rome, as we may
see in the first Chapter, verse. 13. where he speaks of his bonds in Christ,
which were manifest in all the Palace; and here again among the salutations,
which he sends to the Philippians from all the Saints, he makes a particular
mention of those of Caesar's Household; All the Saints salute you, chiefly they
that are of Caesar's Household.

We see see then that there were Saints at Rome, when St. Paul wrote this
Epistle, not only in the City, but at the Court. Now who these Saints were, and
why here is so particular a mention of those of Caesar's Household, are the
Points which we are here to consider.

And first, by the Saints, without all doubt, he meant the Christians, for that
is the name by which he commonly calls them, the name by which they were
called before they were called Christians; for they were called Christians
first at Antioch, where he and Barnabas had spent a whole year in settling a
Church of them, as we read, Acts 11.26. but they were called Saints before he
was called to be an Apostle; for they whom he persecuted at Jerusalem, are
called the Saints at Jerusalem, Acts 9.13.

This name of Saints was appropriated by the Greeks to their Priests, because
they were consecrated after their manner to the service of those whom they
called Gods. But upon a better account it was appropriated by God himself to
the people of Israel, whom he consecrated to himself, Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be
unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation. And Deuteronomy. 14.2. Thou art an
holy people to the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to be a peculiar
people unto himself, above all the Nations that are upon the Earth. But the
people of Israel were herein, as in some other things, the types and figures of
those of the Christian Church, whom St. Paul calls the Israel of God, Gal.
6.16. and of whom St. Peter says, Ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9.

The name of Saints is appropriated to them upon several accounts, of which I
will mention but two.

1. Upon the account of their most holy profession, of the most pure, and holy,
and perfect Religion that ever was, or ever can be. For to say nothing of the
Religion of the Heathen, which served not to sanctify, but to make them more
unholy: The Religion of the Jews was not so pure and holy and perfect; for
though it was instituted by God, it was not instituted by him as the best, but
the best that they were then capable of: for besides the Laws, which were
indulged to them for the hardness of their hearts, as Christ says of the Law
of Divorce, Matthew. 19.8. Their Religion was encumbered with diverse Laws about
meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, imposed on them,
until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. which is a manifest evidence that
they were not the best, but only the best for them at that time; for if they
had been the best, they could not have been capable of a reformation, For if
that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought
for the second, Heb. 8.7. But this second Covenant is called the everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13.20. because it is so pure, and holy, and perfect, that it is
not capable of a reformation. For no precepts can be more pure and holy, no
promises more high and heavenly, no confirmations of them more divine. For what
precepts can be more pure and holy than that of cleansing our selves from all
pollution both of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1? and that of being holy in all manner of conversation, as he who has
called us is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15? and many more to the like purpose. What
promises can be more high and heavenly than that of an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for
us, 1 Pet. 1.4? The Kingdom prepared for us from the foundation of the world,
Mat. 25.34? and many the like expressions of it. What confirmation can be more
divine than that of a Covenant, in which God has made himself a party, of
which the Son of God is the Mediator, of which his blood is the seal, and all
the miracles wrought by him in his Fathers name, and upon him in his
Resurrection from the dead, and all the glory that followed, are the hand of
God, by which this Covenant was signed by him, and the Holy Ghost sent down
from heaven, was the pledge and the earnest? Which is therefore called a better
Covenant established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6. better in many respects,
and particularly in this, that it is more effectually to sanctify them that
have made themselves parties to it. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19. And
the Gospel is the bringing in of that better hope, a hope of which St. John
says, Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure, 1 John 3.3.

2. They were called Saints upon the account of their lives and conversations,
which were agreeable to their profession. For the primitive Christians have a
very good testimony both in the Scriptures, and from the Heathen among whom
they lived. The Scriptures bear witness of their constancy and stedfastness in
observing that rule, which they had received from the Apostles, of their piety
and devotion to God, of their unanimity among themselves, of their mutual
offices of Love and Charity, of their sincerity and singleness of heart, of
their patience in suffering afflictions, for the trial of their Faith, and the
testimony of their conscience, not only without complaining, but with
rejoicing. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in Prayers, Acts 2.42. And they continuing daily
with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having
favor with all the people, verse. 46, 47. And in the sixth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Hebrews we read of their work and labor of love, which was so
good, that God could no more forget it than he could be unjust, verse. 10. God
is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his name. And Heb. 10.32. we read of a great fight of affliction, which
they endured, not only without repining, but with rejoicing, as it follows at
the 34. verse. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance.

And though the Heathen among whom many of them lived, were willing to accuse
them of great crimes and enormities, to render them the more hateful; they knew
them to be so innocent and free from them, that they never offered to make any
proof of them, but did in effect confess that they had nothing to object to
them, but that they were Christians, as Tertullian expresses it, Bonus vir
Caius Seius, malus tantum quod Christianus; Caius Seius is a good man, he has
no fault but that he is a Christian. Such were the primitive Saints, and such
were they at Rome, for it is of them that St. Paul says, Romans 15.14. I am
persuaded of you my brethren, that ye are full of all goodness. And St. Paul
did not say that to flatter them, for in the same Epistle he speaks of their
Faith and Obedience as things well known to the world; Your Faith is spoken of
throughout the world, Romans 1.8. Your obedience is come abroad unto all men,
Romans 16.19. And for their sincerity we need no other testimony than that of
Tacitus, who speaking of the Persecutions, which they suffered for the
testimony of it under Nero, says that infinite numbers of them were convicted,
of which some were clothed in the Skins of Beasts, and torn with Dogs, some
were Crucified, some were burnt in the fire, and when the day failed, they were
burnt in the night to give light, and that they were pitied, because they
suffered, not for any public good, but to satisfy one man's cruelty. And as
the Children of Israel in Egypt, the more they were afflicted, the more they
multiplied and grew, so did the Saints at Rome, so that Rome became more
renowned for Christian piety and virtue, than ever it had been for the
greatness of her power, and the largeness of her dominion. The Church of Rome
was then, and many years after, a Catholic Church, not because it had Dominion
over all other Christian Churches, for that it had not; but because it held the
Catholic Faith, and all other Churches that held the same Faith, were as
Catholic as it. And though the Communion of the Church of Rome, was very much
desired and sought by all other Christian Churches, by reason of the eminence
of the City, and the splendor of the Court, and the free access which the
Bishops of Rome had to the Emperors, when they became Christian, and the great
power which they had with him, especially in the affairs of the Church; it was
desired and sought much the rather, because it held not only the right but the
entire Faith, and was not only a true but a sound Church.

But as a sound man may grow sick, so may a sound Church also, and so did the
Church of Rome: It grew so sick, that we may say of it in the words of the
Prophet, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy. For the sickness
began with a swelling in the head, and soon after in the body of that Church,
which is a disease to which the Romans were naturally subject. For that pride
and ambition, which was the first sin of the Angels that kept not their first
estate, and the first sin to which the Devil tempted innocence in Paradise,
was, as St. Jerome speaks, the natural vice of the Romans, which
notwithstanding the many warnings against it, given them by St. Paul in his
Epistle to them, Romans 12.3, etc. I say through the grace given unto me to every
man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
think; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith. For as we have many members in one body, and all the members
have not the same office: so we being many are one body in Christ, and every
one members one of another. And again at the tenth verse, Be kindly affectioned
one to another in brotherly love, in honor preferring one another. And yet
again, verse. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits. I say,
notwithstanding all those warnings, this pride and ambition prevailed so much
upon the Church of Rome, that not content to be an honorable member of the
Catholic Church, it would not allow any other Church to be Catholic, but such
as were members of it. And the Bishops of Rome, not content to be Bishops of
Rome, as they were styled in the most ancient General Councils, and by the most
ancient and learned Fathers, and in their own subscriptions; nor with the
honor of being the Bishops of the first See, which honor they had, not
because it was the Chair of Peter, but because it was the Imperial City; for
when the Empire was removed to Constantinople, the Bishops of that See had the
same honor and privilege with that of Rome, because that was New Rome, which
reason is expressed in the Canon: They had likewise the honor to be the first
Patriarchs upon the same account; first in order of Precedence, not in
superiority of jurisdiction; for the other Patriarchs were not under the
jurisdiction of the Roman, but had the same Authority, Honor, and Power within
their own limits, which they of Rome had in theirs, and by the same right,
which was not divine but Ecclesiastical right. But the Bishops of Rome not
content with all this honor, began to exalt their Throne above the Stars of
Heaven, as St. Gregory expresses it, to assume a power and authority over all
other Bishops and Churches, and to exercise a jurisdiction in and over them, by
the name of Universal Bishops, which he called a profane name, and a name of
Blasphemy, a presage of the near approach of Antichrist. But though he was so
humble and so modest, as not only to refuse it, when it was given to him by
Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, but to rebuke him for it, calling it a
proud title which none of his Predecessors had used, and which was a degrading
of himself, and all other Bishops; his next Successor but one, who held the Sea
but some few Months, knowing how much it was against the ancient Canons of the
Church, and against the sense of the most learned Fathers, and so injurious to
all other Bishops, that he could not think that they would be so tame as to
yield it quietly to him; he procured the Emperor to confer that Title upon
him; making use of the temporal Sword, as many of his Successors did to wrest
the spiritual out of the hands of all other Bishops, and exercising a
jurisdiction over them, in receiving Appeals from them, in reservation of
Cases, in Collation to Benefices which belonged to them, in inflicting censures
within their limits, and upon them, in absolving men from those censures which
were inflicted by them, in granting Indulgences, and Dispensations in matters
of Vows, Order, Matrimony, and in effect, leaving them the Mitre and the
Staff, and a part of the care, assumed to themselves the fullness of the Power.
And having thus made use of the temporal Sword to get the spiritual, they made
use of the spiritual Sword to get the temporal. For it was upon the account of
this spiritual Sword, that they took upon them to depose Emperors and Kings,
to dispose of their Dominions, to excite other Kings to invade them with force
of Arms, to discharge their Subjects from their natural obedience, to absolve
them from their Oaths of Fidelity and Allegiance, to stir them up to make
Conspiracies, to commit Treasons and Rebellions.

And thus came the Church to be rent and torn with Schisms, Christian Kingdoms
to be imbroyled in Wars and Blood, and the World filled with scandals.

The Papacy, which is the greatest Schism that ever was in the Church, has
been the cause of thirty Schisms in that Church of Rome; one of which lasted
fifty years, and diverse of the rest had lasted longer than they did, had not
the Emperors used that Authority, which they had then, to put an end to them.
In which times, the Church of Rome was so far from being that visible Church,
with which all Christians were bound to hold Communion, upon pain of Damnation,
that it was not visible where that Church of Rome was, with which they were
bound to hold Communion; for having many times two heads, and sometimes three,
and each head had a Body which was joined to it, and if the one were the true,
the other must of necessity be schismatical; the world could not know with
which of them it should hold Communion, because it could not know which was the
true, and which was the schismatical. And if a Canonical Election were
necessary to make a true head, it was many times without a head; while some
invaded the Sea with violence, and hands imbrued in Blood; some with Fraud and
Subtilty; and some as the Centurion in the twenty second Chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles, obtained the freedom of a Roman, with a great sum of Money. By
which means the Sea was filled sometimes with such as were so ignorant and
unlearned, that their own Writers confess they had not so much as the first
Rudiments of Learning: Sometimes with such as were so wicked, that they call
them filthy Monsters of Men; and sometimes with Novices, within the years of
their Minority, who were fitter to be put to School than to be placed in the
Apostolical Chair, and were more glad that they were past the fear of the Rod,
than that they had obtained the Crofier Staff, and the triple Crown.

It would require a long time to speak of the many bloody Wars, which have been
made and caused in the Empire and Christian Kingdoms, by this usurped power of
the two Swords.

The errors and abuses in Doctrine and Worship, against which there was a
remedy before; that remedy which St. Cyprian mentions, Subvenient Caeterae, if
one Church fall into any Error, let all other Churches bring it out. But this
exorbitant power of the Bishops of Rome, has not only disabled all other
Churches from bringing that or any other Church out of those Errors and abuses
into which it might fall, but enabled them to bring other Churches into the
same Errors and Abuses.

The time would fail me, if I should speak of the many Scandals, which they
have given by their Pride and Ambition, in exalting the Mitre above the Crown,
and making them stoop to kiss their Feet, at whose Feet their pious
Predecessors were wont to bow, and prostrate themselves.

By their Avarice, in making sale of those things, which were Sacred, and
raising vast sums of Money in Christian Kingdoms, and particularly in this,
upon specious pretenses, as if the Keys of Heaven had been made and put into
their hands to open and unlock the Treasures of the Earth.

By their Cruelty, in contriving and countenancing Massacres, Murders of Kings
and Princes, Persecutions with Fire and Sword, driving Men as Sheep to the
slaughter, instead of leading them to the Pasture, as if they had been set over
them, not to feed but to fley them; and so making themselves no less hateful to
the Christian World, than their Predecessors were venerable. But to leave them,
and return to my Text, which speaks not of them, but of the Saints at Rome.

Where it is not unworthy our Observation, how speedy and successful a progress
the Christian Faith and Doctrine had throughout the World, not only in the
Eastern Countries, Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and Samaria, the most famous
Cities of Asia and Greece, but in these Western parts of the World, even at
Rome, that Proud and Stately City, that was full of people, great among the
Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, which had subdued mighty Kingdoms
with the force of her Arms, and made her self dreadful to the world with the
fame of her Victories, and was then come to the height of all her Pride and
Glory, and grown so insolent, as to exalt her self above all that is called
God, or Worshipped: For what else meant that challenge, which Caius, one of the
Caesar's, sent to Jupiter, Thou shall down with me, or I will down with thee;
and that Command which he gave under a great pain and peril, to set up his own
Statue in the Temple of Jerusalem, to be Worshipped by the name of Jupiter; and
that Decree of the Senate, that no God should be Worshipped at Rome, but by
their leave? And yet we see it was not long before the sound of the Gospel,
which began at first to be heard at Jerusalem, was heard as far as Rome, and
not only heard but received, not only by Strangers at Rome, Jews, and
Proselytes, but by Romans, for it was to them that St. Paul directed his
Epistle, and it was of them that he says, Romans 1.13. I would not have you
ignorant, Brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you -- That I might
have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles. And when he came
to them, he had much fruit among them as among other Gentiles, even that fruit,
which he promised himself, Romans 15.29. I am sure that when I come unto you, I
shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. For as when
he came to Ephesus, and Preached the Gospel to them, All they that dwelt in
Asia heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks, Acts 19.10. And
when he came to the Cities of Greece, he made Saints in Macedonia, and all
Achaia, as we read, 1 These. 1.7. and 2 Cor. 1.1. So when he came to Rome, Where
he dwelt two whole years in his own hired House, Preaching the Kingdom of God,
and teaching those things which concerned the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
confidence, no man forbidding him, as we read in the last Chapter of the Acts
of the Apostles, the two last verses; he made Saints, not only in the City, and
in the Country about, but at the Court, as it follows in my Text, Chiefly they
that are of Caesar's Household.

The name of Caesar was common to the Roman Emperors, particularly to the
first six of them, of whom Nero, under whom St. Paul was a Prisoner, when he
wrote this Epistle, was the last, and the first Persecutor of the Saints. A man
of that prodigious impiety, and iniquity, that Tertullian thought it was no
small honor to the Saints, that their Blood was dedicated by Nero; and that it
was a good Argument that they were very worthy to be ranked among the best of
men, because they were the most hateful to him, who was so much the worst. And
it seems some of his own Household were of the same mind and judgment; for they
chose rather to expose themselves to his rage and fury by taking upon them the
Profession of Saints, than to ingratiate themselves with him by a seeming
compliance against them, with all the hopes of honor and advantage which they
might have expected from his favor.

Who these Saints were that were of Caesar's Household, is neither easy to find,
nor much material to enquire. For there is not much credit to be given to that,
which some have said of Seneca and Lucan, especially that of Lucan. And
although St. Jerome has placed Seneca among the Ecclesiastical Writers, being
provoked to it, (as he says) by those Epistles of Paul to Seneca, and Seneca
to Paul, which are extant with us; it is much to be doubted, whether Paul or
Seneca had any hand in those Epistles.

The Roman Martyrologies mention Torpetes, one of Nero's Household, and Euelius,
one of his Councillors, who were not only Saints but Martyrs under him. St.
Chrysostom speaks of a Lady of his Court, whom Baronius thinks to have been
Poppaea Sabina, and cites an ancient Writer, who mentions Proculus, one of his
Household Servants. But not to enquire further who they were, this we find for
certain, that when St. Paul wrote this Epistle, there were some of Nero's
Household, whom he thought worthy of the name of Saints. Which is the more
observable because it is so incident to men, to conform themselves to the minds
and manners of those, with whom they live, and familiarly converse, that even
good company is a very good means to reclaim men that are vicious. But as
sound men are more easily infected in the company of them that are sick, than
sick men recovered in the company of them that are sound: so good men are more
easily corrupted in bad company, than ill men reformed in the company of them
that are good. But it depends much upon the will and choice of men, whether
they will be corrupted in the one, or reformed in the other. For there are some
men so much addicted to wickedness and vice, that the best company cannot
reclaim them; and there be others so well affected to Piety and Virtue, that
the worst company cannot pervert them. There was a Devil in the College of the
Apostles, and there were Saints in the Household of Nero. And not only Saints,
but such Saints as St. Paul thought worthy to be mentioned with a particular
respect to them; for he does not say, All the Saints salute you, and among
them, they that are of Caesar's Household, but chiefly they that are of Caesar's
Household.

Which may serve to show a particular respect, which St. Paul had to those
Saints of the Court: he would not have them lost in the crowd of those of the
City; but would take notice of them, not only as of Saints, but as Saints of
Caesar's Household. For though it was not so much honor to the Saints, that some
of them were of Caesar's Household, as it was to Caesar's Household that some of
them were Saints; it was a good evidence that they were the better Saints,
because they were Saints of Nero's Household. For as it is an Argument of a
most wicked and perverse disposition of mind, to live in a Household of Saints,
and yet be Idolaters or Infidels: so it is as good an Argument of a good
affection to piety and virtue to live in a Household of Idolaters and Infidels,
and yet to be Saints.

Our Savior takes a special notice of it in the Angel of the Church of
Pergamos, Rev. 2.13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's seat is, and thou have held my name, and have not denied my Faith. And
it is mentioned as a singular honor and praise of Noah, that he was a just man
in his Generation, Gen 6.9. Not only a just man, which is commendable in any
man, of any place, at any time, but a just man in his Generation, a Generation
in which all flesh had corrupted their way, as it follows at the twelfth verse.
Such Saints are said to shine as Lights in the World, Phil. 2.15. Be blameless
and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.

Secondly, This particular mention of the Saints in Nero's Household, after the
general mention of them among all the Saints, might serve very well to commend
them to a more particular notice of the Philippians, which was very much to the
scope of the Epistle. For the scope of the Epistle was to arm and strengthen
them against some false teachers crept in among them, of whom he gives them
warning, Chapter 3.2. Beware of Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision; and verse. 18, etc. he calls them Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their
shame, who mind earthly things. These false Teachers took occasion from St.
Paul's bonds and imprisonment, to strike a terror into them, as we may see in
the first Chapter, at the 28th verse; and the better to arm the Philippians
against them, he would have them take a special notice of this, at the twelfth
and thirteenth Verses, I would have you to understand, Brethren, that the
things which have happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance
of the Gospel: So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the Palace. St.
Paul would have them to understand that his Chain with which he was bound for
the name of Christ, had not so much dishonored him, as honored that name for
which he was bound; and that Nero's malice and cruelty to the Saints had not so
much showed his Power and Authority over them, as betrayed his weakness and his
folly. For that very means which he used to suppress the number of them, had
served to increase it, and while he thought to drive them all out of the City,
he brought some of them into his Court. As therefore it was for the comfort and
encouragement of the Saints of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia
that St. Peter concludes his Epistle to them with a salutation from the Church,
which was in Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. The Church which is in Babylon, elected
together with you, saluteth you; so it was no less for the comfort and
encouragement of the Philippians, that St. Paul concludes his Epistle to them,
with a salutation from all the Saints at Rome, and chiefly from those of
Caesar's Household.

Now though my Text speaks of Saints a great way off, at Rome, and in Caesar's
Household, we may easily bring the Consideration of it Home, to them who are not
only of the Country, but of the Household of Kings, who are Defenders of that
Faith, of which Nero was the Persecutor, and hear it often Preached to them by
those who are of the same Household, now it is become the Faith which has
overcome the World, which they heard when it was a new and a strange thing, and
the World set against it, from one that was a stranger to them, and a Prisoner.
They lived in a Court in which the name of Saints was a greater reproach than
that of Idolaters and Infidels; we may well think it too great a reproach to us
not to be thought worthy to be ranked among the chief of Saints. For if the
Church of Christ be as he calls it, a City set upon a Hill, which cannot be
hid; they of the Court are upon the top of the Hill, whose Christian Piety and
Virtues would be so much more exemplary to the whole City and Country, as their
station is more eminent and conspicuous.

Indeed the name of Saints has been so Profaned of late, that not only good
Christians, but honest men may be ashamed of it. For it has not only been
assumed, but impropriated by a Generation of men who take upon them the name of
Saints, not because they have their Conversation in Heaven, but that they may
seem to have a better Right and Title to inherit the Earth, and look upon all
other men as Usurpers of those good things which belong to them. The Saints
that must judge the World, and they themselves be judged of no man. Such Saints
as they that arose up against Moses and against Aaron, saying, All the
Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them, wherefore
then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? And have so
great a prejudice against those of the Court, as to be ready to say of them,
Exeat aula qui vult esse pius, He that will be a Saint, must not be a Courtier.
Others there are who would persuade us, that we cannot be Saints, unless we be
Romans: though we hold the same entire Catholic Faith, which the whole
Christian Church received from the Apostles, and they from Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith; yet are not ashamed to call us schismatics and
Heretics, because we do not believe that we owe an obedience and subjection to
the pretended successors of St. Peter, as Monarchs of the whole Church, which
St. Peter himself never had, nor ever offered to require upon any such account.
But neither are the one the better Saints, because they look upon those, who
are not of their Faction, as unholy and profane; nor the other the better
Catholics, because they are so impudent, as to call us Schismatics and
Heretics. Our Lord Jesus Christ suffered between two Malefactors, and so it is
in effect with us; but with this difference, there was but one of them that
railed upon him, but here both exclaim against us. We have no better way to
stop their mouths, than to contend earnestly for that Faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints, and to show forth the fruits of it in our lives and
Conversations, by giving up our selves to him, who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works. That they who call us unholy and profane, may be
ashamed when they see our Piety and Devotion to God, who is highly to be
honored in the Congregation of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all
them that draw nigh to him: Our Justice and Equity, our Love and Charity, our
Fidelity and Sincerity in all our Conversation with men: Our Prudence in
governing our selves with that sobriety and temperance in the use of those
things, which God has made for our welfare, that they, and all men may see,
that as we know that all things are lawful for us, so we consider that all
things are not expedient; and though we know that all things are lawful for us,
we are not so much the servants of our own liberty, as to be brought under the
power of any thing. And that they who call us Schismatics and Heretics may be
ashamed when they see that we are the better Christians, because we have not
been bred and brought up under Jesuits, and that we are the more Catholic,
because we are not so much Roman as they would have us. And that as we know no
other Head of the Universal Church, but him who is the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls; so we honor him, not only by calling him Lord, Lord, but
by doing the things which he commands us: though we do no more believe that he
has made one Catholic or Universal Bishop over all Bishops and Churches, than
we believe that he has made one Catholic or Universal King over all Kings and
Kingdoms. And though we do not offer up our Prayers to the Saints, nor give
that Worship to them, which St. Peter would not receive from Cornelius the
Centurion, nor an Angel from St. John, we honor the memory of them, holding
fast the profession of their Faith, and following the examples of their good
and Godly lives, that we together with them may at last receive the end of our
Faith, which is the Salvation of our Souls, through our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory,
now and for ever.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line antepenult, for those read these. p. 14. l. 24. for our r. one.


