THE DESCRIPTION And Cure of the KENTISH And all other Agues: Plainly
Discovering what it is, from Whence it comes; with the Reasons of those
Particular Symptoms that do usually attend the same.

And humbly Showing (In a measure) the Authors Judgment, why so many are not
Cured; with advice in Relation thereunto; Whether it be Quotidian, Tertian or
Quartan, Simple, Duble or Triple.

With several other Observations and Instructions, tending to the Good welfare
of Mankind.

By Nicholas Sudell, Licentiate in Physic, and Student in Chimistry. Before
the Fire, Living in Mark-Lane, London. But now in the City of Rochester in the
County of Kent.

London, Printed by E. Crowch, for T. Passenger at the sign of the Three Bibles
on London Bridge. 1669

To the Courteous Reader.
Friend,
PRovidence having disposed of me from fifteen years of age, to this day, in
the way of Physic. Besides my particular Instructions from others; I can
safely say, I have labored night and day, and that for some years together to
Attain to the right Understanding thereof; that so according as the Will of God
might be, I might do nothing therein; but that which might be serviceable, by
Gods blessing to my Neighbors, and a good Conscience to my self, and could if
need were, give such an account thereof, as I doubt not but would be
satisfactory to all, and every Enbiased Person or Persons; but what has
already been done by me, (and that in a Public way) in that particular may
suffice, always remembering: Arbor ex fructibus cognoscitur.

Some there are, whose Interests Transports them beyond their Reason; That
would like cunning men, cast a mist before the Eyes of others, and darkning my
Reputation by false Reports and evil Surmisings, which I wonder not much at,
because, Impies voluptas est alienam famam laedere, These I pity, and
Attribute it more to the want of charity, then sound knowledge, there own or
there friends Interest, then safe and sober Intelligence; whilst I as the Fox:
The more I am Cursed by envious Men; the better I speed, through the blessing
of a good God,

Let the World and them know, that I have an Antidote through Gods Grace, that
will keep and preserve me amidst all their Poisonous Arrows; and that I have so
much the spirit of a Man, that I lightly value their Evil, either of thoughts,
words or actions; And have so much the spirit of a Christian, that I heartily
wish their good and welfare; and this not only in point of Prudence, but also
in point of Duty; knowing, that Laborandum est ut prosimus: and not only so,
but to love our Enemies.

What great Obstructions or Stumbling Blocks I found in my Minor Studies,
possibly for want of profound learning; the way then being more locked up then
now it is: and partly because our Authors are so Voliminous. I shall not here
relate, save only that through Gods assistance; great pains, and helps of those
that had traced the way before me, at last the way was made plain and easy,
and every Material Obstruction bowed before me, and hoysting sail immediately
came to the Haven of my Expectation.

Where taking great delight in thinking of what was past, at last began to
think of what was yet to come, and so remembering that Nemo sibi Nascitur, I
began, and I hope in the fear of God, to put my knowledge into practice, having
a fair opportunity thereunto, which I thought would be my prudence not to
neglect, for occasio non Negligenda, be it either for the good of our selves or
others. Therefore at all times, and several ways, I have endeavored, according
to my weak Capacity to be servicable in my Generation, and having lately been
under a severe Providence, in being disinhabited by the late dreadful fire at
London, was in little time acquainted in this place, and as several places in
respect to their Situation, Constitution of Ground and Water; with the Diet,
Exercise and manners of the People, are subject to some particular Disease; So
this place for several reasons easily to be given, besides its being subject to
all Diseases in common with others: it has two Diseases that are more
Epidemical Viz. The Scurvey for one, but the Ague in special: The former, Viz,
The Scurvey, it is a Spleenetical Distemper, arising from a peculiar degree of
Malignity through the putrefaction of Melancholy humors: and is known by
variety of Symptoms, Viz. Redness, Itching and Putrefaction of the Mouth and
Gums: Spots in the Legs, which are first Red, afterward Purple, Blew and
Black; Straightness or Shortness of Breath, Laziness and Heaviness of the whole
Body, Weak and anequal Pulse: Urine for the most part Red and clear like Lie:
Pains in the Hips, Knees, Joints, and several parts, all most like, those that
have defiled themselves with the French Disease, save only this Difference: the
pain of the Pox, is between the Joints, and if it continue long, makes Knots,
and there are or have been other Symptoms thereof, as Running of the Reins,
Vlcor of the Yard, Bubo, and the like; but the Scurvey pains seize upon all
parts Indifferently, and other signs of Melancholy, or a very sharp and salt
Diet do aver, there is often Headache and Toothache also in the Scurvey:
Sometimes Palsies and Convulsions, as also a loose Belly, strong Breath, a
Consumation of the Body, and an Intermiting Feavour or Ague; The latter of
which being the more special troublesome and common Disease: Here I have
thought good to treat only of it at this time; and as I have one purpose done
this to do good; so I will endeavor to do it to the purpose that it may do
good, as to the Description and Curation; and may serve for all sorts of Agues
in Men Women or Children. O Read with understanding, Judge with Charity, and
practice upon your selves or others with prayer and supplication: and I doubt
not but you will reap much advantage and profit which is the hearty desire of
thy Friend and Servant.

Nich. Sudell.
28. 8. Mo. 1669.
The Description and Cure of the Kentish, and all other Agues.
AGues are of two sorts; Cureable or Uncurable. The Curable are those that come
in a common way of Providence: and all Persons and Degrees of Men are equally
liable to the same; and are commonly thus distinguished; A Quotidian, or every
day Ague: A Tertian, or every other day Ague: A Quartan, or every third day
Ague: Computing the time or distance of the Fitts right, will supply that
seeming defect that is in the Terms.

Every of which Agues have therefore divisions; as Ligitimate, or Illigitimate,
Simple, Double, or Triple; which causes some more then ordinary difficulty,
rightly to discern between a simple Quotidian; a double Tertian; and a triple
Quartan; each coming every day, and that very near alike: But the diligent
Observer of Time, and some particular Symptoms may notwithstanding easily guess.

The Uncurable I reckon are those that are not sent in a common way of
Providence, but more immediately from God in the way of special Judgment; such
as Israel of old were threatened withal, Levit. 26.16. and they admit of no
Physical Cure, Deuteronomy. 28.22. but are like the ungodly King Jehorams Disease of
his Bowels, which will certainly destroy: Notwithstanding the wisest of men be
concerned, and the very best of means be used, 2 Chronicles. 21.18, 19. Some such
Agues I have seen in my time, which surely are no other then the fruit of sin,
which because it displeased God, and brings Evil upon our selves: Let us take
the Psalmists advice, and stand in awe and sin not; Psalm. 4.4. But it is the
former sort of Agues, viz. Those that are Cureable by Physical Administrations
that I concern my self herewith, for whatsoever others may think or believe, I
am of that faith, that all diseases (coming not as aforesaid) are cureable.
Only observe, as formerly I have hinted elsewhere, That although I do believe
that all Diseases whatsoever are Cureable,, yet they are not Curable in all
Persons. My business herein is to do two things; First to discover to you what
an Ague is: And, Secondly, To discover how it is to be Cured: In both I will be
plain and brief, and (yet I hope home, and full) to your content and
satisfaction.

First, we shall enquire what an Ague is; Many are the Opinions of all sorts of
Persons concerning Agues: Some think it a strange thing, but they know not
what: The more ignorant, and evil Spirit; but coming they know not whence.

Physicians themselves differ in their Judgments concerning this Disease, as
well as in the way of Cure; my Task is so much the harder; however we shall
declare our Apprehensions, and leave it with submission to better Judgments,
and believing that there are some that are able to say more; other some as
much, and other some not so much; to the latter of which as I intend this most
chiefly: so it will find most welcome.

But our answer to the above enquiry is; that an Ague is no other then an
Intermiting Feavour, and every Intermiting Feavour is commonly and properly
called an Ague, which does arise from putrefaction of rotten humors.

And its to be observed that those putrefying humors do rot either within the
Vessels, or else without the Vessels, when they rot within the Vessels, either
all the humors do putrify and rot equally, and cause Synochus Putrida.

Or else our only humor putrifieth and so causes a common and ordinary
continual Fever, and according as the humor is that putrifieth, so is the
Fever either a continual Quotidian or a continual Tertian, or a continual
Quartan. But those homours rot also without the Vessels, and as from the
putrefaction within Springs continual: so from the putrefaction without, comes
intermiting Feavours, or Agues: coming upon the person sooner or later,
according as the humor is that putrifieth. For the Spirits rises up at
certain times and opposes that rottenness with heat, as an Enemy to Nature,
and at the end of the combat returns home and according as the enemy remains
either in strength or vigor, so more or less good or evil Symptoms follow: And
if the putrefying humor be phlegm, then the Spirits return to oppose it the very
next day, hence the Quotidian, or every day Ague.

And if the putrefying humor be Choler, then the Spirits return still to
oppose it every other day; hence the Tertian or every other day Ague.

And if the putrefying humor be Melancholy, then the Spirits return to oppose
it every third day, hence the Quartan or every third day Ague.

The cause of the inequallity, that is to say: why one returns sooner then
another, why one comes every day; another every other day; and another every
third day is, Because the Phlegmatic humor recollects it self sooner, and so
makes new work for the Spirits, and so its returns are accordingly. Choler
which is accounted hot of it self in respects of the Spirits opposing it with
heat, does occasion a very hot combat and does not so soon recollect it self as
the former: and therefore is opposed but every other day.

Melancholy is a Dregy humor, and does not recollect or recruit it self as
soon as the others do, but because it is soft and viscous (the seat of which
also being more remote) it is not so easy to overcome; notwithstanding it is
opposed every third day: And all these are changed one into another, or one
joined with another, according as one while one putrefying humor, another while
another is to be opposed.

This is the most common and general opinion concerning Agues: which I must
Embrace and not condemn, there being much of Reason and truth in it rightly
understood; and also because it stands upon the shoulders of famous and
learned men: which is sufficient Authority for such a belief.

Nevertheless I beg leave with humble submission, further to offer my late and
more private conceptions concerning this thing, and hope hereby I shall offend
none: but rather prove, as a whetestone to a knife, to beget an edge upon some
more Great and Learned then my self; to further enlarge this secret, and bring
more light into the World, in respect to the Original cause (setting sin aside)
of all and every Disease in Man's body; and more especially and perticularly of
an Ague concerning which; I have as to its Description a little more to say.

Understand then with me, that every Disease is admitted to be a being existing
in us, and not from crudities arising from things taken from without us.

And then I judge an intermitting Fever or Ague to be; The Archeus, enraged,
disturbed, confused or disthrowned by Ideas, conceived or inplanted in him, by
a formative power: the Archeus himself according to the diversities of his
motion, stirring up sundry and various Symptoms: For to me it appears plainly
that every Ague is caused from the violent assaulting Spirit, by Ideas
conceived in the proper of the Archeus, by whose fault alone, a living body
suffers all diseases; and hence it is that many times specifical Medicines
excel in the curing the most desperate Agues. And hence it is also that the
Ague begins with cold, because the Spirits being to enter combat with a strong
Enemy, gather from every part aid; the outward member in the mean while
Quaking; for the truth is, this Spirit is the Prince of the World in us, and
has alone obtained a motive beginning in us; as well Local as Alterative;
containing the cause of rigor or extremity of cold, as well in respect of Local
motion, as the Alteration of cold to successive heat.

The Archeus or Spirit, intending by trembling rigors, As a Learned Man
observes, to shake off the excrements adhering to the Similer parts, and to
quit it self from a foreign guess. If this may contribute to further the
Understanding of any concerning an Ague, and excite them to a further
manifestation this way: I shall be truly glad, however I have spoke my present
Apprehentions, and at present must leave it to your Considerations, hoping that
what may be found wanting to your content in the one, may be made up in the
other: for this is all we have to offer at present as to the first thing, the
Descirption of an Ague; and so shall pass to the next which is,

Secondly, The Cure of an Ague. There are several (ways propounded and at this
day in practice to cure Agues, by the learned and Juditions which the common
and vulgar people have confusedly jumbled together, and so advise the same
Medicines in a Quotidian or every day Ague, as in a Tertian or every other day
Ague, or in a Quartane or every third day Ague, having no respect to the
nature, time or complication of these Diseases. My intentions herein are real
and purely for the good of my Neighbors, whom I pity when I see them quake
and groan under these Distempers, and therefore shall endeavor plainly to make
known the cure thereof; so far as I judge them apprehensive, and I have
apprehended.

I begin with a Quotidian Ague, which may be distinguished from a Double
Tertian or a Triple Quartan, though they both come every day as a Quotidian, by
its coming for the most part in the night season, without shaking, and has
only a coldness or light shivering, and the heat and thirst but small.

To cure this kind of Ague you must observe before the third fit to give or
take a Vomit either of Infusion of Crocus Metalorum, or a Dose of Mercurius
Vite, which in this case is very excellent in strong bodies; and besure to give
it at that time that is most remotest from the Fit: it matters not whether it
be morning noon or afternoon; only let the stomach be empty of all food.

And if the body be strong, of evil habit and abounding with obnoctious
humors, if need be you may give it a second time, otherwise once will serve.

If the Ague go not away with this, then against the next fit following,
prepare this decoction following, give it half an hour before the fit comes
and either walk roundly after it, or be covered warm upon the bed. Take
Chamomil Flower and Wormwood of each a small handful Juniper berries 100.
bruised, Cinnamon 1 dram, boil all in a pint of White Wind to half, strain it
and add 2 ounces of Sugar and drink it three days together if need be, one hour
before the fit comes; and the Ague I suspect may leave you.

Secondly, The cure of a Tertian or every other day Ague.

Give a vomit of the Infusion Crocus Metalorum, or Mercurius Vitae, as
aforesaid on the well day, or 2 hours after the fit, and before the third fit
comes; and the next well day give this purge following. Take Electuary
Diacathoricon one ounce, Cremor Tartar. 1 scruple, mix them and eat upon the
point of a knife, drinking warm broth 3 hours after, forbearing to eat till
noon.

The next well day be let blood, if you be not to weak: and take away less or
more according as it may offend either in quantity or quality, or is good or
bad: If yet the fit remain then prepare, or cause to be prepared, one of these
Specifical Medicines following, which seldom miss in curing, especially coming
after a general Evacuation of corrupt humors by those Medicines aforesaid.

Take of the Juice of Plantane 4 ounces, Rose Vinegar half an ounce Saffron 4
grains in powder mix all together, and give it almost an hour before the fit.

Or, Give one Dram of the Powder of the Herb called Cinquefoil, in a quarter of
a pint of Sack, in which is mixed 2 or 3 drops of Spirit of Saffron, ^ Cynamon,
take it half an hour before the Fit comes. Astrologers say, let Jupeter be
anguler and strong when it is gathered, it being an Herb of that Planet. But I
have several times proved the same with good success: yet have ha^ no respect
unto the times of gathering the same, because God is strong of goodness and
Power, the Trees, Herbs, and Seeds, in the Creation, was before the Sun, Moon,
or Stars were Created, Genesis 1.11, 12, 13.

Or, Take Sal Absinthy, half a dram, Spiritus of Sulphoris Plampanum, one
Scruple, Aqua Card. Benedictus. four Ounces.

This I have often tried, and very seldom has it failed in answering my
Expectation, either by way of Divertion, if not, of total Curation. Observe
after the taking of any of these three last mentioned Things; you must take to
your Bed, and be covered warm for four hours. You may renew the taking of them
as often as you see cause, but usually three times is sufficient, except the
Ague be very stubborn indeed, and also if the Body be strong and can bear it;
and full of bad Humor, and require it; you must Vomit, and Purge as aforesaid
two or three times: Only observe, that you must do it in the first place, and
let the other Medicines succeed, and not the Vomit, or Purge; the other
Medicines accept some other particular Indication thereunto: This rule being
observed, seldom will you miss of Cure in a Tartian, or every other days Ague,
especially if you begin time enough.

Thirdly, The Cure of a Quartan, or every Third Day Ague. To Cure this sort of
Agues, are far more difficult than the two former, and that for several Reasons
before mentioned: For these Agues, especially if they are not taken
immediately, many times withstand the stoutest of ordinary Remedies: Therefore
my Counsel here again must be, that you begin Cure before the third or fourth
Fit at most, and proceed thus. And first, If the Body be bound, give an
ordinary Glister over night, and the next day morning, being the well day, and
that farthest from the fit, take this purging Potion following. Take Seen Alex.
one ounce, Raysons of the Sun half an ounce, Anniseeds half a dram, White Wind
six ounces, put those things into the Wine, and set it into a moderate heat,
for five or six hours; then strain it, and add half an ounce of Syrup of
Rubarb, and drink it in a morning fasting; drink a little Broth afterward, as
is usual in taking Physic of that Nature. Next day four Ounces, about two
hours before the fit comes; take one of these Vomits aforesaid, either Infusion
of Crocus Metalorum, or Mercurius Vitae. After which, upon the next well day,
take the purging Potion aforesaid again: And observe that one hour before the
next fit after, to be let Blood in the left Hand, in the Vein between the
Ring-finger, and the Little-finger: Which said thing to my knowledge was done
about sixteen Years ago, by the Emprick Parker, in this County, with very good
success, and to his great Honor, and worldly Advancement. If the Ague still
continue, then get ready this Specifical Medicines following: Take Venice
Treacle half a dram, Juce of Plantan a quarter of a ^int, Saffron four grains,
Sugar Candy one ounce, mix all together; and take he same one hour before the
Fit comes, being covered warm upon the Bed, do ^o three times together. If the
Ague still remain, then you may use the foresaid Medicines over again once
more; and if still it should remain, then there is certainly some more than
ordinary fault in the Bowels; which to remove, you must take this Medicine
following fifteen Days together in the Morning fasting, and drink warm Broth
two hours after it, forbearing to eat till noon, and keeping within doors, but
about the House you may go.

And the truth is, it is so powerful a thing in stubborn Quartan Agues, that
where ever I could persuade any Patient to take the same, and observe a good
Diet, it seldom failed; and it is pure Love to my Neighbors, that causes me
to Incert it here. Take a quart of Burrage Water, one ounce of Seen Alex. half
an ounce of the best Rhubarb, two drams of pure Salt of Tarter, and one dram of
Oil of Sulphoris Plampan. Put the Seen, Rhubarh, and Salt, into the Water
together, then put in the Oil of Sulpher, drop by drop, till it be all in; then
set in an moderate heat for six hours, then strain it, and divide it into four
parts, and take one part every morning, as long as it last, as aforesaid;
making provision for more against that shall be done, and take hereof as
aforesaid: And there is no great Question, if your Ingredients be good, and you
punctual in taking, but you will (by Gods blessing) sind it to answer your
Expectations, upon once more a little before the fit comes, taking the
Specifical Medicine as aforesaid, made of Venice Treacle, etc.

Many other Internal Medicines there are of all sorts, and for all sorts of
Agues; but I must Travel no further in this Field at this time, and that for
much the rather, because that I am satisfied that these related, are of as
great Worth and Authority as any; except some particular Arcanaries, that may
lie hid in the Studies, or Labrotaries of some particular Persons: As also I do
really believe, a good Diet being observed, and Prayer and Supplication not
omitted, these present Medicines will prove very Succesful and Advantageous to
all, and every Person, or Persons that shall take the same.

But besides Internal, There are several External Medicines for Agues,
prescribed and often used, and sometimes with good success (as I have been
informed) which way of Curation, though it be out of the Common way of my
Practice, seeing no sound Foundation for the same. Nevertheless I cannot but
have so much respect to them, knowing that God can do great things with small
means, if he pleases; as here to Incert the more Principal of them that I know
of, and so leave Persons to their Liberty in the using, or not using the same.

These External Medicines, are commonly used four ways. Either to the Neck,
and Wrist; or else to the Belly and Feet. First to the Neck, the pri^cipal of
which is Camphire, which is a Gum, coming for the most part frot the Kingdom of
China, distilling there from a great Tree, not unlike our Walnuts: and is
highly esteemed by the Indian Physians, who look upon it as on of the most
wonderful Productions of Nature, being Uolatile Sulpherous Salt purely
separated by God himself, from a substance which seems to be altogether
uneapable thereof: This Camphere from one Scruple to four, is to be hun^ in a
Tiffiny Bag, tied fast with Silk (about the Neck) letting the same hang upon
the Breast toward the upper Orifice of the Stomach, and there to be worn Nine
days, without Intermission, and the Ninth day to be thrown (without examining
what remains) in a Running Water, and say; That if any of these Circumstances
be omitted, they may expect no Cure, and have something to say to back their
Opinion; but it having Respect unto every High and Obstruse Philosophy, I wave
it at this time, and in this place; and shall only give my Opinion thus: That I
know nothing against the lawfulness of so using it (simply considered) and
therefore if I should use the same, my present thoughts are to observe these
Directions too a little, that so if it might please God, it might prove
Succesful for all kind of Agues.

Secondly, The next Medicines that are Externally used, are to the Wrist, of
which I have several times heard many to boast, but never could be satisfied
they had true cause so to do, by the Operation of their Medicine: Yet I
confess, I have known many an Ague to depart, when things have been upon the
Wrist; but never had yet faith enough to believe that Application was the cause
thereof. And because all may be satisfied that I despise not the meanest ways,
to help in needful Seasons: I shall here discover the choicest Remedies of that
Nature, that I am or have been acquainted with, and leave them to be used as
there may be cause.

For a Tartian, or every other Days Ague. Take Leaves of Plantane, and
Celandine the great, of each a handful, Cobweds, Nettle-seed, and Soor from the
Chimney, burning all Wood, and Common Salt, of each one dram, strong Vinigar
enough to make it all moist; beat altogether, lay it upon two Cloths, and apply
it to both the Wrists a little before the Fit comes: Repeating the same three
times one after another. Also some highly extol the Herb Mousear, with a little
Salt and Vinegar, bruised together, and laid on as aforesaid.

For a Quartan, or every Third Day Ague. Take the Leaves of Elder, Sage,
Doves-foot, and Rue, of each a handful, Marygolds, a third part, Salt a
handful, and a little Rich Wine, or Wine-Viniger, beat altogether; and Rubbing
the Wrist well, apply the same a little before the Fit comes. Some commend the
Roots of Nettles, to be Excellent, being bruised with Viniger, and applied as
aforesaid. Other some say, that Crowfoot chafed or rubbed between the hands,
and so applied as aforesaid, is very excellent. My own ^xperience can say but
little by way of Commendation of this sort of Medi^ne: Yet have I sometimes
used them, as supposing that something they may fect, by Communication of their
Virtue unto the Heart, by those notable Arteries which are situate in the
Wrist.

Thirdly, The next of this sort are used to the Belly, and many much esteem ^f
this Plaster following for any kind of Ague; and say, many have been hereby
Cured: Take Turpentine, Aloes, and Soot from the Chimney, of ^ach alike; beat
the Aloes and mingle them; make two Plasters, one for the whole of the
Stomach, another to lay upon the Belly, round about the Navel, ^hey must be
laid on a little before the Fit, and changed three times together.

Fourthly, The last of this sort are used to the Feet, and several have a good
Opinion of this following Medicine. Take Cake Soap, two ounces, blew Currance
as many; beat them together, and make two Plasters for the Feet, and having a
little Saffron strewed upon them; a little before the Fit comes apply them:
These must be used three times. Many more Medicines there are of this sort; of
which every one is proved, and therefore I judge it will be but Labor lost to
repeat any further. Now for the right ordering of these things before
mentioned, in order to the Cure, observe. 1. That the Vomit spoken of,
Mercurius Vitae, is not to be given to Children, or weak Persons, but to those
of Years and Strength; to whom the Dose is, in a little Conserve of Red Roses,
from six Grains to eight at atmost, in a Morning fasting; drinking Posset Drink
an hour after, and so once an hour till it leave working; forbearing to Eat,
Drink, or Sleep till twelve or one a Clock, keeping warm all day.

Secondly, That the other Vomit of Infusion of Crocus Metalorum, is to be had
at every Apothecaries, and the Dose for Men is one ounce, with a little Oximel
Simplex, mixed with it; for Women and Youth, six Drams; for Boys or Girls,
about eight, nine, or ten years of Age, half an Ounce; for younger Children,
from two Drams to three: and is a safe Medicine, and to be Drank in the morning
fasting: With the same Observation aforesaid, or what is common in taking
working Physic.

Thirdly, That the Camphere, is to be used more or less, according as the Party
is of strength and years. Thus have I performed my first two Promises, in
discovering what an Ague is, and the Cure thereof; and I question not, but
herein I shall be profitable not only to my self, but many others also.
However, will some be ready to say, that there is no Cure for an Ague, and that
it will have its Course, take what one will. To remove this stumbling Block,
and to satisfy the Ingenious, according to my weak Capacity, I will here offer
some of my present Thoughts, how it comes to pass, that Agues are not often
Cured. Know then, that the Reason is not because they are Uncurable, for as I
have elsewhere declared: I do believe that all Diseases whatsoever are Curable,
though at all Times, nor in all Persons. The reason then why so many are not
Cured of Agues, especially Third Day Agues, may be such as these.

1. Because Persons having Espoused the former Principal, that Agues are
Incurable, do not seek out for any other means, then their one or their
Neighbors judgment can advise to, until the Disease has rooted it self in the
Body, and the Putrefaction of the Humors and Blood great; that Nature is very
much weakened, and the Disease very much strengthened, that no Ordinary means
will do the Cure; whereas if they did apply themselves to others more knowing,
and that speedily, before the fourth Fit at furthest, no question but the Ague
would easily be Cured.

2. Because many Persons, if they do apply themselves to a Phisician in due
time: Yet in respect of their quaint Stomachs, or peevish Fancies, they cannot
take such things as are proper for them, so that the Phisician bending his mind
to please their Pallets, does not oppose their Enemy with that Vigor, and
Power, as otherwise he by his Medicines might do: And whereas in this, many
times the Patient blames the Phisician for want of Cure, and indeed the Patient
is more to be blamed, that they will not be Cured.

3. Because others again, if they do leave the Phisician to his Liberty in the
former Respect; yet they will if a Friend tell them of a Medicine, and say its
Rare, Jumble together the Medicine of their Friend and the Phisicians, that the
Efficacy, and powerful Opperation of the most proper Medicines, are thereby
very much hindered, and the Patient disappointed.

4. Because other some again: Notwithstanding they give the Phisician his due
Liberty in making up what is needful, and stand by his Administrations, and his
only: Yet nedlecting themselves at the first, and so the Ague growing powerful,
there must of nessessity, not only more then ordinary means be used, but also
longer time then ordinary required, and so they grow weary of Physic; And if
they be not Cured according to the time of them, or their Friends fancy, then
away with the Doctor, and his Medicines; and make false Conclusion, that he
cannot Cure him, when indeed it is the Patients one fault, because they cannot,
or will not abide a Due and Regular course. These things I know by Experience,
and of many hereupon have run unto Dropsies, Consumptions, Black-Jaundies, and
other desperate Diseases, never to be Cured.

Now then since so it happens many times, and that a more soon and speedy Cure
is desired of all hands: I will propound a Medicine to those that shall be
willing and free to use the same, that sure I am, that for the safe and speedy
Curing all sorts of Agues (other means failing) that the like I know not
extant. And this Medicine is, that noble Preparation Pull. Febrifuga, or the
Ague Prighter: Of Riverious, as I am surely informed, the Preparation of which,
as well as some of the Powder it self, is lately and Providentially come to my
Hands (which I have often, as also many other Chyrugeons, and Phisicians, which
have had, and still continue to have the same of me) Cured the very worst of
Agues at three times taking at utmost: Only this should be observed, that the
Patient take hereof before he is too much weakened, that they may be able
comfortably to bear the Operation of the same, which discovers it self in great
Splendour, and Triumph in its Specific Quality; besides the largness of its
Operation, as an Emetick, Cathartick, and Diaphoretick Medicine. And there is
this Excellency in it besides: That it has no offensive Taste nor Smell, Safe
and Sure in its Opperation, and Cheap in Price; Three Doses being not above
five Shillings: and I never yet gave more in the most Inveterate of these
Diseases. Sometimes it Cures the very first Dose, oftentimes the second, and
what remains, may be kept without damage ten years, or till further Occasion:
And so sometimes I have known three Patients Cured with three Doses, many times
with two, which is but Half a Crown a piece; and if it extend to the third, my
Opinion is, that he that will not freely part with a Crown out of his Pocket,
to be eased of such a Disease in his Body, deserves to keep it.

The Objection that I have met with in this case is; but we are not sure it
will cure us. Our answer has been and still is: you are not sure it will not,
and that we dare not asume Gods Prerogative to assure that beyond our power,
and are satisfied that lesser things then those cannot nor dare not be
warranted by any sober Christian, and therefore our assurance can go no further
then our experience, which in this case, as in some others is very large, and
that in respect to all sorts of Sex, Ages and Constitutions whatsoever: and for
our further information herein we are under some obligation: not to Cumunicate
the preparation, and therefore this preparation or Medicine is to be had of me,
and me only at present as aforesaid. And the truth is this powder is not only
thus excellent in Agues: but I have often experienced the same to be effectual
in the curing of all sorts of Dropsies, whether Ascities, Anasarca, or
Timpanies, and have several times known, that upon the taking once thereof: the
patient has voided in 6 hours time several gallons of water; by Seige and Urin
to their great comfort, content and satisfaction. And also in that common and
injurious Disease called the Rickets, in children; and for the same I commend
it as a thing highly to be prized and vallued by all such, who for the good of
there little ones shall have occasion to use the same, having helped many
therewith (by Gods blessing) some of which being aged four, five, and six
years, and could not go nor stand, but by the help of stilts.

Likewise for all Inveterate pains of the Stomach or head arising from any
defect in the Stomach occasioning evil vapors to afflict the head or
otherwise, this powder is a sure remedy being taken as shall be directed: The
same also is excellent in the Gout, whether Podagra, Sciatica, or otherwise,
and often times has proved more then an ordinary help in that tetrible Disease
the Falling sickness, if not of too long continuance.

Of me also is to be had, as occasion may serve: The Element or Milk of Perl,
which certainly cures (if taken timely enough) all sorts of consumptions of the
body in all Ages Sex or Constitutions; only some observations given therewith,
in order to Diet, and composure of Mind.

Also that excellent Pilulae Croci or the Saffron Pill, which certainly gives
speedy releif, if not cure in the most desperate and tormenting Diseases, the
Stone, Inflammation or Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder; in extraordinary pains or
Gripings of the Stomach or Bowels; as many have lately experienced, helping
also all Surfeits, Coughs, Colds Catarrhs, or other Flux of the belly, to
admiration. Also Elixir Proprietatis, an ancient and Noble Medicine, worthy of
honor and esteem amongst the ablest of Physicians, and to be wished: prepared
as of old (but the Alkehest) who shall discover the middle way; mentioned by
that expert Philosopher, V. H. I have practiced some years, and find every time
of Opperation by some particular Observations, that the Medicine may be much
heightened in its virtue, or lessned thereby; but being duly prepared, the
place, Utensils and Ingredients good, it is worthy of praise for the Curing all
sorts of worms in men women or children, for the curing all obstructions either
of Liver Spleen, Messentery or Womb, resists Melancholy potently, and is
good: in Convulsion-fits, the Palsy, and many other deplorable Diseases; being
also a good Cordial. Also Aurum Potabile; Not to deceive the World give it this
title, to this Arcanum, therefore understand, that I do not avouch. Neither
would I so be understood, as if I had attained to such a Key as would unlock
Gold and fetch such a liquor therefrom as is the pure life and essence thereof;
and never to be reduced to the same substance; But this I do affirm, that
Providence has made me master of such a Menstrum (not Corrosive) as does so
kindly open the body thereof, that by it I produce such a liquor, as I judge
few or none are comparable to it, In all Diseases of the heart, for it
perfectly cures the passions, pains, beatings and weakness thereof, being a
very rich Cordial, whose operation besides the comforting refreshing and
strengthening, both Vital, Animal and Natural spirits: is very well pleasing to
the Archeus: The principal director both as to health and sickness; so that
many by this only Medicine, have in a manor been restored from death to life;
especially those who have been under faintings, swooning or hycoughs. Also Ext.
Magistralis which is made and prepared of many choice Animals and Vegitables;
yea and some of the Mineral Kingdom also; and is very profitable, and
advantageous in the gentle and safe purging of the body of all obnoxtious
humors, residing in the first Region, or more Remote; and the truth is, my
care herein has not been small, aiming to make it, as indeed I have done
(universal in its Classes) and therefore frees from, not only Chollor, but
Phlegm and Melancholy also; or from any Morbifick matter, that is or may be the
cause of many Diseases; which I have had large experience of, upon my own body
Spring and Fall, in order to the preservation of my health and welfare in that
respect, for which I desire to bless God. Also Tinctura Vita, or the Tincture
of Life, which abundantly helps lost Appetite, degenerated Disgestion,
difficult Breathing, impurities of the Blood, conducing much to it is free
circulation, inward Heats, and Inflammation of what Part soever: and all evil I
infermities in either of the parts of Disgestion: having also a peculier
property to resist the increase of the Scurvy, and many times alone cures the
same. Also, several particular and special Medicines proper only for those
Diseases incident to the Female Sex, of which mention is made by me, in my late
Book (Mulierum Amicus) or, The Woman's Friend. which have been largely
experienced to the comfort of many in great difficult Times, of Distress,
Trouble, and Danger; some of which I have always ready by me, and the other to
be prepared in due time. Also, Aqua Opthalmi, which gives speedy ease, and
redress, in all Defluctions, Inflammations, or other Infirmities of the Eyes,
and preserves and quickens the Sight, being used as shall be directed. Also,
Oil Aurat, which with the help of some other Medicine, and some particular
External Opperation, Cures most sorts of Deafness, though for some years
standing, as many are able to justify in this County, and else where. Also,
Pilulae Ruptura, which I have often Experienced by the help of Trusses,
perfectly to Help, and Cure most Ruptures, or Burstness, in Young, or Old.
These and every of these Medicines, as also many others, both Gallenical, and
Chimical, are to be had of me at Reasonable Rates; considering the Worth and
Excellency, which doubtless, are answerable to the Curing of all (Curable)
Diseases, residing or springing from either the Head, Stomach, Heart, Lungs,
Liver, Gall, Spleen, Kidneys, Blader, Back, Womb, Bowels, or Limbs. Having thus
published these Things my Request is, that none censure either me, or them,
without Trial, being done out of a principle of Good, and with a good
Conscience. And as our Evidence thereof, you may please to understand, that
being already engaged to Maidstone, once a Week, my Resolutions are to be there
every Thursday, being Market Day. At Mr. Thatchers House in Puddin Lane, where
any that are desirous may speak with me, and receive any of these things, or
other Advice in any case belonging to Physic, as they may stand in need, and
we see cause. From Ten a Cloc^ to ^hree in the Winter, and from Eight a Clock
to Six in the Summer. As also every day besides at my own Habitation, near the
Sign of the Eliphant and Castle in Eastgate Street, in the City of Rochester.

I have no more to offer at this time, but B^g a kindly acceptance hereof, and
to assure you that my Prayers shall attend my Administrations, that they be
Effectual and Advantageous to all that use them; that so they may be Redressed
and Comforted, and that God may be blessed and Glorified for: Omnia Nostra in
manu Dei posita.

FINIS.

