THE SUBSTANCE OF THE ARGUMENTS For and Against The BILL, FOR Prohibiting the
EXPORTATION of Woollen Manufacture from Ireland to Foreign Parts.

Delivered at the Bar of the House of Lords.

Together with Some Remarks on a Printed Paper, Entitled, Some Thoughts on the
said Bill.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood, at his Printing House behind St. Christophers
Church in Thred-needle-street, the backside of the Royal Exchange. School.

The Substance of the Arguments for and against the BILL, for Prohibiting the
Exportation of Woollen Manufacture from Ireland to Foreign Parts, etc.
Against the BILL it was said,
I. THat this Bill passing would become a total Prohibition of the Exportation
of Woollen Manufactury from Ireland, because the Bill prohibits it to all
Foreign Parts; and the Duty upon it here in England is so high, that it can
never be brought hither; and under this Head it was said,

That this would put the Irish upon making Cloth for their own wearing, which
would be more prejudicial to England, because the Cloth imported from England
into Ireland is of much greater Value than what is exported from Ireland to
Foreign Parts, the English Cloth being worn there by the Nobility and Gentry.

It was further said, That this Bill opens all the Ports in England to receive
Irish Wool; and by that Means Wool coming up the Channel in sight of the French
Ports, would have an easy Opportunity of running in thither: And, Secondly,
That it being so near a Cut over from the North part of Ireland to Scotland, it
would be carried thither, and from thence to Foreign Parts.

II. That this would discourage the English Interest in Ireland, and that it
seemed not to be well timed, after the Distress the Irish had lately been in;
and that it was the English Irish that were chiefly concerned in the Woollen
Manufacture there.

It was said further, that the Allegations of the Bill were not true, viz. That
great Quantities of the like Manufactures (to those of England) have of late
been Made, and are daily increasing: And to disp^ove the said Allegations, an
account was given, (taken as ^as said out of the Custom-House Books) to show
thou more Woollen Mannfactury was exported out of Ireland from 1084. to 1687.
than from 1693. to 1696. and th^^ the chiefest part thereof was the New Drapery
of S^^^^s and F^^z^^, and but little Cloth, which was the Old D^^pe^y of
England; and that therefore the Old Drapery was not prejudiced thereby: And an
Account was also given, how many Yards of Cloth was Imported into Ireland from
England in a Year.

III. It was alleged, That this was only the Concern of one place, viz.
Exeter, and that that ought not to weigh with the Interest of the whole Kingdom
of Ireland.

And Notice was taken of a Paper printed for the Bill, and a List of the Names
of Persons lately gone from Exeter and Tiverton to Ireland; and it was said,
that several Matters of Fact in the said printed Papers were false, viz.

The printed Paper asserts, that Wool was 50 per Cent. cheaper in Ireland than
England, a pound costing there but 6 d. being worth 9 d. here, which it was
said was a Mistake, and that it was but 25 per Cent.

The second thing was about Dying Wares being dearer in England than Ireland,
which was denied; and it was said, that it could not be so, because all the
Dying Wares was sent from England to Ireland, and therefore of Necessity they
must be dearest in Ireland.

As to the printed List of the Names of about 150 Persons lately gone from Exon
and Tiverton to Ireland, a Person said he knew three of the Names, one whereof
went above twenty years since, and the other two a long time ago.

It was agreed, that Spinning the Wool was cheaper in Ireland than England, but
not the Combing and Weaving.

And as to Soap, it was said, that but little was used in a piece of Stuff, no
more than to the Value of 3 d. a piece.

It was said by a Gentleman, who lived long in Ireland, that,

Anno 1656. the Woollen Manufacture was attempted to be set up by some, but
they failed in it. 1679. Some again from Holland and England made another
attempt, which also miscarried. But, 1684. It was again attempted, and
succeeded, as to the New Drapery, but that as to the Old Drapery they can never
set up that, because they have no Fullers Earth there.

It was further said, That, 1st. The Irish must bring their Wool to a Market
where it will not vend, meaning England. Or,

2dly. That the Wool being brought hither unwrought, will lower the Price here,
and glut the Market, and that will bring down the Rents of England.

And it was also said, That England gets much by Ireland,

And several Irish Statutes were quoted, as 13 H. 8. c. 2. 28 H. 8. c. 17. and
11 El. c. 10. which it was said, were to encourage the Woolen Manufactury there.

I will here add also the Substance of what is contained in a Print, Entitled,
Some Thoughts on the Bill, etc. That the Strength of all that can be said on
that Subject may be laid together; and though it is somewhat long, think the
Arguments are in short these.

I. That England profits greatly by Ireland. Because,

1. Near one third part of the Lands of that Kingdom belong to the English, who
inhabit here, and have their Rents constantly returned in ready Money.

2. Most of the Nobility and Gentry spend their Estates here.

3. That England supplies Ireland with most of the Commodities they consume;
that nine tenths of the People there, that are able to buy it, wear English
Woollen Manufactures, and that England receives little from Ireland, their
Cattle being prohibited, high impositions on their Tallow, Leather and Corn,
and last year the Tonnage and Poundage was doubled on their Linen and other
Manufactures, and such as are suffered to come, are absolutely necessary for
us, or Materials for our Manufactures.

4. That what Ireland gets by Trade, centers all in England, and the Trade
there is mostly carried on by English Stocks.

And hereupon it is said, that we seem to desire to get so much from Ireland,
that at last we may put them out of a condition to pay us any thing.

The Second general Head is, what was urged at the Lord's Bar, that it may
weaken the English Interest, so as to endanger the Loss of that Kingdom.

And it is said, That it may not necessarily follow, that so much the more
Woollen Manufactures will be made in England, as is restrained or destroyed in
Ireland, but that Holland, France, etc. may get the Trade Ireland looses, and
that what Ireland has done, has not lessened the Woollen Manufacture in England.

And then he comes, fol. 10. to the point, on which the Stress of the
Controversy depends, and that is, whet her the Irish can send their
Manufactures cheaper to Foreign Markets than the English, and this the Author
affirms they cannot, because they want numbers of People, and Stocks, and
Materials.

The Author says further, that they make only a sew Stockings, Stuffs and
Frizes, which are different from those made in England, and yet they send but
few abroad, and that because they pay less Wages in Ireland than here, they are
not so likely to drain our People away, and that none go there but such as are
necessitated.

He argues, That those who are in the Woollen Manufacture there, will be forced
to go to other Countries, if this Bill pass.

And the last doubt is, whether the Law, if made, would take effect, it being
the Interest of all Ireland to defeat it. And then again, the Bugbears of
Scotland and France are set up. And after all, the Author proposes a gentler
Method of doing the Work, and that is by secret Discouragements, and so to let
it decline by degrees.

For the BILL, and in Answer to the Objections to it, it was said.
I. It was acknowledged, That the Duties on Woollen Manufactures from Ireland
are at present high, the Subsidy being lately doubled, which will soon expire,
and then they will come near to a level with the English, some a little over,
and some under; and yet notwithstanding, we find by daily experience, great
Quantities of Irish Frizes, Broad cloth napt, and Stuffs, imported into England.

If the prohibition put the Irish upon making Cloth for there own wearing,
instead of what now they take from England, it seems then, the Irish can take
to making Cloth if they please, and no doubt of it, and the English will
never deny them the liberty of making what they themselves wear, but have just
reason to fear that by degrees they will not only do that, but beat the English
quite out of their Trade to Foreign Markets, which must be the natural
consequence of their making the Woollen Goods so much cheaper than we can.

That this Bill opens all the Ports of England to receive Irish Wool, is true,
and with great reason, that one place may have it on as easy terms as others,
otherwise the charge of Land-carriage, and other Charges and ill-conveniencies
are so great, that it makes 10 per Cent. difference between places no further
distant than Biddeford and Exon. And whilst all our Plantation Goods, and
particularly Tobacco, which pays so high a Duty, come up the Channel, and Wool
is sent from Southampton to Jersey and Guernsey, and may also be sent from any
one Port to any other Port in England, and all under no other Security than
Bond given to discharge in England, there can be no greater danger here, nay
much less, seeing by this Bill it is provided, that the Bonds for Security
shall be given by sufficient Persons, residing in or near the place where the
Goods are shipped, and shall not be granted over to any Person, and that a
particular account from time to time shall be transmitted to England of all the
Wool shipped, and the Ships and Masters Names, and to whom, and at what Port
consigned.

As to what was said, This would discourage the English Interest in Ireland, it
was answered,

1. That by their own Confession, the Woollen Manufactury has not long been set
up in Ireland, and the English Interest was preserved before that time, and no
doubt may be so still, without drawing so many People from England as would
certainly leave it, if the Woollen Manufacture goes on there; and it is better
that a good strength remains in one Kingdom, than to divide it into both, by
which means neither may be strong enough to resist a Foreign Enemy.

2. Though the Woollen Manufactury be suppressed there, they have the same means
of Improvement they had before; nay, greater, since our West Indies take off so
great Quantities of their Provisions, Horses and Servants, which makes a
compensation in some measure for the prohibiting their Cattle from coming into
England.

3. The Soil is very well adapted to produce Hemp and Flax, and so to establish
the Linen Manufactury, which would find all due Encouragement from England,
and employ great numbers of People, and so would the Fishery, which might be
carried on on the Irish Coast to great advantage.

4. They send great Quantities of Corn, Beef, Hides, Tallow, Butter, etc. to
Foreign Markets, and will never want means of improving their Country, and
increasing their People, without giving so great a Wound to England.

As to the Truth of the Allegations in the Bill:

1. The Accounts they themselves gave, were a sufficient Proof of them; for by
them it appeared, great Quantities of New-draperies were exported (which although
they endeavored to shroud under the Name of Frizes, yet they are known to be
Bays, Perpetuano's and Serges) such as are made in diverse parts of England, and
a Witness on Oath declared, that the Irish Serges were preferred to the English
in Holland, and were in great demand at the same time that English Serges lay
on hand, and would not sell.

2. That the Woollen Manufactury had as yet increased to no greater a height,
(was said to be, as the Truth is) because of the late War, which made
Exportation from Ireland unsafe; and that Kingdom not being well settled,
Persons were unwilling to adventure their Stocks, and to enlarge their Trades,
but that nothing can hinder their increase now, if Peace continues, but this
Bill.

Further it was said, That there was no doubt, but by degrees they would
improve and increase in their making of Cloth, for that all things grew to
perfection by degrees, as the Woollen Manufacture did heretofore in England,
and making of Lute-strings and Allamodes was coming to it, and that nothing
could hinder this in Ireland, having there the same Materials, and by degrees
would have Workmen from England sufficient, and a good profit arising by it,
Fullers Earth would be found there, or sent from hence, or they may do as they
do in Holland and France, where they have no Fullers Earth, and yet make as
fine Cloth as we do in England.

III. It was said, That this was not the Concern of Exeter alone, but of all
England, for there were presented to their Lordships at least 18 Petitions from
several parts of England, as from Norwich, Colchester, Bocking, London,
Sudbury, besides those from Somerset and Devon, who thought themselves
immediately concerned.

2. All the parts of England are affected, where Wool is produced, in the price
of their Wool, which would soon be reduced to a very low rate, when the
Manufactury of it is decayed.

3. The increase of the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland would draw People from
all parts of England, who consume the Product of the Land.

4. The able working People of England going over, would leave the Weak and
Aged a Charge to the Parishes, and on both accounts the Rents of England must
fall considerably.

5. That the Woollen Manufacture of England exported, was above half the Value
of the whole Exportation, and that being lost must needs also abate the Value
of all the Lands in England.

As to the Objections made to the Paper printed for the Bill.

And, First, About Dying Wares being cheaper in England than Ireland, it was
said, 1. That such Goods may be brought from any part of Europe, Asia or
Africa, directly to Ireland, and the few sorts which come from America to
England, as Logg-wood, Indico, etc. draw back great part of the Custom, when
exported to Ireland; particularly Logg-wood, so much as that it may be afforded
cheaper there than here; and although as yet Dying Wares do not come in very
great Quantities directly from other Parts to Ireland, yet they will do so, as
the Woollen Manufactury there increases. And it might have been added, that
there is lately gone from Holland to Ireland a great Quantity of Red-wood,
which is brought thither from Guinny cheap, although in England it is at a very
high Price.

As to the Objection, that Wool selling for 6 d. per lib. in Ireland, and at
the same time in England for 9 d. per lib. was but 25 per Cent. difference,
Arithmetic determines that; for if what cost in Ireland 100 l. sells in
England for 150 l. that is plainly 50 per Cent. odds, and 6 d. to 9 d. bears
the same proportion.

The Names of three Persons amongst 140 in the Printed List were picked out;
one whereof, as their Witness said, went a way 20 Years since; but being asked,
he could not say but there might be others of the same Names gone since, and he
owned it was seven Years since he left Exon.

About the Workmanship it was owned, that the Spining was much cheaper in
Ireland; and though it was said, that that was the least part of the Work, yet
the Clothiers know, that it is above half: And as the Manufacture increases,
the resort of People skilled in it will increase; and Ireland being so cheap a
Country, when it is in Peace, the Workmanship of all kinds must be cheap too.
The Person that Witnessed at first that but three Penny worth of Soap was used
in a Serge, afterward owned himself mistaken, and in truth there is above
three pound of Soap used in a Serge, which is worth about One Shilling.

From the Account given of the first Attempts that failed to settle the Woollen
Manufacture in Ireland, in 1656. and 1679, and that which afterward did
succeed in 1684. it was observed, That all New Manufactures are begun with some
difficulty, as the Woollen Manufacture it self formerly in England, and the
Manufacture of Lutestring and Allamodes lately here: And though at first it
succeeded not in Ireland, even in the New Drapery, yet afterward it took
effect, and to that Degree, that a Witness on Oath affirmed, that they make as
good Serges in Ireland as any where in England; and though as yet they are not
come to perfection in Fine Cloth, nothing can hinder them from it in time,
having, as before was said, the same Materials and Workmen, and all, so much
cheaper than we.

It was acknowledged by a Gentleman against the Bill, that bringing the Irish
Wool hither would not prejudice the Price of English Wool; and it is not to
bring it to a Market where there is no Vent; for it always did, and always will
find Vent here; and England will be much the better Market for it than
Scotland, though it should even be permitted to go there.

As to the Gains England makes by Ireland, the clear Gains are not much, and
England would pay too dear to part with their Woollen Manufactury for them: And
whoever pleases to look into the Irish Statutes quoted, will find that they
were only to prevent the Exportation of Wool, and not to encourage the
Exportation of Cloth to Foreign Markets.

And now to give Answer to so much of the printed Paper, Entitled, Some
Thoughts, etc. as is not answered before:

The Author has written with much Art, and said a great deal that does not
immediately concern the Question, and but slightly touched what does.

And First, as to the Profit England gets by Ireland.

1. England had need get something where it has been at so vast Expense of
Blood and Treasure, to deliver and protect Ireland.

2. This was got by Ireland, before the Woollen Manufacture was set up in
Ireland, and will be after that is suppressed there.

3. If it should get by the Establishment or Continuance of the Woollen
Manfactury, which must unavoidably ruin our own, by getting a penny we should
loose a pound.

If most of their Nobility and Gentry spend their Estates here, it is because
they live where they like best, but as Ireland flourishes more and grows
greater, as it must do if they remain in Peace, and such a Bill does not pass,
that Humor by degrees will alter, and they will have every thing as much to
their Content and Pleasure there as here, and now they go as much to Foreign
Parts as England.

That England supplies Ireland with most of the Commodities they consume is
affirmed, and formerly it was so, but before the War, the Case began to alter,
and they were more supplied by the return of their own Product and Manufactures
sent abroad then from England, and if a Peace continues there, and they go on
with their Woollen Manufacture, they will soon want nothing from England, but
it is able working People and Manufacturers and Seamen.

And although England has prohibited their Cattle, yet a great deal of Tallow,
etc. comes hither, and Anno 7th. and 8th. of this King, An Act was made here to
encourage the Linneen Manufacture of Ireland, and therein it was Enacted, That
it might be lawful to bring any sorts of Hemp or Flax, and all the Production
thereof as Thread, Yarn and Linen of the Growth and Manufacture of Ireland
free from all manner of Customs, Duties and Impositions whatsoever. It is true
indeed, that the next year the Act which doubled the Subsidies of Tonnage and
Poundage, did by an oversight (as is supposed) comprehend Linen, etc. from
Ireland, which by the Wisdom of the Nation may be rectified.

It is asserted, that the Trade in Ireland is carried on mostly by English
Stocks, but the Author is misinformed in that particular, and will soon find
many Foreigners send their Stocks thither when things are settled, as they did
before the War, and if they were English Stocks, yet that would be a great
deteriment to England, to have the Stock drawn out of Trade here to be employed
there.

Concerning the weaking the English Interest, it has had an Answer, and further
it may be said, that the Irish themselves say the Woollen Manufacture there,
for Foreign Exportation is small, and if we Prohibit that, they will in all
likelihood make the Cloth they wear themselves, which is much more, Where then
is the weakening them? It is not fit that they should have an Accession of
Strength by the Diminution of our own, who must support our selves and them too.

It is evident that as the Irish make and vend more Woollen Goods abroad, we
shall vend the less, because all Traders to Foreign Parts know, that the Goods
they make are in imitation of Ours, and they are wise enough to send such Goods
as they find are Esteemed and will Sell; and such the English make and send;
and the going off of many of our Woollen Manufacturers to Ireland, is too
convincing a Proof to be denied, that the increase in one Kingdom must be the
decrease of the other.

And now the Author of Some Thoughts, etc. is come to the main and indeed the
only Point, on which the Controversy turns. And that is, Whether in Ireland
they can make the same Woollen Manufactury cheaper than in England; and this
the said Author, Determines in the Negative, but leaves us to seek the Proof of
it where we can find it; and seeks to cloud the Matter with an obscure way of
Arguing but such as every one must see thorough, especially such discerning
Judgments as the Matter is now before. To make a long Notional Argument to
prove that two and two makes four, or any other certain Proposition in
Arithmetic; or to argue against the Truth of Addition or Substraction of Sums
without Numeration; is equally absurd. And therefore the plain Answer to that,
is the account which follows.

In England. In Ireland. l. s. d. l. s. d. A piece of Serge of about 40 s.
price, takes up 24 lib. of Wool, at 9 d. per lib. 00 18 00 at 6 d. per lib. 00
12 00 The 24 lib. of Wool when Combed, makes 15 lib. for the Spinner, at 9 d.
per lib. 00 11 03 at 5 d. per lib. 00 06 03 Soap used 00 01 00 00 00 08 Combing
and Weaving reckon the same in both places 00 09 00 00 09 00 1 19 03 0^ 07 11

So that a Piece of Serge which costs in Ireland but l. 1.7.11. costs in
England l. 1.19.3. which is 40 per cent. difference besides the Exchange.

And if the Advocates for the Woollen Manufactury in Ireland would succeed,
They Ought to disprove one of these two Points.

1. That either this Account is False, and in what Particulars; Or,

2ly. That if the same Sorts of Woollen Manufactury are made in Ireland 40 l.
per Cent. cheaper than in England, and thence Exported into Foreign Parts:
That Foreigners will for the sake of England, Buy English at dearer Prizes, or
that English Merchants, will to their loss send English rather than Irish. But
these are so self-evident, that they may as well attempt to prove it is Night
at Noonday. And therefore let the Consequence be what it will to Ireland, it
can never be supposed, that the Lords or Commoners whose Estates, and Families,
and Interests are in England, will ever yield this Point to the Irish. The Case
with England is not the same as formerly: Heretofore our Neighbors had no
great Strength at Sea; and then Foreign Trade which is the Foundation and
Maintenance of our Shipping and Customs was not of such absolute necessity as
now it is. The French and the Dutch are now grown Powerful in Shipping and Sea
Force, and England being an Island must at all times be able to cope with all
its Neighbors in Strength at Sea, or it will soon become a Prey to
Foreigners. And this can be done by no other means but the most vigorous
Promotion of our Foreign Trade; and the Woollen Manufacture is so great and
essential a part of it, and that on which all the rest Depends, That with
submission it seems to be no Policy, so much as to connive at the least
Diminution, or to allow of the least Discouragement of it.

And whilst the Irish did formerly, and may still go on with Tillage and other
Trades greatly to their advantage, without the Linen Manufacture, and
especially whilst England seems to be inclined by all ways and means, to
encourage their Proceeding upon the Linnen-Manufacture, they will have no
reason to complain.

The Author says, Ireland is not likely to drain England of People, because
they pay less Wages there, as the Promoters of the Bill assert, but if the
Advice of a very ingenious Gentleman who has written of Trade, were followed,
to reckon by Political Arithmetic, this Author would have seen where his Error
lay, in not reckoning, that if at the same time that People have less Wages in
Ireland they spend much less, and so can lay up more at the years end, then it
would be Encouragement enough to invite People there, where they can get most.

That those who are in the Manufactury there, will be forced to go to other
Countries, seems not likely, for the reason the Author himself gives elsewhere,
that they will turn to making of Cloth for their own wearing in Ireland, or if
they do, there is no Country where they can find so great Encouragement as to
return to their Native Country.

The probability of their Wool going to Scotland or France, is before answered,
and to prevent that, if this Act be not strict enough, it is a good Foundation,
and a stricter may in time be made, and the Government there being so much
under the Direction and Influence of England, there is no doubt but the Laws
will be executed there as well as here, and I believe by degrees, the
Rumny-Marsh People will be weary of their Connivance.

The Proposal which the Author makes of doing the Work more gently by secret
Discouragements, seems cruel and unjust: Cruel, to ruin People under the
pretense of showing them Kindness, and unjust to do it where there is no
Public and known Law to give them notice, whereby they may order their Affairs
accordingly.

All which is Humbly Submitted.

Postscript.
WHereas a Witness against the Bill affirmed on Oath, That the first Man named
in the Printed List, viz. Thomas Allen, went away to Ireland at least twenty
years since, upon Enquiry it is found, That he went thither about twelve years
ago, and not for Debt, and when the War broke out in Ireland he came back to
England, and about a year since returned to Ireland again, and has sent for his
Wife and Family, who are since gone thither to him. -- and Henry How, whom
their Witness said went away in 1680. or 1681. went away but about four Months
since from Gullumpton.


