Holy Confidence Well Improved, BY NEHEMIAH and the JEWS: Whose Faith and
Spirit were considered and applied to the SOCIETIES for Reformation of Manners;
in a SERMON at Salters-hall in London, on Monday August 16, 1697. And now at
their Request made public.

By Matthew Sylvester.

Cui sapit ipse Deus, solus sapit ille. Quid haeres?
Ad res difficiles dum vocat, ipse praeit.
London, Printed by J. Darby, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns
in Cheapside. 1697.

TO THE READER.
Candid Reader;
AS Divine Providence has exceeded all our Expectations and Deserts by the
Vouchsafement of a most Grateful Peace in these Parts of Christendom: and as
the same Providence has greatly used and prosper'd the Agency and Conduct of
our most Gracious and Illustrious Sovereign King WILLIAM III. in this great
Acquest, to his Immortal Honor and Renown; in all which God seems to be upon
his way to bring great Things to pass: so what can more concern us, and become
us, than to meet this Providence, and his Majesty, in that Spirit and Course
which may best correspond with those great Obligations and Designs which are
hereby laid upon us, and set before us? Sad and portentous would it be, and a
Presage of dreadful Judgments in reversion, if a delivered Generation from all
the Calamities of desolating and expensive Wars, should yet continue to wage
War with Heaven, by uncontrouled Immoralities, Debaucheries, Profaneness, etc.
God knows yet how to distress us more and more, either by Wars, or by other
Judgments of equally dismal Consequence thereto, to us. What signifies our
Peace with Men, if we have none with Heaven? The Lord of Hosts can neither need
nor want fit Instruments and Engines of Distress to plague us with, when he
once finds that neither Peace nor War will bring us to that dutiful and needful
Reformation, which he so evidently does attempt to fright and court us to. Fain
would I hope that this Design of Reformation is on foot; and that such a Spirit
is kindled amongst us as will invigorate all fit Endeavors to bring this thing
to pass, and that too, under Divine Countenance and Patronage. And my Hopes are
the more strong and free, in that I find so many of different Communions, as to
external Discipline and Worship, to be so evidently one in this important
matter. I think I have seen all the Sermons preached before the Societies for
Reformation of Manners hitherto: and I have read them with great Pleasure, and
to my no small Satisfaction. I find them all breathing the same true Christian
Spirit; and I must tell my Brethren, whether Conformists or Dissenters, that I
cannot but esteem and reverence that Judgment and Savor which I have discerned
in their so excellent and pertinent Sermons. I strongly hope that the nearer we
all come to God and Christ by Faith and Holiness, the more of Peace and Love we
shall experience amongst our selves. And the more evident we shall render it to
all Men, that we can differ in our Sentiments about the Modes of Discipline and
Worship, and yet most dearly love each other. I do not hate nor censure those
of my Brethren whom I differ from, so many of whom I find so very much beyond
my self in Parts and Learning, and Practical Christianity. I reverence all
proportionably to their discerned Excellencies. Christ has his valuable and
useful Instruments in each Communion. O that we could but love and treat each
other as Christ himself does and will love and treat us all! Why should I hate
or slight any below on Earth, whom I expect and am well satisfied that I shall
love and live withal in Heaven above? I neither do, nor can expect much Good
from any inordinate Heats or Bigotry, wherever fixed and practiced; as
knowing well who has declared, that the Wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God. Sound Faith, orderly Lives, peaceable Principles and
Behavior, cordial Affections, with all fit Ci^ilities of Conversation, and a
perfect Abhorrence of all Countenance to the Works of Darkness; may these,
Candid Reader, be ever dear to thee, and to thine, in and for the sake and
Universal Interest of tke Great Lord of Holiness, Peace, and Glory.

London, Sept. 27. 1697. Matthew Sylvester.

Holy Confidence Well Improved.
NEHEM. II. 20. Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of Heaven he
will prosper us; therefore we his Servants will arise and build.


. 1. GREAT Enterprises require several things to make them in their appearances
like themselves; and more particularly such things as these. 1. Good Warrant,
that they may be justifiable. 2. True Conduct, that they may be orderly. 3.
Noble Spirits, whereby they may work their way through all the Difficulties and
Oppositions which in all likelihood will attend them: for as the Enterprise
will deserve the Spirit, so should the Excellence of the Spirit be conspicuous
in the Enterprise, which is to be managed by that Spirit. 4. Right Ends; seeing
all Actions and Undertakings are specified, and so either ennobled or debased
by their Ends. For it is a sort of profanation of any Undertaking that looks
well, and appears worthy in the matter of it, to be prostituted to any Designs
or Ends inferior to the Person and his Work. 5. Through Diligence,
Watchfulness, and Confidence. Diligence respects Difficulty, and is opposed to
Weariness; and he that grows weary is not likely to attain his end.
Watchfulness relates to, and connotes surprising Danger; and good Beginnings
may be baffled by unthought-of Hindrances. Confidence spirits Courage; and
great things are encountered bravely where Success may be in prospect, through
peculiar Help. 6. Clear and impartial Proceedings all the way. Irregular steps
are most dishonorable things. Means and Motions ought to be answerable to
their Ends, and evidently worthy of them. No truly sinful Steps can here be
justified; for whatever God calls us to, he neither needs Lies nor Wickedness,
nor any thing forbidden, as in its own nature unworthy and unwarrantable (no
more do we) to bring such things to pass, as God ingages us to pursue. And
therefore, 7. All must be done with evident and great regard to God, and to the
Public Good. To God; (as to his Name, Will, Interest, and Glory) there must be
solemn and sober Addresses to him, and great Submissions to his Providence and
Pleasure. There must be continual Dependence upon him; mighty, but
well-grounded Expectations from him; judicious and well-tempered Zeal for him;
and (in a word) uniform Faithfulness and Devotedness to him, and to the Public
Good; as of him, by his Order; under him, as to his Conduct and Government; and
to him, as to his Glory, as to just Representations of him to our selves and
others, wherein we may expect him to appear; and as to all sit Testimonies of
our Respects to him. To all which I may add, 8. There must be Self-denial in
all fit Instances and Engagements. As to the Public Good, it ought to be
dearer to us than our own personal Concerns. For this indeed, if it be
deliberately, vigorously, and successfully promoted, one way or other, the
Benefit and Honor will be greatly ours. Defectiveness in any of these things
will hazard, and may frustrate and defeat the most glorious Undertakings, and
dreadfully expose the Undertakers.

. 2. I did not seek to be God's Mouth to you, and yours to him, this day: yet
did not I much withstand your Offer, because my Heart is in your worthy Work.
For I well know, (and so does God himself) that you might have chosen far
better Heads and Hearts than mine, for your Instruction and Encouragement, as
from the Mouth of God. But as you have chosen the Mouth, so God has sent the
Message, if I mistake him not, and far be it from me to talk deceitfully for
him. The Lord enable me to speak as from his Mouth, and as it becomes the
Oracles of God, that I may appear before and to you, (as once a Prophet long
since did, viz.) As the Lord's Messenger in the Lord's Message to you, saying,
The Lord is with you, Haggai 1.13. For all our Accomplishments, Assistances,
Encouragements and Successes, must be derived alone from him.

. 3. It looks not a little hopefully upon us, that so many worthy Persons
(rather of different Names than of contrary Spirits and Designs) have so
concentred their Hearts and Purposes, in a Matter so full of God, and so
evidently for him, as this appears to be, in my most serious and impartial
Thoughts. The World, I hope, will hereby see, that our Hearts are one in God
and Christ, and for their Glory and the public Good, tho we have some
different Sentiments about Excentricals: And I will (and I dare be free to)
say, that those excellent, learned, and serious Persons, both of the Clergy and
Laity of the Conformists, who have concerned themselves in this Affair, have
hereby showed their Readiness to strengthen each others hands for God, and are
now resolved to run down (if possible) those Immoralities, Blasphemies, and
Debaucheries, which give such bold and fatal Strokes at our public Welfare and
Renown. Whereupon I must and do profess, that as thereby they have been most
commendably exemplary to our selves and others, so have they most deservedly
entitled and endeared themselves to our best Affections and Respects. How much
more lovely is it in the sight of God and Man, to see Conformists and
Nonconformists vigorously to engage themselves to cast out all the Rubbish of
Profaneness, and practical Disorders, (which is disowned by the Laws of God and
Man, and has been frequently discountenanced in these Kingdoms, by public Acts
and Edicts) than by their Tongues and Pens to dispute and write each other into
such dangerous, unaccountable, and unwarrantable Distances, Jealousies and
Discords! And I am pleased to see in this Affair such eminent Proofs, that in
the Church of England there are more excellent and worthy Persons, than
strait-lac'd and censorious Spirits may possibly imagine. To cleanse, to build,
to fortify for God, under the Calls, and in the Prospects of our present Day;
and under such Countenance as our present Government and Laws afford us; O!
what more worthy of our Thoughts and Pains? what more delightful to the views
of serious Christians? and what more awful and accountable to the Enemies of
God and Christ, of serious Religion, and of the public Good?

. 4. As to the chosen Text, it will not appear so very foreign in its Sense and
Import to the Design and Business of this Day, as the hasty Reader, or rash
Hearer, may possibly imagine at the first view, if a few things be well
considered: viz. that,

First, The Transgressions of this People had brought them to their terrible
and disgraceful Desolations and Dispersions; Nehem. 1.7. chapter 9. 26 -- 37. Of
this Jeremy gives us a very great account in his so mournful Lamentations. See
also 2 Chronicles. 7.19, 22. And indeed the Sacred Scriptures abound with lively and
copious Representations and Assurances of this thing.

Secondly, Till they were penitent, and concernedly intent upon the
Reformation-work, their Deliverance and Restoration were not reasonably to be
expected by them. Levit. 26.40 -- 42. Ezekiel. 43.11. Deliverances and Salvations
must we not look for to the Dishonor of the God thereof, nor to the
Disadvantage of that holy Kingdom and Design, which the Son of God has been,
and is endeavoring to promote and finish.

Thirdly, They all grow sensible hereof: Neh. 1.6 -- 11. and 9.32 -- 35. No
Sins now unlamented, and no Reformation now declined by them. A wicked,
slothful, and hard-hearted People, are not receptive of what they seem to
covet: but when they lie down in Tears and Shame before their God, and clothe
themselves with Resolutions to do no more so foolishly, but to walk more worthy
of that Divine Presence which they so much affect and need; then their very
Temper and Deportment most comfortably presages their Mercies and desired
Salvations to be near them.

Fourthly, Their present Work and Aim is to prepare for the Memorials and the
Residence of their God amongst them: Neh. 2.17. and 13.14. Psalm. 122.1 -- 9.
Dan. 9.15 -- 9. They had now known the Import of a present and departed God to
them. They knew and felt, that when God's Temple is demolished, Jerusalem's
Walls and Houses could not stand; for God's Departure is impregnated with great
Woes to them that lose him. The Sheekinah always bears its own Charges; and
where it is welcome, it makes Blessings of all kinds and sizes to be plentiful.

Fifthly, Walls, Temple, City, and the Peoples Habitations there, must be
designed (as they well knew) for something else; 1 Kings 6.12 -- 14. They could
not be insensible, of whom they were themselves; of what a God they had to do
with; and to what purposes he and they were to come and dwell together there;
yea, or in what Frame and Course they and their God were to converse and keep
together. Hence Zerubbabel builds the Temple: Ezra endeavors to reform the
People; and Nehemiah builds Jerusalem's Walls and Gates to secure all within.
For who can possibly suppose that Temple, City, and People, should be thus
provided for, and so industriously secured without just reference to their God?
Surely it had been much below Nehemiah's excellent Sense and Spirit, to mind a
People, and to slight their God; Jer. 3.14. -- 18. A Man would think, that the
Seventy had their eye upon this thing by their thus rendering the Text: (...).
We are his pure Servants: Perfectly separated from Gentile Vanities, and
entirely consecrated and consigned to our God: (...) and we will build, as it
becomes such Servants, i. e. pure Votaries to our God: so far are we from
thinking or designing any thing abstractedly from him. And the Arabic Version
represents them as sensible hereof, that God would therefore prosper them, his
Servants, that they might arise and build.

. 5. In the Text therefore are observable these things to be considered. 1. The
confident Persons, Nehemiah and his People. 2. Their grounded Confidence; The
God of Heaven will prosper us. Wherein we see what they conceived concerning
him: That he is God; the God of Heaven; their God; for they call themselves his
Servants. This they were sure and sensible of; they thence inferred the
Certainty of their Success. 3. The Resolution grounded thereupon; We will arise
and build. 4. The Influence of their professed Faith on this their purpose;
therefore we will, etc. 5. The free Profession of all this; Then answered I,
and said to them. And here consider by whom it was made. It Is a discouraged and
scorned Seed in humane view, tho ordered and encouraged by their God. To whom?
To Sanballat, Tobijah, Geshim, those contemptuous Scorners. What they
professed; where; when; and why. 6. The Usefulness of this Text to us.

I. The Confident Persons.
First; Nehemiah, whose Name imports Comfort from God unto his Servants; whose
eminent Accomplishments for this Work have their evidencing Instances in
abundance; whose Heart was greatly set upon his Brethren and Work; and whose
Countenance and Encouragement was wonderful from God and Providence. Indeed
Zerubbabel the Son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the Son of Jozadack, (the Prophets
at Jerusalem helping them) they set about the Temple to prepare God's House for
him, that so the Presence and Residence of his Name might be fixed and kept
amongst them: Ezra 5.2. Then Ezra sets upon the reforming the People by solemn
Prayer, and proper Counsel and Persuasion; Ezra 9, and 10. And after all,
Nehemiah sets upon the building of the City-Walls and Gates, for the security
of God's House, City, and Servants; and to prevent the Reproaches of the
Heathen; Nehem. 2.17. All these improve their Season and Advantages from the
Indulgence of Authority, and from the Counsel and Encouragement of God's
Prophets with them; and all the Remnant of the People in their respective
places fall in with them to promote this Work of God, when thus accommodated
for it, and encouraged to it; Haggai 1.12 -- 14. But then, not only Nehemiah,
but also,

Secondly; His People with him, were accomplished for this great Undertaking;
Haggai 1.14.

1. As to Nehemiah, their Leader, and the great Promoter of this blessed Work,
he was hearty and concerned; sensible of God's Judgments, and the Peoples Sins;
acquainted and affected with their doleful Case and State; devotional and
serious with God for his good hand upon them in what they undertook; more
devoted to the Interest of Religion, and of the public Welfare, than to his
own Honor or Inrichment: Valiant and vigilant to go through with what was now
incumbent on him: Prudent and circumspect in managing Things and Persons to the
best advantage: Frequent in pertinent Consultations about emergent Difficulties
and Dangers: Generous in his Contributions toward the promoting of this great
Affair: and every way provident for Unanimity and Reformation: Much set upon
it, that the House be fit for God, that the People suit God's Presence there,
and that all be duly guarded.

2. As to the People: They had a mind to work, Neh. 4.6. They strengthened their
Hands for the Work, Neh. 2.18. Their Eyes were up to God, Neh. 4.9. They were
receptive of Instructions, and attentive to the Law, Neh. 8.3. and they adhered
to God and to their Superiors, Neh. 10.29.

II. The Confidence of these Persons.
1. More generally; that what they were about was according to God's Heart:
that it was pleasing to him: that Nehemiah and his People were thus concerned
about a Temple and People worthy of him, and about their Preservation in that
State; that it was according to his Order; that it was according to God's
Promise; that it was for his sake, that he might dwell among them, be glorified
by them, and appear glorious, and look like himself in every eye, to the
effectual rescuing of his City, Temple, Name, and Servants, from the Reproaches
of the contemptuous Heathen. For how dreadfully did it look, to see a People,
peculiarly God's, to be without God, and God himself to be without his Temple,
and without those reverent Adorations and Addresses from his People, and
without those practical Regards to him, which might distinguish them from
others, and show to all with what a holy God they had to do? They were also
confident that God had spirited them for this thing; Haggai 1.14. and that his
Presence was their Countenance and Patronage. They had his Prophets to
encourage them; they had fit Leaders to influence them, and their own Spirits
were prompt and resolute to and in all those Endeavors and Attendances, and
Pursuits, which were now so conspicuous amongst them. They were well satisfied
that God would show himself to be the God of Heaven, and prosper them,
answerably to their relation to this God; and that God himself would treat them
as the Servants of the God of Heaven. It was evident that he fixed amongst them
his Intercessors for them continually to mind him of them: And that he had
poured out the Spirit of Prayer upon them. They had no doubt about God's Name,
about their Relation to him, their Interest in him, their Call from him, their
Concern for him, their being countenanced by his Providence; nor about the
genuine Reference and Subserviency of what they now resolve upon, unto God's
Glory, and to the Propagation and Renown of their Religion.

But more particularly, 1. The Matter of their Confidence was, that God would
prosper them: i. e. first, they should complete their Temple, City, Walls and
Gates. That then their God would keep his Residence, as before, amongst them.
That God would countenance, promote, accept their Reformation, according to his
Grant and Order, both in Church and State. That he would in and from his Holy
Temple be their Glory, Guard, and Joy. That he would there accept their Suits
and Offerings; give them such Answers and Returns as they should truly need;
and thereby greaten both Himself and Them in public view, to the astonishment
of all about them. That consequently no Enemies Attempts upon them to defeat
their Work and Purpose should be prosperous. And that all this should end in
the Appearance of the Lord of Glory, in his Gospel-living Temple. O! had the
City, Temple, Walls, and Gates, been built, and no God there; or had the
material Buildings bounded and terminated their Desires, their Building had
been vain, and they themselves unfit for the Patronage, Presence, and
Protection of the God of Heaven; neither had their Prosperousness in their
present Enterprise been really a Blessing to them. Buildings and People without
God and Godliness, without Devotion and Religion, how mean would the Design and
the Success have been? How thin the Possession? How dishonorable and
reproachful the Success?

Secondly, The Ground of this their Confidence, that they should be prosperous;
was, 1st. God's Eminence, as the God of Heaven. Heaven is God's Throne and
Residence; and it represents him as above all, and over all; and able to
accomplish and dispense what he thinks sit. 2dly. God's Relation unto them. How
many encouraging Relations to this People does God own, whilst he calls them,
his Portion, Children, Subjects, Heritage, and Jewels? 3dly. God's Presence
with them: Witness his Spirit, Prophets, Providence, etc. 4thly. God's own
Concern and Interest in this their present Work: for he designed them to be the
People of his Presence, Choice and Joy, and accordingly by special Favors to
signalize them as such. And, 5thly. His ancient Promise to them. And, O! what
Holds are these for Faith and Hope? How will they animate and invigorate our
Prayers and Confidence, our Diligence and Resolution, when we are called out to
act for God!

III. Their Resolution hereupon.
1. We will arise and build, Neh. 2.17, 20. They fix their Purposes. They
thought it not enough to mourn, fast, pray, profess, or seriously to represent
their Case to God: Nor would they hesitate or desist. God needs not us, but we
need him. Yet if there be any Abilities, Accommodations, Opportunities, Warrant
and Encouragements, our ordered Province is to be minded by us, and our
determined and appointed Work resolved upon: For Resolution is to issue into
Action. This turns and fixes the bent and biass of our Souls and Motions. Man
is fit for nothing, till Resolution sets him out: Men unresolved are unstable;
James 1.8.

2. This we will do, as we are God's Servants, and because we are so; Neh.
1.10, 11. Ezra 5.9 -- 11. All must be done by order from on high, in conscience
of it, and according to it. They did not look upon their present Purpose and
Employment as an arbitrary thing; as if it were left with them whether to build
or no; or to build as they list. God's Will and Favor were the great
Enforcements of this Purpose. Humor and Will did not here thwart or baffle
Conscience; but all lay prostrate at the foot of Conscience, as that respected
God's Authority and Order; and all was commanded and directed by that regent
Principle. Men do not otherwise act as Servants.

3. Their high and awful Thoughts of God gave Life and Spirit to this their
worthy Resolution; and well it might; for where God is, all must be prosperous:
Nothing can stand against him, or before him, to defeat his Purposes and
Counsels. Romans 8.31. Numb. 14.9. They saw whose Patronage, Help and Presence
they might rely upon. This made them fixed and fearless, and unwearied till
their Work was done.

IV. The Influence of their Confidence upon their Purpose.
1. This made their Resolution to be rational: Therefore we will build.
Rational Resolution will be constant. It Is no small satisfaction to know upon
what Ground we stand; or what we enterprise, and why. What! such a God! so
great! so wise! so good! so true, and faithful! We his Servants! and such
Success in prospect! What are Enemies, Difficulties, Cost or Pains hereto!

2. This fixed their Purposes at once. The Cogency hereof could not but
preserve an equal Tenor; for God is evermore the same. He never can deny
himself, 2. Tim. 2.13. They had here the same cogent Arguments and Motives to
urge their continuance in their Work, which they had to prompt them to begin
it. Clear Apprehensions of God's Immutability will greatly establish the
Resolutions of his Servants.

3. This sweetened all their Pains and Dangers, and set their speedy, joyful End
and Issue in their clear and constant Prospect; for all their Enemies that
opposed this thing, did but expose themselves thereby. None can be prosperous,
they knew, that hardened themselves against the God of Heaven; nor can that
Work miscarry, nor that Hope prove abortive, which God espouses, and attends
with a propitious Eye.

V. The fit and free Profession of all this.
1. The Professors were a despised and discouraged Seed, under Correction for
their Crimes. God had let loose their Enemies upon them, and suffered them to
lay all waste before them; and the Spirit of Enmity against them in their
Enemies was not yet extinct; Ezra 5.12. Neh. 2.17, 19. and 4.1 -- 4, 8, 11. and
9.36, 37. Jeremy's Lamentations afford us a sad Mirror of their dreadful and
deplorable Condition.

2. The things professed by them were all distasteful to their Heathen Enemies:
Their Faith, that their God was in Heaven, where Pagans Gods are not: Their
Relation to this God, that they were his Servants, and therefore owed no
Service to their Pagan Gods: Their Resolution, that they would arise and build
for God; for they would admit no Rival nor Peerage with their God in this Concern:
which made this good Man briskly tell his Enemies, that they had no Memorial,
Right, nor Portion in Jerusalem. As for God's Grandeur in Jerusalem, and his
Residence and Worship in his Temple there, this they knew would eclipse all
their Pagan Glories. And then their gathering to their own Land could not be
pleasing to their insulting Enemies. And, lastly, Their professed Confidence in
this God, and their expectation of Success from him, seemed to import, yea,
plainly spoke it, that they took their Adversaries to be as nothing in God's
hands; Neh. 4.14.

3. This they professed, when most opposed and scorned; Then answered I them.
Something of parallel hereto we find in Dan. 3.16 -- 18. and 6.6 -- 10. They
acted now, as under the Sense and Power of what we have upon Record in Isa.
8.12 -- 14. and 41.10 -- 16. and 51.12, 13. and 40.25 -- 31.

4. They had great Purposes and Reaches in their eyes in this Profession; 1
Pet. 3.14 -- 16. and Ezra 5.11, 12. This their Profession seems to be animated
by that Spirit of Love, of Power, and of a sound Mind, which we find mentioned
in 2 Timothy 1.7. And it looked well and providently every way. 1st. Toward God
himself; As the God that they would sanctify, and had so profound a Reverence
to: this spoke them tender of his Honor, and heartily devoted to the
glorifying of his Name. For they hereby were solicitous that all should know,
that the God of Heaven, and of Israel, had no Equal. 2dly. It reflected greatly
on God's Enemies: For did they know the God which they confronted by hindering
the Builders and the Building, they would rather roll themselves in Dust, than
engage their Tongues or Hands against that Being which so infinitely transcends
them. 3dly. It looked greatly at the once captive, but now returning Jews. It
ministered to their continual Encouragement, that the God of Heaven was even
riding in the heights of Heaven, to bring them to, and fix them in their own
Land and City, and to enable them to complete their undertaken Work. 4thly. It
looked greatly at this great Professor, Nehemiah himself: for his Profession
made it clear how much he valued himself, and promised to his People and
himself from his Relation to this God, and from the Conduct, Government, and
Kindness of this God to him, whom he had chosen to carry on this Work. 5thly.
It looked greatly at their approaching Privileges and instant Mercies; This is
our God, who is the God of Heaven. And O the sparklings of his heavenly Glory,
which we shall see to our great Benefit and Pleasure in the great Glories of
his rebuilt Temple, and repaired Walls and City! 6thly. This looked greatly at
their present Work; for it was their own concocting and digesting of all those
Ministries to their Courage and Endeavors, of which their Sense of God was as
the Life and Strength. Their Hearts would saint, their Hands grow feeble, their
Thoughts would be confounded, their Expectations would be baffled, and their
Spirits stripped of Courage; were not all these revived upon them by this great
Name, which they so pertinently and prudently professed. 7thly. This looked
greatly at their own endangered Frame. Their Enemies were many, they themselves
but few. Their Enemies were crafty, busy, and malignant, whereby they were but
as Sheep amongst the Wolves. But when they set this God against their Enemies,
they readily could conclude, that all their Enemies would be found Liars, as to
God and them. And, 8thly. It looked as greatly at that Reformation which must
be vigorously carried on in order to their getting, keeping, pleasing, and
honoring their God. They knew that the refining of Men's Spirits, and the
reforming of their Lives, were as removing Mountains, and as raising Persons
from the Dead. It is no easy Enterprise to oppose Sinners against their
Interests, and against their strong Corruptions; and to bring Men off from all
their darling Lusts and Follies. But when they knew that the God of Heaven
could make them strong and prosperous; whatever might appear exceeding
difficult, could not be thought impossible.

VI. The Doctrinal Import of this to us.
Doct. 1. That which the God of Heaven will prosper in their hands, his
Servants should resolve on and promote. Be the thing enterprized never so
difficult, costly, or unlikely to succeed in humane thought or view, yet if God
order it, and expect it from us, as we are his Servants; and if he intimates
his purpose to succeed us, we must not be discouraged or remiss. This great and
glorious Undertaking to repair the Temple, City, Walls, and to reform the
People, how intricate and perplexing was it found when once engaged in by
Zerubbabel, Joshua, Ezra, Nehemiah, and all the Remnant of the People?
Contemptuous Scorners despised them, and reproached them: Pretenders offer to
work with them, with the greater Subtlety and Secresy, to confound and hinder
them: The People of the Land disturb them, and hire Counselors to frustrate
this their purpose: These (in confederacy with others) misrepresent them to the
King: and they provoke him to reverse his Order issued out to build; and they
accordingly prevail. And thus the Work was made to cease by Force and Power;
Ezra 4. When they obtained a new Commission from the God of Heaven (or rather
the Revival of a former Order) by Haggai and Zechariah, God's Prophets; this
also was enquired into, censured, and informed against by Tatnai, and
Shethar-Boznai: but yet the Elders kept up their Spirit, Purpose, and
Profession; and they went on boldly in their Work. After this they had
mercenary Persons, who by Prophecies and crafty Insinuations of instant Enemies
and Dangers, endeavored to obstruct their Progress; and all this under great
pretense of Friendship, tho they designed hereby to influence these Builders
and Reformers into a Distrust of God, a contracting a Dishonor to themselves,
and turning scandalous to the People: Yet notwithstanding this, the Wall was
finished. And (if some say true) a Counter-Temple and Religion at Samaria was
advised to, to divide them: which was accordingly accomplished, as Josephus
tells us, Jud. Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8. And Manasseh (who was Grandchild to
Eliashib the High Priest, and Son-in-law to Sanballat) was made their Priest,
by the Solicitation of Sanballat, that so Manasseh might not put away
Sanballat's Daughter, his Wife, as the Elders of the Jews required. See Bishop
Usher's Annal. ad Ann. 4381. ex Josepho. Hence all revolted thither who would
not quit their strange Wives. From all this it is most evident, that these, in
conscience of their Duty to God, and of their Encouragements from God, went on
to build; and that they looked upon all their Enemies and Affronts but as the
Trial of their Faith and Courage. And this, in the Doctrine of it, reaches us,
who have this day discerned our Duty, and espoused it; and who here present our
selves before the Lord, to bewail the Demolishments of our Walls and Temple,
and our Reproaches consequent thereupon; to consider and confess our Sins,
whose Sinfulness is so visible in these our Desolations; to profess our
concurrent solemn Resolutions, to set upon Reparation-work; to entreat God's
Blessing upon our purposed and commenced Reformations; and to make known to
all, our Relation to God, our Confidence in him, our Zeal for him, our
Dependence on him, and our great Expectations from him: and to testify to all,
in whom, in what, and to what purposes we (tho differing in Sentiments as to
some smaller things of ritual Consideration and Concern) do now unite as
Brethren, to love, encourage, and assist each other, as one in God and Christ,
to run down Immoralities, and to reduce Men to that visibly orderly Behavior
which may conciliate to our Religion (our Christianity) its just and genuine
Reputation; and to make us Protestants more exemplary, and less scandalous even
in the eyes of Rome it self. And shall we be discouraged by any thing, from
attempting to rescue our professed Religion from the Reproaches of the Pagan,
Antichristian, Papal World? What can be more of God than what is for him? And
what can be more for God than what is of him? And when can we expect his
Presence, Patronage, Countenance, and our Success from him, if not when we
become all Spirit and Vigor against what he has so frequently and solemnly
remonstrated unto; and for what he has told us, that he has prepared a Hell;
and upon what he has left upon Record, the History of so many executed (and
those so very tremendous) Judgments? By which it is evident what he has most
espoused, and does so evidently set his Heart upon. No Man (I hope) of a
greater Latitude and Candor for free Thoughts, and Searches, and Expressions,
than my self, when I see them attended with fit Modesty and Self-suspicion, and
a true evident Concern for serious Dealings with God, and for practical
Christian Godliness, in those who differ from me in doubtful and inferior
things. God himself knows how far I am distrustful of my own Judgment, the
Weakness whereof does cost me many a serious, sad, self-humbling Thought, in
both my Solitudes and in Conversation. Yet other Men's Passions and discouraging
Reflections upon me, will never make my Judgment better, tho they fill my Heart
with Grief, and force me to lament my self, and to refer them to themselves,
and to their Judge and mine. But yet I see no reason that bold-fac'd Atheism,
Infidelity, Anti-scripturism, and the daring ridiculing of the Eternal Word and
Son of God, should escape their deserved Censures, so far as liable thereunto
by the Laws of God and Man. For of such things I hear from others, tho I have
met with none my self. I would not have every Objection, modestly and
discreetly offered, and closely urged in its full Strength in order to its fit
Resolution, to be accounted culpable. Modest Inquiries and Proposals are vastly
different from industrious designed Propagations of Errors, and from scurrilous
and blasphemous Reflections upon the Godhead of the Lord of Glory. So far as I
can find, too much in Sacred Writ is attributed and ascribed to Christ by God
himself; too much is arrogated, claimed, and assumed by Christ unto himself;
too much has been predicted of him by the Prophets; yea, and too much has been
asserted, received, expected, and attested by his Apostles and Disciples in
their day, to leave it possible for me to think him a mere Creature, or any
thing less than the Eternal Word and Son of God. To which I will take liberty
to add, that how the Universal Government and Judgment should be safely
committed to and left with a mere Creature, or with one that could not judge the
World without a Prompter, quite exceeds my Understanding. But as to
Blasphemies, Profanations of Holy Days and Institutions, abusing those who
minister therein; Debaucheries, Intemperance, carnal Pollutions, exposing
Sacred Words and Things to Scorn, unseasonable hauntings of Publick-houses;
yea, all things tending to debauch Youth, or others, these God would have
rebuked and exposed to Punishment and Shame.

Doct. 2. High Thoughts of God should evermore attend great Undertakings for
him. It is in his Name, for his Sake, to his Praise, and by his Order, that we
go forth to serve him comfortably any way. Where then is our Confidence and
Courage? Where is the Strength and Cogency of our Motives, if God be meanly
thought on by us? He that misrepresents his God to himself, dispirits all that
is to move him to his Work; and dilutes every thing that is derived from God.
We are not self-sufficient; our Difficulties, Adversaries, and Perplexities,
will be found manifold and mighty. Perfidiousness will be frequent. We our
selves shall faint and be discouraged, if our due Sense of God do not animate
our Endeavors. Whence otherwise can we derive our Conduct, Courage, Strength,
Protection or Success? How can we think or hope to fetch down Gigantick
Wickedness, or to stem the Tide of rampant Immorality and Profaneness, (which
has so many subtle, potent, and malignant Patrons and Abettors of it, who
through long Custom are hardened therein) but by our dependence upon that God
whose Name we reverence and adore? And how shall we preserve our Bow in
strength, and invigorate our Purposes and Courage, to oppose Debauchery and
Immorality, but by our actuated Thoughts of our exalted God in our own Spirits;
and by our setting off his Eminence against all the formidable Aspects of Sin's
Votaries and Champions; and against the discouraging Prospects of that Cost and
Danger whereto our espoused Enterprise may expose us?

Doct. 3. Great Expectations from God will give great Life and Spirit to noble
Actions and Enterprises for God. High Hopes will make our Spirits truly
Heroic, and inspire and fortify the bravest Resolutions for generous and great
Actions and Acquests. God eyed as for us, near us, and before us, as with his
Euge and Reward, will make us fearless and unmovable, and greatly eager in the
pursuit of what concerns his Laws and Glory. Certain Acceptance and Success
must needs have cogent Influences upon considerate Souls. Lively Hopes make
through Work: God will prosper, and therefore we will build. The God we hope to
live with, and whom now we serve, has neither Heart nor Heaven (we know) for
Immorality. He is the God, and Heaven the State, and Holiness the Frame and
Course; and Christ the Patron; the Law of God the Rule; his Promises the
Encouragement; his Presence, Providence, and Spirit, the Promoters and
Countenancers of all due Order, and of all beautiful Conversation: And Satan is
the Enemy, and Hell the Sink and End of all that is against this. He therefore
that expects the Patronage and Kindness of his God, and that understands
wherein these must consist and fix, here and hereafter, will heartily endeavor
the extirpation of all things irreceptive of God's Countenance and Reward. They
that make God their All, that have placed their Hearts in Heaven, and know the
stated Laws of Expectation: They that have well considered the Repugnancy of
Sin unto, and its Inconsistence with the holy Nature, Will, and Interest of
God; with the true Health, the great Beauty and genuine Pleasure of humane
Souls; with the due Grandeur and Designs of Divine Government; (which is indeed
the Illustration of Divine Excellencies in the true Constitution and Conduct of
what relates unto the Sons of Men, sutably to their Author, Make, Capacity, and
End) these, as they expect Success in what is of and for this God, so will they
engage and act accordingly.

Doct. 4. What we believe, expect, and purpose, with respect to God, should be
as freely owned and professed by us, as others testify their Scorns and Enmity
against God. Acts 24.14. 1 Pet. 3.15. Great Enterprises ought to be seconded
with brisk and bold Profession when the case requires it. Ezra 5.11, 12. Thus
in the Text, Then answered I them, etc. See Dan. 3.16 -- 18. Mind here what was
professed: 1st. That their God was the God of Heaven; but so was not the God of
their Enemies. 2dly. That they were the Servants of this God; and thus were
their Enemies Gods disclaimed. 3dly. That they were resolved to build for God:
And thus the Oppositions of their idolatrous Enemies were (in the sober Sense
of God) confronted by them. 4thly. That the God of Heaven would prosper them.
Thus were their Enemies, and their Gods despised by them, as too impotent to
help or hinder them. 5thly. All this was boldly owned by them when most
despised and derided by their Enemies; and those too some of the greatest of
them. And thus their Scorn and Rage were represented to their faces as most
despicable things, because of the Patronage of the highest Being. What may
justify your Work, will equally justify your Confidence and Profession. Shall
we not be as bold for God as others are against him? Where lie the odds? Deuteronomy.
33.26 -- 29. Zech. 4.6, 7.

Doct. 5. Our Purposes and Practices ought to agree with our Relations,
Stations, and Professions; Tit. 1.16. Nehem. 5.9. This great Reformer gives the
Answer, makes the Profession, reforms the People, incourages the Work,
addresses to and eyes his God, rebukes the Immoralities of his Followers,
brings them to observe, and own, and praise their God, in the Advances of their
Work. And he acts answerably to his Station, as a Magistrate; to his
Circumstances, as a rich Man; to his Relation, as God's Servant; to his
Obligations, as the Surviver of a long Captivity; as attended with gracious
Providence, and as his Prince's Favorite, to the best Advantage both of
Church and State.

VII. Practical Reflections on the whole.
1. See hence who are the fittest Persons to appear and act for God: Those that
are hearty Servants: Those that have great Thoughts of God: And those that most
depend of God for their Conduct, Protection, and Success.

2. See hence what such are most intent upon: Psalm. 137.5, 6. Hag. 1. 2 -- 8.
Neh. 2 3. Building for God, and for his People; doing what may distinguish,
credit, and secure Jerusalem, and God's Worship, Truth, and People there: and
indeed nothing but what may well become the Patronage, Presence, and
Encouragements of the God of Heaven. Numb. 25.11 -- 13.

3. See hence what actuated Thoughts of God, and of fit Confidence in him, and
of great Expectations from him, will make Men do: viz. these will fix their
Purposes, fire their Zeal for orderly Behavior, spirit their Diligence,
embolden their Looks and Speeches, and make God's Servants keep their ground,
and to mind their hits and helps.

4. See hence how a few Men of Place and Figure, by their exemplary Wisdom,
Zeal and Diligence, may influence the Body of a People. They may be as their
Eye, their Heart, their Hand, and Mouth. We see how Nehemiah could speak as in
the Name of all, and for them; and draw the rest after him.

5. See hence what it is to appear and act for God, and for the Good of his
Jerusalem, from Principles of Conscience and Religion. Self is here laid aside,
and melted down into the Interest and Order of the Public, even of Jerusalem.
It is not well with such in their own Thoughts, unless and until Public
Affairs go prosperously on. Psalm. 137.5, 6.

6. See hence what a true Estimate of God's City, and of his Temple-presence
there, will prompt and reconcile his Servants to: Nothing is thought too great,
too good, too much, as to Diligence, Cost, Hazard, Watchfulness, and
Adventures, to set all right toward God and Man; to reform Men's Lives and
Manners, that thus God and his People may delightfully dwell together. This
speaks the God of Heaven, well known, and greatly valued by his People.

VIII. A word of Exhortation to Reformers, and that to these few things.
1. To Considerateness. Luke 14.28 -- 32. and that in several respects: 1st. As
to your God. For it is for him that you arise and build: bis you are; for him
you enterprise your present Work; under his Eye you are at work; to him you are
accountable; according to his Order you must act; on him you must attend and
bear your selves; to him you must resort; and from himself must you receive
your fit Reward. Think then with what a God you have to do; whose Presence you
desire and prepare for; whose Work you are about; and to whose Will and Service
you would reduce this dissolute, profane, debauched, immoral Generation. 2dly.
As to your selves. Consider well from what Principles you act; what you have in
your Eye as your great Design and Scope; by what Rule you intend to walk; and
then what Life and Strength is put into your so generous, weighty and
warrantable Resolution. 3dly. As to your enterprized Work before you: Ruins
here call for Lamentation; Breaches for Reparation; Rubbish for Rejection;
Dangers for Watchfulness; long, tedious, and much Work, for Patience; Scoffs
and Conflicts for great Resolution; different Humors, Stations, Circumstances,
and Degrees and Kinds of Crimes, for much Wisdom and Discretion; subtle
Countermines, Evasions and Excuses, for serious, prudent, deep and clear
Discoveries and Thoughts; and all your Procedures and Successes, for
Observations and Acknowledgments. And seeing so many Eyes may be fixed upon
you, what strict Self-discipline and exemplary Blamelessness ought you to have?
And I need not tell you, what necessity is incumbent on you for solemn frequent
Prayer to God, for your Conduct, Safety, Encouragement, and Success from him in
this Concern. Here then consider well what you may ask and urge; and how you
may obtain and use what such Addresses may bring in.

2. To Confidence in God. That you shall not be Losers, nor deserted by him in
this thing. Hag. 1.13. The God of Heaven will help you. The Son of God will
speak and plead for you. The Spirit of God will cherish and inflame what he
implants and kindles in you. For all the Immoralities which you are laboring
to suppress, are grievous to him, and a great hindrance to his Work. God's
Providence will not neglect you. You have (caeteris paribus) the Prospect and
Assurance of your Great Master's Euge and Reward. True Peace of Conscience will
attend you in these your resolute and regular Purposes and Engagements for your
God. The very Consciences of the Dissolute are against themselves for you; and
their future Tongues and State will justify your Zeal and Faithfulness at
Death, or in the day of Judgment. God will be every way your Friend; and they
that know his Name may cheerfully and safely trust him in his way. Set but your
God before you always, and you need not be moved. O let not these encouraging
Consolations be neglected, unconcocted, indigested, or accounted small! Your
solemn Thoughts must help your Confidence; your Confidence must six your
Purpose, and quicken you to and in your Work. Did we but make more reckoning of
God, as the God of Heaven, and as our God, he would more gloriously show
himself for us. There would be more Experience of him undoubtedly, were there
more regular and actuated Expectation from him; Isa. 26.3, 4.

3. To Resolution for God. Acts 11.23. Neh. 6.11. And let those Words of Truth
and Soberness be well considered, which you find in Jam. 1.5 -- 11. Fixed and
strong Resolution is as the Root and Life of generous and great Actions. I
verily persuade my self, that I speak to Principles when I speak to you. I am
(I hope) both a Stranger and an Enemy to Flattery. So far as I can understand,
this glorious and hopeful Project was no sooner contrived, espoused, and set on
foot by Gentlemen of the Church of England, as to their stated Communion, and
such in Faithfluness to their own Judgment, than it was readily complied with
by others called Dissenters: but we are all one in Christ, and Members each of
other. And being now concentred in this great Purpose and Concern, I hope we
shall go on, both hand in hand, and heart in heart; and make it evident to all,
that our different Sentiments in some other Matters will not extinguish or
abate reciprocal Affections and Respects, nor make any Breaches or
Encroachments upon any fit Civilities of Conversation; nor upon any Articles of
mutual Helpfulness as to the Public Good, or our Civil Concerns with one
another. Such large and noble Souls are lovely things indeed, both in the sight
of God and Man, as can make all yield to weighty things, and make us heartily
and respectfully to converse and act together, to stem that Tide of Wickedness
and Profaneness which threatens so apparently to ruin the Welfare and Renown of
Church and State. See Hos. 4.1 -- 3. Jer. 7.8 -- 16. and 5.5, 27 -- 29. Ezekiel.
22. Bold Sinners, and an angry God; great Crimes attended with notorious
Impenitencies, and growthful Judgments, are dreadful things when found
together; Lev. 26.26 -- 28. Isa. 1.2 -- 6. Let then your Fear of God, and your
Pity to the Land, and to the Souls of Men, excite and fix you.

4. To your mutual strengthening of each others Hands in this great Work and
Purpose; Heb. 10.24. You have great Encouragements from God and Christ, from
Heaven and Earth, from the Laws of God and Man, and from the public
Professions of Transgressors, who stand up at the Creed; who cry, Incline our
Hearts to keep this Law; and that in solemn Assemblies; and who do not deny
that God, that Christ, that Gospel, which testify and protest against the very
Crimes which they so shamelesly commit and perpetrate. None so deserving of
Rebukes and Punishments from God, as they that sin against the very Letter of
those Laws which they profess to be Divine, and which are no way controverted
amongst themselves. Set but their professed Principles against those their
Practices, which contradict such Principles; show but the Inconsistencies of
these Men's Principles and Practices with one another; and then urge them
closely, to show to all which of these two must be deserted and denied by them.
We may put Spirit thus into each other, and God will own and patronize us all.

5. To discourage all those Principles and Doctrines (as far as regularly you
can) which minister to these Immoralities. Rev. 2.14. Tit. 1.9 -- 16. 1 Timothy
6.3. Jude 3, 4. He that shall teach, There is no God, no Providence, no future
Judgment, and consequently neither Heaven nor Hell: He that shall propagate
such Doctrines as these, that Souls are mortal; that Christ is not the Son of
God; that Man is but a siner sort of Brute, etc. he ought to be stopped in such
Careers. For if these be true, and credited accordingly, then all Religion and
Morality comes down at once. All then must be lawful that may be safely done,
as to humane Vices and Injuriousness.

6. To walk prudently and blamelesly your selves in all things. Phil. 2.14, 15.
Neh. 5.9. it is but reasonable for you to expect all sorts of Eyes upon you.
They whom you prosecute for their Immoralities, will thereby be awakened and
irritated to their severer Observations of you. And should they (which I hope
they never will, and beg of God and you they never may) ever find you guilty of
the same Sins, or of equivalent Crimes to what you proceed against them for,
you may conclude that your Miscarriages will be told in Gath, with all
imaginable Aggravations, to your Reproach, and to their Joy* and God himself
will justly make you base before the People; in that as God and others expected
other things from you, so may you look for such Returns upon you from his
displeased and incensed (because more reproached) Majesty, as shall abundantly
demonstrate, that with him there is no respect of Persons; and that your
Profession of God and Christ, and your Endeavors to suppress Sin in others,
shall not commute for your dishonouring of God, and for your being scandalous
unto others, by your own personal Transgressions. Nor is your personal
Blamelessness, as to Immoralities, sufficient for you in this matter, but you
must also see that all your Diligence, Zeal and Courage, have their due
Conduct, and be every way (as far as in you lies) accountable to God and Man.
Bear with me in this faithful Freedom with you: This Caution is not given you
from Accusation or Suspicion of any one amongst you. All that is possible does
not come to pass; but you are Men, and in the World and Body.

IX. A word to the Immoral and Profane.
Could I entreat you seriously to read Deuteronomy. 27.9 -- 26. and there and then
consider the Sins there doomed to a solemn public Curse; the God who hates
those Sins, and who will execute the Curse wherever he sees those Sins
committed; the Motive offered and urged there; and God's insisting upon
universal Obedience to his Laws, with the Encouragements which he affords
thereto, in Deuteronomy. 28.1 -- 13. Could I obtain of you to lay to heart that
peremptory Word, with the historical occasion of it, in Levit. 24. 10 -- 16.
Whosoever curses his God shall bear his Sin: and he that blasphemeth the Name
of the Lord shall die. Could I prevail with you to pause upon God's published
Resolution, not to hold him guiltless (not to free him from his Wrath) who
takes his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7. I might then hope that your Reverence
toward God, and your Self-love and Care might keep you orderly and safe.
Uncleanness, Intemperance, Rudeness and Profaneness, are such debasing and
unworthy things, as that serious Thoughts could not but move you to abhor them.
Are not your Tongues, your Souls and Bodies, his, who made and bought them?
Were they created and redeemed; Are they protected, maintained, accommodated,
and encouraged, to be alienated from their Proprietor, and to be profaned and
abused before him? Can any thing be pleaded for your Sins which may be
justified at your own Tribunal? Or can the Gain and Pleasure of your Crimes
compensate what you are sure to lose, and to bring upon your selves thereby? If
there be no God, no future State, how came you by your Beings, and by all your
suitable Provisions for their universal Welfare? But if there be a God, and a
future State, has he made that and you to be eternally his own Reproach? Or do
you think God made his Laws in vain? Or that Heaven can bear or suit with your
present Frame and Course? Or that God needs or fears you, so as to save you,
with a Lie in his own Mouth, or to confront him in the Heavenly State; or to
let you provoke him whilst you live here, and then to change you, and to save
you when you die? Your Reformation will be your Credit and Safety, and our
great Ease and Joy.

It can be no way pleasing to the sober Mind, or to Men of Peace, intent upon
their own Interest, Quietness and Safety here, to minister to Contentions, or
to irritate your Passions, by thwarting and exposing you to public Censures,
or by reproving you, tho in secret; were they not conscious to themselves of
these things, of God's strict Observations both of them and you; of the
accurate Laws by which he will judge us all; of the Solemnity and Impartiality
of that Judgment; of the Importance of the future State to all; of the terrible
Reviews and Censures which your and their awakened Consciences, (by the so
sensible Approaches and Instancy of Eternity on a Deathbed, wherein we can
look for nothing but the Severities of Divine Revenges) will make upon all
Follies and Neglects: Of those most intimate and sharp Resentments which our
Great Judge cannot but have of all your notorious and aggravated Crimes, which
have so boldly and provokingly confronted him in the whole Constitution and
Procedures of his Government and Designs: Of some possibility of reclaiming
you, and of reducing you to God and Christ: and of the notice which God and
Christ will take of them, as they behave themselves in this Affair toward you.
They do believe the Articles of the Christian Faith. They know those Rules of
holy and orderly Deportment toward God, themselves, and others, by which they
must be governed and judged. They are very apprehensive of their Sacramental
Vows and Ties to be true to God and Christ, and you. They have seen the
tragical and dismal Conclusions of debauched and immoral Lives. They clearly do
discern the dreadful Influences of such Lives upon the public Peace and
Welfare. They are not ignorant of those most rueful Desolations of Persons,
Families, Churches, Kingdoms and Societies, which dissolute Spirits and
Practices have produced and multiplied. And they are well satisfied that the
Prevention or Removal of God's Judgments, and the procuring and continuance of
his blessing Presence with us, can never rationally be expected but in the way
of universal penitent Reformation, and evident Return to God. And they would be
glad to know but in what Frame and Mirror you would behold and face your
selves. Do but reflect upon what you are: And can you think it orderly and
accountable (even to your own impartial selves) that Men should brutify
themselves? That rational Souls should prostitute their so noble Faculties and
Powers to the so sordid and mean Interests and Satisfactions of intemperate
Flesh? Shall that lie wallowing in the Mire, with the Self-defiling Brute,
which might so gratefully and commendably exert and illustrate its own
Authorities and Vigours in the due Management of its so very useful Body? Lust
and Intemperance are a great profanation of that so curiously contrived and
compacted Mansion which is consigned to the Soul to live in, and to improve, to
its own true and great Advantage. And for the Tongue, which is the Soul's
Orator and Interpreter, to represent its Excellence and Sense of things to all;
must that be used to viler Purposes, even to proclaim your Transformation into
a devilish Frame and Nature? Does it become a Creature to blaspheme and curse
its God, to imprecate his Anger, to contend with the Author of it self, and to
show more Enmity and less Reverence to him, than Pagans will or dare to do unto
their false Gods? What need of Oaths and Blasphemies in humane Conversation!
Such things are no ways fitly expressive of noble Extraction, of genteel
Education, of improved Parts, of exquisite Learning, or of endearing Principles
and Dispositions; nor yet of considerable Usefulness and Figure in Church or
State.

Do but reflect upon whose you are. You are God's own, as to Property,
Obligation, and Accountableness, whether you will or no: Nor can you divest him
of his Right to use you as he pleases; tho you may possibly spoil your Title,
and implead all Claims unto his Favor and Rewards. And now, must that be used
against him which is more His than Yours? Or can you think your selves to be of
such Ability and Figure, as to hector, curse, or flatter him out of his own
Throne and Rights? Can you implead his righteous Sentence, or prevent its
execution, when doomed by him to Hell?

Do but reflect upon where you are; even in that World and Body, wherein you
have not long to stay; but you have much to do and be, in order to your
everlasting Misery or Happiness. This World is but a Pilgrim-state. Your Flesh
is as the Grass or Shadow. Your carnal Pleasures are but Dotages, Dreams, and
Snares. Your Blasphemies, Cursings, Oaths, and rants of Speech; your swelling
Words of Vanity are but Self-cruelty and Reproach, and the hastening and
enflaming of that Divine Vengeance, which, when inflicted on you, will convince
you to the purpose, of how unfit a Match you are for an incensed and engaged
God against you. Your bold Affronts to God and Christ, speak you either
ignorant of, or unacquainted with, and inconsiderate about your selves and
Them. Nor can I think on any thing whereto you can ascribe your present Peace,
but to your contracted and judicial Stupidness; which is, I think, the greatest
Plague on this side Hell. Hardheartedness and Fearlessness are productive of
Carelessness and Presumption. These ripen Souls apace for Hell; and they will
be found as the drying of the Stubble for the Flames of the infernal Pit,
wherein the Terrors of Revenges will surprise and scorch such Sinners most
severely. And shall this present State, and Scantling of probationary time only
be spent in what is most like to shorten it, to ruin you, to strike profanely
at both Majesty and Mercy, and to prevent your own Salvation, by making it
unbecoming God and Christ to save you from eternal Wrath? And shall others fear
or love you more than they love God and Christ? And must they tamely give up
all God's Rights, lest you should thereby be displeased and stopped (tho
regularly) in your attempted Rapes upon all that is Orderly and Sacred? You
know your time is short; that it is given you by God, purchased by Christ, and
filled with what may help you to a better State. And is this the best
Improvement of what you are entrusted with so kindly, to curse and swear, to
profane Holy Time and Things, and to drench your selves in such prodigious
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, who are to perfect Holiness in the fear of God?
O tell us seriously, or ask your selves in your sober Thoughts; to whom, to
what, are you thus most attempered? Think you that there is so little
difference betwixt God and Satan, Heaven and Hell, as that the Spirit and
Practice of the one can be congenial with the other? Think therefore most
composedly upon Who it is that instigates and prompts you to all your
Dissoluteness and Profaneness, and why he burries you hereto, and animates
those Principles in you, whereby he governs you for himself. Does Satan love
your God, your Souls, your Happiness? When you have by him filled your measure
up, and at length find your selves in Hell; will that malignant and proud Enemy
in Hell, ( the Devil I mean) forget or pardon all your Reflections upon him? or
will he overlook any thing done by you in time disserviceable to himself? He
knows you never can be his, unless you cast off holy Speeches, Purposes and
Practices, and yield your selves to be his obedient Servants, and to become his
Volunteers. Are others then your Enemies because they would rescue you from
him? And lastly, spend some solemn and close Thoughts on this, viz. What you
are like to think of your own self-ruined selves. When God is your fixed Enemy:
when Christ has sentenced you to Hell: when Angels have bound you up, and have
thrown you thither: when all this World is burnt and gone: when you have seen
Christ's Family carried up with himself to Glory, and find your selves, after
an awful Trial, shut out for ever, and given up to the absolute Pleasure of
your insulting Enemy: when Conscience, Passions, and Revenges are let loose to
fix tormentingly, and to center on your desperate and remediless selves: and
when your free Thoughts are to range in the Discoveries of all those Springs of
Misery, of which once you took so little notice here. When these things are
upon you in their eternal Strength and Fullness, can you then face, or have
Converses with your profane, debauched, intemperate, wilful, deserted and
distracted selves, delightfully? Or can you think that Christ will fetch those
Souls to Heaven, that always practically and presumptuously told him how little
they esteemed Heaven or Him? and how much they preferred Satan and his Ways
thereto? I have no personal Prejudice against any of you. I highly value your
Learning, Parts and Ingenuities, and Usefulness, and all things valuable in
you. And O that your speedy and effectual Reformation might prevent all things
disgraceful and afflicting to you!

FINIS.
Books printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Body of Practical Divinity, containing 176 Sermons on the Assemblies lesser
Catechism. By Tho. Watson, formerly Minister of St. Stephens Walbrook, London.
Fol.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects, by the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and some time Fellow of Clare-hall, Cambridge.
Fol.

Mr. Pool's Annotations upon the Holy Bible, in two Volumes, Fol. The third
Edition, with an Addition of a Concordance, and Contents to each Chapter. By
Mr. Sam. Clark.

Theological Discourses, in 8 Letters, and 3 Sermons on the Sacred Trinity:
Part the 1st. 4to. Theological Discourses and Sermons on several Occasions:
Part the 2d. 4to. Both by John Wallis, D.D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford.

Mediocria: Or the Middle-way between Protestant and Papist, in a Paper of
Justification. The 2d Edition, with Additions of a Letter to Mr. Williams. 4to.

Peaceable Disquisitions, in some Animadversions on a Discourse writ against
Dr. Owen's Book of the Holy Spirit. 4to.

Pacification touching the Doctrinal Dissent among our United Brethren.

The Righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel: Or, an impartial Enquiry into
the Genuine Doctrine of St. Paul, in the great, but much controverted Article
of Justification. To which are prefixed the Epistles of the Right Reverend the
Bishops of Worcester and Chester. These four by Mr. John Humfrey.

The glorious Reward of faithful Ministers declared and improved, in a Sermon
upon occasion of the Funeral of that excellent Minister of Jesus Christ, Henry
Newcomb, A. M. late Pastor of a Congregation at Manchester. By John Chorlton.
4to.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that pious Gentlewoman Mrs. Judith Hammond,
late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hammond, Minister of the Gospel in London.
By Mr. John How.

A Sermon preached at St. Mildred Poultrey, Jan. 3. 1696/7. by John Lord Bishop
of Chichester, and late Rector of the said Church, upon his leaving the said
Parish.

The Fountain of Life opened: Or, a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory, containing 42 Sermons on various Texts. 4to.

Pneumatologia: Or, a Treatise of the Soul of Man, 4to. Both by Mr. John
Flavel, late Minister of the Gospel in Dartmouth.

Discourses upon the rich Man and Lazarus. By Tim. Cruso. 8vo.

The Swearers Doom: Or, a Discourse setting forth the great Sinfulness and
Danger of vain and rash Swearing: By John Roast, A.M. Rector of Ofswel and
Gittisham in Devon.

Scripture Light about the Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism, in a Letter to some
scrupulous Friends, by a sincere Lover of the Christian Community. 12mo.

The Church-Catechism enlarged and explained, in at (...) and (...) Method;
with the Scripture (...)

The (...) and faithful Servant set forth, in a (...) Oak in Essex, (...)
before the funeral of Mr. (...) some time Minister of the Gospel (...) with
(...) account fo his Life and (...). By Henry (...)

A Paraphrase of (...) with Notes, Doctrinall and (...) for the Use of
religious (...) calling of the (...) Reverend Mr. (...) corrected. 8vo.

(...) our Righteousness: Or the Justification of Believers by the
Righteousness of Christ (...) and applied in several Sermons. By (...) and
Minister of the Gospel. 1(...).

(...) the Families with (...) and (...) 8 vo.

(...) Golden S^^fers: (...) Christian Reprovers and Reformers characterized,
cautioned and encouraged a Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners in London. (...).

(...) God's Being, and of the Scriptures Divine (...) 20 Directions for the
profitable (...) of them. By D. Burgess. 8vo.

A most (...) explanation of the (...) shorter (...) amended. By (...)

An (...) of (...) Henry, Minister of (...) in Shropshire who died June 29,
1696. fifty fifth Year of his Age. Recommended by Dr. Bates.


