BEEN AGERE AC LAETARI
FRANCISCUS DE LE BOE SYLVIUS Medicinae Practicae in Academia Lugdun^^ Batava
Professor

R: White sculp


NEW IDEA OF THE Practice of Physic; Written by that Famous FRANCISCUS DE LE
BOE, SYLVIUS; Late Chief Professor of Physic in the University of Leiden.

THE FIRST BOOK;

Of the Diseases either constituting, producing or following the Natural
Functions of Man not in Health.

Wherein is containd, beside a New Method in general, a Vindication of the
Spleen and Mother from Fits attributed to them.

As also a new Discovery of Intermitting Fevers, the Yellow Jaundice, and other
Diseases, never before discoverd.

All cleard by Anatomical Experiments, and Chemical Demonstrations; As also by
their Cures.

Whereto is prefixed a Preface written by Dr. Mar. Nedham.

Translated faithfully by RICHARD GOWER, formerly Student under the Author.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1675.

To all the Supreme Powers in Christian Europe, FRANCISCUS DE LE BOE, SYLVIUS,
Physician, wishes perfect Health of Body, and Mind, and also faithful and
quiet Peace, from God the giver of every good Gift.
THe toilsom labor which I have undertaken to endure for the common Good of
all Men in the adorning of Physic, Part whereof such as it is, being brought
forth and published as occasion was offered, I thought fit to Dedicate, not to
one Prince only, but to You all, as being the High Lords of Earthly things in
this part of the Universal Orb, wherein I am born and live, to whom I doubt not
but that Your Own, and Your Subjects Prosperity is Your desire and care.
Beseeching the Good and Great God with my whole Heart, to inspire You with an
ardent desire, and constant will, that Physic should be perfected (as yet
deficient in many things) by the pains of excellent Physicians, who live under
Your Power in many places, it being useful and necessary that our Course should
be happily finished upon Earth.

Hitherto I have endeavored to do something, to the measure of my Ability, for
the good of the Commonwealth: But who can expect so great a Work of one Man,
and that private, and therefore destitute of infinite necessary Helps to perform
so immens and hard a Matter? But so much me thinks I have profited in the Art
of Physic, by a continued painful Labor almost forty years, that I now dare
boldly affirm, the Structure of a more perfect Edifice of Physic may be
erected, the Authority and Munificence of Princes being employed with many
industrious and judicious Physicians, so much the more desirable and to be
wished, as by how much Princes no less then Subjects do need its help, being
afflicted unto Death with so many, so grievous, and those not as yet enough
known Diseases, and therefore so often esteemd insuperable.

Neither doubt I, but in a short space a rational and certain way of Physic may
be found out by the proposed Method, if not in all, yet in the most Diseases.
For which end I here offer publicly my weak Pains, if acceptable, to You, by
Divine Authority set over the Government of others, out of sincere love of
farther deserving well of the Commonwealth, seeing that it pleased the
Clemency and Wisdom of God, of mere Grace, not only to free me beyond my
expectation a year ago from a most grievous Disease, and in a manner from the
Jaws of Death, and to restore not only former strength of Body and Mind to me,
but farther to illuminat my Mind more, and hence so bountifully to consent to
my Wishes, that entrance has been made daily to me more easy, and farther, to
the dark and deepest retirements of natural things.

Now, the same God for his unspeakable Mercy and Goodness toward Mankind,
direct your Thoughts and Counsels to the eternal Glory of his Holy Name, as
also to Your own, and Your Subjects Health both Temporal and Eternal. Amen.
Which is my hearty Prayer.

Leiden, April 14. 1671.
To the Reader who is studious of Truth and Public Good, Franciscus De Le Boe,
Sylvius, wishes Health.
AS often as any Men do endeavor, in any kind, to afford any thing that
conduces to the benefit of of the Public, they have in all Times been thought
worthy of the favor and benevolence of Great Men; but when they do indeed
promote the Public Good, they deserve moreover to be rewarded in a
well-ordered Commonwealth: wherein, as Cicero says, Rewards are by the Laws
proposed to Virtue, and Punishments to Vice: Therefore if at any time their
excellent Performances are not only envied by Men idle and malicious, but
perverted by prating Cavillers, accused by Parasites that have little else to
do, and traduced by slanderous Calumniators; so often those who are in
Government have taken care, that they should be neither neglected nor despised.

That I may apply these things, though but in part, to my Concerns, there are
so many ridiculous and unjust censures of my Enemies, oftentimes pretended
Friends in the United Provinces, especially through a false Prejudice, or Envy,
or Hatred of my Words and Writings, that I scarce know whence to take a sit
beginning for my Preface.

For, I so much esteem my own peace, that unless I had already venturd, and
something were already published by me; which nevertheless several good Men
favoring the Common welfare do approve here and elsewhere beyond my
expectation, though my Adversaries chafe at it; perhaps I should have prevented
by silence the manifold Cavilings and Calumnies of Ill-minded People, which
have hitherto befallen me, and were foreseen by me.

Wherefore I intend to publish some of mine Endeavors and Labors, lest many
should think I am brought to a perpetual Silence, by the vain Threats and
injurious Calumniations of malignant Men, because this Book, such as it is,
has been slowly finished, and now also published.

For, after that I being moved with love to the Commonwealth, took in hand the
Professorship of Physic above thirteen years since, which was more then once
offered to me in this Academy (although with a great deal of damage to my
private Concerns) thought this Business was given me, that I should teach mine
Auditors not a few things observd, by me for many years privately, amongst my
Patients, and otherwise; but even those things which were daily further to be
observed, as also thence solicitously concluded, and deduced by a continued
reasoning, and so both profitable and useful to Mankind.

Wherefore, that I might rightly do my Duty, I spent Days and Nights both in
calling slowly back into my Memory what I had for a long time considerd, and
had accuratly examined and noted, and also in conferring the past with
following Experiments, daily made at my own Cost for common Good, as well in
drawing thence Conclusions and most solid Determinations to cure the Sick, as
in informing the studious Youth (that came hither in a great number to hear me)
faithfully about those things, which I judged were both true and good, and also
in a right forming of them, according to Art, for the Practice of Physic.

Nor was success through God's assistance wanting to mine Endeavors undertaken
in the fear of God, and love: whilst Letters came from my Scholars daily,
thanking me for the benefit received, who practiced happily at home and
elsewhere. But, as in Man's Concerns nothing is wholly blessed, I have not been
free from Envy, Cavilling, evil speaking of malign Men, or such as hated me,
and whatsoever the Devil, that perpetual disturber of Man's Tranquillity and
Happiness, uses to suggest to his Servants.

I will not farther enlarge with words upon the manifold ill will and
evil-speaking of mine Adversaries for some serious Causes, being content at
present to mention in a few words the detriment which is brought upon the
Commonwealth by the Cavils and false Accusations of some.

Whatsoever singular Gift of Mind, Body, or Fortune, every one has receivd of
God, (And I pray you what has any Man, which he has not receivd from Above?)
he is bound to employ it, acknowledging the Giver with an humble heart, to the
common Good and benefit of Men, never to any ones loss or detriment.

Which common good is promoted, both by searching out the Truth obscured as yet
in sundry things, or by illustrating it more or less hid, and by manifesting it
to others; and by searching out any Profitableness coming or likely to come
from things known to Mankind, and by calling into use what is invented, and
communicating it to others.

He that does this, is wholly to be estem'd for an excellent Citizen, whose
Virtue the Parent of Roman Eloquence judged worthy of Imitation and not Envy.
And indeed they are to be praisd who emulate, and not at all to be blamed who
endeavor to overcome the Virtues and good Deeds of others; on the contrary
they are to be abhord, who maliciously cavil, or contumeliously slander the
profitable Words or Deeds of others, as often as they cannot equal or excede them.

It is moreover the property of these truly miserable People, that they first
envy good People, and strait-way become evil-speakers, being before ill-will'd.

As many therefore as are persuaded, or think that they can excel others in Wit,
Judgment, Memory, Dexterity, or pains about any things whatsoever that are to
be done, and are desirous of Splendour and Glory, (seeing that so many things
are as yet obscure in Nature, and coverd in thick darkness) they have an
opportunity to wax renowned with the celebration of their Name, if they would
discover with an incessant labor, and continual industry, and bring to public
light many of these things as yet coverd, and so serve the Commonwealth.

But they who have not sown with much labor and expect a great Ha^^ est, for
the most part are fed with va^^ hope; whence they grieve and sorrow by degrees,
whilst they see others in the me^^ time enjoy the deservd Glory, which they
being Pretenders would have conferd upon themselves, or at least removed from
those they envy. Wherefore the Study which they ought to take in acquiring Glory
about honest Arts, they almost wholly spend in Carping, Biting, Corrupting,
Confuting, and Desaming other Men's Words, Writings, or Actions profitable for
the Commonwealth, whereby they deprive them of due, and sometimes attributed
Praises, or at least extenuate and diminish them.

For this same reason, though they often enough harm good Men, (for it is the
custom of most Men to give heed to the Publishers, and more to the defamers of
other Men's Praises) yet for that reason there redounds none to them, or Profit
to the Commonwealth.

For although many joy in Cavils and Calumnies tending to the dishonor of Good
Men; yet ought they also to bate Cavillers and Reproachers, (were they prudent)
because they likewise know that they are in danger of them: as great Ones are
said to love the Treason, though they hate the Traitor.

It is so far unlikely, that any profit should befall the Commonwealth by
Cavils or Calumnies whatsoever, that contrarily many are afrighted by them from
propagating their Inventions or Observations with a notable loss hereof, which
otherwise might serve the Public; and being made more cautious by others or
their own danger, they had rather that those things should perish with them,
(as I have experienced it often done to my grief in several cases) then be
unjustly traduced by mocking Censurers, as being ignorant of those things, or
be scurrilously tossed upon the Tongues of Vain and Evil Men by means of these
Bablers: which will be, as long as it shall be lawful that any injurious Man
may impudently rail at good Men, and find favor with his flattering Tale among
Rulers, in that not very wise nor prudent.

Hence it coms, that God out of his unsearchable Wisdom, would not that many
things, which as yet are hid from us, should be found out and brought to light
always at once, but by degrees, and at times, not by one, but by many.

And as all good Men deservedly praise Ancient and Modern Authors, who have
only in part seen many things, and have not thoroughly seen every thing, much
less all; yet because they have left to Posterity as much as was known to them,
so they think (because it is easier to add to what is invented, then to invent
what is unknown) that all do what is worth the while, who but a little promote
the Bounds of Sciences and of Arts; and therefore it seems not only unworthy of
any that desires the Name of a Learned and Honest Man, but unjust also, and
ini^^^^^.

Good Men and the Commonwealth, (...) to taunt or defame those wickedly, who
even now, according to their power, do at least endeavor to make or show a way
to discover more things coverd, or to illustrate Obscure Things, or find out
Profitable Things and bring them forth to the common use of Men; and much more
those, who actually do this, and liberally communicate their useful
Observations to others: seeing it should be the Good of the Commonwealth for
which all should by any means be stird up to do more and greater things, yea
others should be joind to them, who also would put to their helping hand, and
share with those both in Pains and Praise, who already have and do deserve well.

But because it is irksom and grievous to delicate or otherwise lazy Men, to
stoop to handywork, it is on the contrary more pleasant and easy to prate with
a voluble Tongue, most Men being vainglorious and seeking a little praise,
though in a trivial Matter, whereby they do disturb and by their importunate
talking daily more obscure those things, which they know not, nor will
illustrate by assiduous labor. For as they are not accustomd to great Labor,
so neither are they given to it. Therefore they do worst employ their Pains, to
be able to babble about every thing problematically on either side as they
list, and not to excel in endowments of Mind or Body, to perfect any difficult
Work, or to unfold, explain, or determine doubtful and intricate Matters.

Mean while large Gifts are often bestowd on such Great Pratlers, and Annual
Stipends for their vain and flattery-Talk; which the Inventors of good things
do for the most part want, being more studious in searching out the obscure and
hard things themselves, then to propose them with handsome words, or in a
servile manner to curry savor.

What I have before said, will be more manifest by an Example. It is
wonderfully now controverted in our Art of Physic, about the Manner, Motion,
and Use of Choler in Man's Body. Where I freely acknowledge, as I have testified
often both in public and private, that I cannot fully satisfy my self hitherto
in this Matter, and indeed partly by the defect of certain Experiments
requisite as yet to resolve some Doubts even now urging me; partly because of
sundry Experiments not having the like success in all, nor at all times, but as
it were sometimes repugnant one to the other.

Wherefore it were to be wished that they, who have more leisure then I, would
take necessary ^^ans both in finding out, and in making accuratly manifold
Experiments, that so they might take away all Difficulties that may molest any,
and so presering the true and plain way of preparing it for Motion and Use in
Man to their own Honor, and the Commonwealths prosit.

Whoever will try to effect this, shall have my praise; but who-ever performs
it, shall moreever have me to be his faithful and certain Follower.

I have endeavored, with a great adventure to set forth a New Idea of Physic by
mine own manifold Observations; which I have begun to communicate heartily in
the simplicity of my Heart, first to mine Auditory, then to all, seeing my
study of deserving well of the Commonwealth, has pleased many Famous and
Illustrious Men in our Art.

And when I observd that for this cause the Malign Cavillers, and Reproachers,
waxed hot and rose up against me, I was necessitated to proceed cautiously,
least any thing should fall from (...) by imprudence, or hasting, which ill
speaking M^^ might deservedly carp and slander.

And among other Causes, this also hinderd the composing and publishing of this
Book; by which (...) the Public gets more Profit. For I at^^^^ (...) as my
Business, and continual Distractions permitted me) to every thing more
diligently, and weighed them more accuratly and longer, and have confirmd the
most things more clearly by manifold Experience, which before in part at least
were evident to me only by wonted reasoning; so that now I appear in public so
much the more secure and heedfully with my Meditations and Observations.

I could indeed have brought out of my Store both more, and perhaps more
perfect; as also greater, and more abstruse, and therefore better and more
profitable things, if God had given me desired leisure to do those things,
which is scarce at any time to be expected of Men. Nor did I judge it equal,
that I in these Belgian Provinces wisely addicted to frugality, should be too
much and perpetually negligent of my private Estate, and give for nothing almost
all that I have brought forth by incredible Labor, least new Curators should
be chosen to over-see me against my desire for the Good I have newly done so
freely, as though I had been a Prodigal and carried my Matters ill.

Mean while I testify before God, the only Searcher of Hearts, that I have not
Written or Taught any other thing here or elsewhere, than what seemed to me
true, or most like to Truth, and chiefly profitable to the Sick. For upon these
accounts I have never withheld or shund any, yea not the most troublesome
Labor; I spared no Cost, often great enough for my Condition. The which
Charity of mine, the most Mercisul God bountifully favoring, has more then
once graciously requited, and without doubt will yet farther recompense in his
own time, what all sorts of ungrateful Men, though from them due, have often
denied or turned from my Merits.

God grant that, as I have written these Things to serve Young Beginners of the
Art of Physic, and (hence by their help) the Sick themselves, all these things
may tend to the good of them both.

Leiden, April 14. 1671.
To the Gentle Readers and Printers, the Admonition of Franciscus de le Boe,
Sylvius.
ALthough I do not much esteem my Works, yet would I not that they should be
published any way corrupted by any Body whilst I live and without my privity.
Wherefore, that I may consult with mine own Honor, and the Profit of the
Commonwealth, I would have all admonisht, that I in no wise acknowledge that
Edition for mine own, which Thomas Matthias Gotzius published in the year 1664.
under my Name, and of the College of Practical Physicians: nor that which I
hear Frideric Leonardus has published this Year 1671. at Paris under the Which
how deficient it is from Chap. 40. Sect. 47. to the end of the first Book, let
any that have that Copy c^mpare, this being no further published at that time by
the Author.
Title of my Practice: Much less that infamous and soul Book, which some
ill-imploy'd busie-Body wrote and published, out of his own wicked Store and
impure manners, a few years since, under the Title of The Second Part of
Physical Disputations concerning the Circulation of Seed, and the Generation of
Man, imitating my style whereby he might fasten it upon me, and thereby injure
my Reputation.

To the truly Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire.
SIR,
YOur most profound and singular Learning, together with your sincere love to
all Persons and Things that any way tend to improve or promote the Interest of
it in the World, especially those kinds thereof which tend most to Practice,
and are most useful and profitable for Mankind; As also your great Candor and
Ingenuity in pardoning or excusing the Lapses and Inadvertencies of Humane
Infirmity, induces me to make this bold but humble Dedication of my Labor in
this Translation of this Praxis of Sylvius, Chief Professor of Physic in Leiden
my Quondam Tutour.

Not imagining you are unacquainted with the Contents, much less that it can
add any thing to your Stature; But your Noble Patronage may be both needful and
useful to me, who cannot be so much a Stranger to the Epidemical Distemper of
the present Age, as to think my self secure from some carping Zoilus, or the
calumny of some strait-laced Physicians, that would rather the whole Science
were engrossed to the hurt and injury of the World, than that the Power and
Virtue of the Art of Medicine should be promoted and divulged, and thereby
flourish in a public Benefit; whereas common Good should be the prime
intention of every Man, and will certainly be so of all Spirits truly generous.

The worthiness of the Author, and high esteem he has very deservedly
acquired, by not only his Learning, but also great industry and Ind^fatigable
Pains, rendering himself Eminent among Judicious and Industrious Spirits; Being
conscious also of my own design to do him right in the Translation, and
acknowledge my high respects to your Honor in the Dedication, and in both to
serve my Country, makes me the more presumptuous to offer it to you, as the
fittest Person, craving your Pardon and Acceptance; Which will be a perpetual
Obligation to

Your Honors most humble Servant, RICHARD GOWER.

TO THE READER.
THe Translator of this Book, when the Translation was even quite finished at
the Press, was sent to me by a Gentleman, one of the most Learned in this Isle
of Great Britain; with a desire, that if I liked the design of Publication, I
would own it so far, as to give my Opinion about it to the World. Should I name
that Learned Person, there is none of the most stiff Philosophers of the Time,
but would perhaps bow the Head at the bare mention of his Name; and therefore
it will be Apology enough for me in what I do, that I thus pay Obedience to
his Desires, which I ought to entertain as Commands upon me, in this
Declaration of my Opinion.

The Truth is, nothing could have been offered more welcome to me, in regard of
the worthiness of the Author, and of the Work it self, wherein he has done the
World more Service, toward the promotion of the Art of Physic, than ever any
Man did before him in the United Provinces; And in such a manner, that he does
not, as some here in England, trifle away all time and patience in labored
Discourses, more fit to tickle the fine Ears of a Speculative Auditory, out of
the Chair of an University, than to edify Men engaged in Practice: But like a
wise Practitioner, so orders the Matter, that his Sheets may smell as little as
may be of an Academick Professor; for, the infection of those places is so
strong, that Men used to Philosophizing there with Niceties, and conjectural
Probabilities, are wont, when they come abroad, to smell rank of it ever after
in all their Writings and Discourses; and so does Sylvius in some Particulars.
Their manner is to abound with Notion; for which having been admired by the Men
of Letters in the Academy, they all believe they may set up for Authors of
Science; though (when they come into the World) they generally prove mere
Slow-Men at Business; yet they pass as great Men among some Learned, and the
better sort of Men Unlearned: for, the World will still be for Learning (so
reputed) in Men of Physic, not being able to judge, whether that which is
acquired in the usual way of Education be learning to the purpose.

To give you a more particular Account of Sylvius the Author, take what I have
received from the Ingenious Translator, who had the happiness to be a Scholar
of his. He was by Birth a German, who through industry arrived to such degree
of merit by working and practice at Amsterdam, that his Fame spreading about
the Low Countries, the States of H^^land cast an eye of great regard upon him,
and p^aced him (though a Stranger) in the Professors Chair in the University of
Leiden; which he afterward adorned for almost thirteen years, by forming many
useful Doctrines (not mere formal Points of Literature) for the Institution of
young Beginners in Physic, of whom a multitude were by his Reputation drawn
thither from all parts of Europe, to be his Disciples: such Doctrines as have
not had their Rise from the Ancients, and the Academies, but most of them from
Laboratories of his own and others, wrought out of the Fire for near forty
years together, and confirmed by constant Practice among the Sick; in which
Work of Curing he excelled all his Fellows, in the most difficult Cases: Yet
because he had recourse mostly to Chemical Remedies (of whose safety and
excellency the World is now convinced) the more lazy Tribe of Doctors made it
their business most maliciously to calumniate and traduce him, as you will find
him miserably complaining in many parts of his Book; of whom he says in 40th
Chapter, that they be ignorant of most Natural Things, yet are a prating Crew,
that strut about and swell inani Doctorum Titulo, with the vain Title of
Doctors: they are his own words of them, and the World has too many of them,
though they and their Credit wear off apace. So that now in this discerning
Age, seeing the Pedantry of their Breeding, the Leigerdemain of their
Philosophy, the Theatrical Mountebankerie of needless Niceties in Anatomy
(about which they perpetually quarrel, and puzzle one another) are like to
prevail no longer, to gain admiration among the great Vulgar, or the little;
and it being found, that to Industry in operating one grain of Prudence being
added (such a Prudence I mean, as is in an Apprenticeship improved under a
Practiser, and by an in-sight into Practice from ones youth) will weigh down
all the Schools in a sick Man's Chamber; therefore they are constrained to have
recourse to other Arts, to uphold that Tottering Dominion which they have long
held over the Phansies of the People.

To say nothing of their Flatteries among the Great and the Rich, besides the
Calumnies that they sow against other Practitioners, the frequentation of Clubs
and Tipple to gain Acquaintance, the glosing Collusions and fine Tales with
Nurses, Midwives, Women and weak People; the Confederacies to cry up one
another with Doctissimo and Clarissimo in Prints, the creating and canvasing of
Interests in Families, and the common chequenerie of Consultations only with
Men of their own Tribe; the most remarkable Trick of all is, that they have an
Oar in the Boat of every Party round the Town and Nation, having listed
themselves accordingly. Some are for the Church of England; some for the Church
of Rome; some for the Presbyterian; some for the Independent; some among the
Baptized; some for the Fifth-Monarchists; some for the Quakers; every Man for
himself, and God for all: And so the World is very luckily divided; every Party
taking its own Proselyte to be the Ablest, and the most Conscientious Doctor.
Is not this a short Cut (think ye) to get Custom? This and Scholastic Twattle
will do the Work, according to the general Mode of their Second Commencement:
after which, the few Men of no Party, whatever their Industry and Art be, are
left to be turned to grass upon the cold Common of Integrity.

But in this latter Age, the great Pranks they play now are by mounting the
Stage of Anatomy, (for that pass it is now come to) where many of them are wont
ever and anon, to make wondrous Ostentation of pretended new Discoveries in the
little World of Man; with which they have a Mint always going, for coining new
Hypotheses, out of which they start up their various Dogmaticisms, to amaze
their Admirers, and amuse the World; so that the very Neighbors Dogs are in as
much danger of their Shambles, as they are of the Falconers. And though it be
ridiculous enough to prudent Men, yet when the part is acted it gains upon many
gentle Spectators, be it in Print, or in open Lectures; so that they come
within the reach of that Motto in the Duke's Theater, Vniversus Mundus exercet
Histrioniam. And besides this, it serves for diverse purposes more: Concerning
which give me leave, because it may be of use, to make public here what I not
long since privately wrote upon an eminent occasion, thus.

It Is a common trick among the Tribe of Dissectors, to open Bodies of their own
or other Men's Patients, in pretense to satisfy themselves, and the deceased's
Kindred touching the cause of Death; and thence they always pick out enough
before the admiring Bystanders, to justify themselves and their own mistakes,
by reasons to prove that the Patient was incurable: or else they will be sure
to collect dirty matter enough, to cast upon any Physician whom they envy,
whose hap it may have been to have given Physic before them to the same
Patient; especially if he be not of their Honorary number: hundreds of able
Practitioners and Learned, have been thus artificially blasted: So that it were
well if this famous City of London, would take Notice of such crafty Abuses for
the future. For, though sometimes, when upon opening of Bodies, the internal
parts appear decayed or corrupted in their Tone and Substance, it is manifest
then what brought on Death; yet not so at other times, seeing most Diseases
lying in the variations of Blood and Humors, Spirits and Ferments of the Parts,
are in their Causes remote from such ocular inspection, let none in these
Matters be gulled hereafter. For, that nothing certain can be concluded from
the stagnation of Blood, or other Humors found in any place or passage of the
Body after Death, is evident in this, that Nature upon Death's approaches,
being driven to most violent motions, does extravasate, intravasate, throw
Blood and Humors in and out, here and there and everywhere, Cap-a-pe, through
the most abstruse and unperceivable Passages. So that if stagnant or coagulated
Blood or other Humor, be found in any part by Anatomizing, it cannot be
concluded it was so before death. For it was well said of old by Celsus, the
most prudent of all Physicians, in his Preface, Neque quicquam esse stultius,
quam quale quid vivo homine est, tale existimare esse moriente, into jam
mortuo: which is in plain English; That nothing is more foolish than to
imagine, that things within a Man should be in the same state when he is dying,
as they were when he was living, much more when he is actually dead.

From hence also observe, what mistakes Physicians may be led into by blind
supposals and conjectures of Blood or other matter lodged in this, that, or
other secret Passage of the Vessels, or Bowels, to be causes of Diseases; when
they proceed thereupon to raise fanciful Doctrines whereby to manage practice
in After-time, and order Cures by Calculations, secundum ductus and Hypotheses
Anatomicos. No Man can be against a due enquiry into Anatomy, so far as
concerns a being acquainted with the Structure, Figure, Situation and
Connection of the Parts of the Body, especially in Cases of Surgery, wherein
its greatest use does lie; and of this also it becomes a Physician not to be
ignorant, who ought also to be a Chirurgian; though the sine-finger'd Academick
Education of Physicians in England has here unhappily divided the two
Faculties, the Professors of the one being brought up to Talk, the other to
Work; the one in their youth to speculative Philosophy; the other from their
very first youth in practice^ Drudgery, if I may so call it in comparison with
the other: from whence it is observable, we are always furnished with far more
able Chirurgians than Physicians. Consider what greater Men ever had we in the
World, for the old way of Physic formerly, than those that were bred up
Chirurgians? Galen himself was bred a Chirurgian. And where now will you find
among the Galenists of our Nation, Men for Physic to be named after those
famous Persons bred Chirurgians; such as were Pareus, Chalmetaeus, Pigraeus,
Guillemeau, Ingrassias, Felix Wurtzius, Fallopius, Vesalius, Carcanus,
Severinus, Marchetti, Spigelius, and the two Fabricii, one an Italian, the
other a Swisse, viz. Hildanus and ab Aquapendente? whose Judicious Works and
great Performances, made them renowned through the world. But now forsooth a
Chirurgian with us is made so little a thing by our Doctoral Confederates, that
when he has a Patient, they expect he should not presume to prescribe any
thing of Internal Physic for the promoting his Cure; though none can judge so
well what is fit to be done as himself: so that if he gives way, he remains
liable to the possibility of having his Work spoiled, either, by the ignorance,
or sometimes the malice of another Person that knows little or nothing of the
management of a Chirurgical Curation. Besides if our Chirurgians were excluded
(as that is the desire and aim of the others) from the Practice of Physic, I
wonder where his Majesty for his Fleets, and the Merchants for theirs, ^^n
which the Wealth and Glory of this Kingdom does depend, would be supplied with
Able Practitioners for the Sick at Sea, the greatest sicknesses, both Acute and
Chronick, being there predominant. Not from the fine breed of the Scholastic
Family, whose Learning (so much as it is, and that is in but a very s^w of them
lies quite beside the way that leads to the more noble ^^^ally of Physicians;
insomuch that when they first come to Town with the Learned Cushion-Cap and
Scarlet, the very Apothecaries Boys are able to tutor them in Town-practice,
laugh at them, and tell Tales behind their backs. Wherefore, seeing the Juniors
are not fit to be trusted aboard with the Seamen, and the Seniors never did
serve nor mean to do it, and nothing but another great Plague can send them out
of London, Which way can the Sea, or, our Armies be served with Physic and
Surgery, if Surgeons-Hall be not to be looked on as a College of Physicians?
and for which of their good Services to the Crown, Kingdom, and City, will the
other Society ever have the confidence to seek an Authority, to tuck the Necks
of all other Physicians, Chirurgians, and Apothecaries, under the Girdle of
their Jurisdiction? But it is to be hoped the Nation will ere long be convinced,
that the Laboratory, the Workhouse is the way to be traced before we enter the
Library; an Apprenticeship from our Youth to work and study under a Practiser,
is that only which can make one a Doctor: all the rest is but flocci nauci
nihili pili, etc. Whereupon it is to be hoped also, we shall one day think it
high time that a Reformation be thought of, that the present formal way (which
none of the Ancients knew) will be left, and our Youth for Physic, instead of
being Academians, be bred up more Mechanico, instituted in the Operative,
before the bend themselves upon the Contemplative and Philosophizing part of
Physic. For Aristotle said well, Nihil in intellectu quod non priu in sensu,
Nothing lies right in the understanding, that is not first collected by sense:
that is, by sensible operation. And Celsus says, Non post rationem inventam
esse Medicinam, sed post inventam Medicinam rationem esse quaesitam; That
Remedies Medicinal were not found out by reasoning; but reasoning came in play
being sought out after Remedies had been found. From whence it is conclusive,
That the sure Notions of Curing are those which Men form unto themselves:
First, Not by Tradition of Authors, but by reasoning upon their own and others
Experiments, whose operations and Effects they have seen. But for Physicians
bred the fine way, he says, Etiam sapientiae studiosos maximos esse Medicos si
ratiocinatio hoc faceret; nunc illis verba superesse, deesse medendi scientiam;
to wit, That your Students of Philosophy (meaning the old way of Philosophy)
were the greatest Physicians, if reasoning could make them so; now that sort of
Men abound with words, but want the Science of Curing. Yet they (he says a
little after) do bear away the Bell in the World, Ingenium and facundiam
vincere, morbos autem non Eloquentia, sed Remediis curari: that is, They that
have a witty knack of talk, prevail above others in the Opinion of the People,
though Diseases are not to be cured by fine words but by Remedies. And
therefore it is hoped the Magistrates, Nobility and Gentry of the Land, will
accordingly steer their Judgment in the choice of Physicians, and one time or
other give a helping hand toward a reforming of the Education of Men for the
practice of this Faculty. This may serve also for an Item to our young Students
in the Universities how to prevent the less of time. It Is not a formal degree
in Physic that will make amends for it, or give them satisfaction at last, if
Men of Conscience and Ingenuity. And as for Anatomy, I do not declaim against
it. A competent knowledge therein is most commendable and necessary in many
cases, though a just Treatise may shortly evince to the World how little use it
is of, in managing the Cur^^ of most Internal Diseases, a Capite ad Calcem: and
how little advance (as Mr. Boil long since observed) the practice of Physic
has received by the pretended novel Discoveries: every Anatomist boasting like
a Schoolboy, that he has found out more Birds-Nests than his Fellows; and
then be struts in Print with Disquisitions thereupon, though the Issue be, that
none of them all there be, from (...) time of Galen to this day, but contradict
one an^ (...): So that controverted Curiosities and mere Toys must needs be a
sweet uncertain ground to take aim upon, in so serious a Work as the hitting of
the Nature of Diseases, and their Remedies. And it is most ridiculous to observe
what a clatter is made among us with Dogs, Cats, and other Creatures about the
trivial Enquiries. Not that such Niceties are to be discommended in Gentlemen,
who may spend their time that way, or in those who have little else to do but
Dissect, and then to discourse for recreation. But Hic est fundus calamitatis
nostrae, the Bane of the profession of Physic, that it attains so little
Improvement in the World, is this; That while there is a manifest Faction
driven among Professors to magnify one another in these Matters, as if they
were able to make a Man a Physician above others, and to establish the main
ground for Students to build a Reputation upon, it proves an occasion of three
sore Evils under the Sun.

1. That as all Men affect Repute in the World, so the young Seminary of
Physicians thinking this the way to render them great and considerable in the
Faculty, are inclined to follow that Tract, and in the mean time neglect
courses more advantageous for themselves and Mankind. 2. Whereas many of the
present P^actisers, who make most noise with their Anatomical Rattles, being
Men otherwise of pregnant Wit and Literature, might do great service to their
Generation, if their Wits and Industry were set the right way, The contrary
falls out. 3. Others growing up being perverted by their example, the Materia
Medica lies too much neglected: the Improvement whereof is the one thing
necessary. They ought rather to employ themselves in the Anatomizing of all
Natural Subjects, in order to the knowledge of their various Virtues, by
resolving and educing the several Parts and Principles of which they are
composed, and in searching out their usefulness by reasoning upon the manner of
those Operations by which they are prepared, and from thence calculating what
uses they may be put to.
Alas, what a world of ground lies waste in the Field of Nature! how comely
would it be, to see them spend their time in making further enquiries into
Herbs and Roots which contain innumerable other Virtues than yet are known. Had
we not been more beholden to Women and Rusticks, than to the Men of Literature,
very little more had been known of them now, than was a thousand years ago.

What shall I say of those wonderful numerous Treasures locked up in the Bodies
of Stones, Earths, Minerals, Metals, and Salts, which require the Hands of all
Mankind to unlock? It were to be wished they would but bestow part of their
time and ingeny in reforming the old Doctrines and Notions in Physic, not in
substituting new ones drawn from mere Hypotheses Anatomical, but from the good
old real Principles of Acre, Acidum, Salsum, Dulce, Amarium, Penticum, Acerhum,
and insipidum; wherein our Syl^ius here has pointed out part of the way, those
things being by experience found to be the real principal disturbers of Humane
Bodies. The accommodating of Physical Preparations to the qualifying of those,
when either of them is peccant, is the only way. And all the long Methods and
Doctrines of Physic grounded upon other Notions, he that would be a
Practitioner ought to lay aside, till he can find spare time to read them, as a
Man would do to read Romances; which, if never so Scholarlike, serve only for
prattle among such as having spent time the same way are wont to admire them.

And truly, had Sylvius kept himself in his Experiments and Contemplations,
only to that way of Reforming, he had been much more honorable and fortunate
in the improvement of our Faculty. But what shall I say to excuse his raising
some of his Doctrines by Anatomy? I have no more to say for him but this; That
being made a Public Professor in an University, he was obliged to play Prizes
according to the custom of Men in such places; whose Lectures are fitted for
Pomp and Ceremony more than Use, wherewith the expectations of the Young and
the Injudicious must be gratified, or else they will not believe themselves in
the way to be well Instructed: Besides, of so great force is prejudicate
Opinion in the minds even of the Rulers and great Men in some Countries,
touching the value of Anatomy for Internal Cures, that they will hardly believe
a Public Professor merits his place, unless he render himself famous by
Pretenses of advancing Physic with some new Anatomick well-fancied Inventions,
though nothing has more confounded the Science: And how can it be otherwise,
seeing it is so rare to find any of them agree about any one matter of this
Nature, as I could most amply demonstrate, if I should fall to coursing them in
their Books. Which it is like I may do ere long, that there may be a correcting
of Men's Judgments about them, and some end also be put to the estimation of
this endless Butchery and Foolery; seeing one twelvemonth well-spent is enough
to acquaint a Man with what is necessary to learn by Dissection, for the
Practice of Physic, either Internal or External; though it be but of little
use, save only in this l^tter, viz. the most worthy Art of Surgery: which as
it is the most Ancient of all the Parts of Medicin, so, next after the
Accomplishments of a Grammar School, it ought to be the first thing that he who
aims to be a Physician, should propose unto himself, and accordingly serve
seven years therein to some Master, that is able to tutor him in the daily
practice of it, and of Chemical Operations, and of Curing Diseases, as the only
Method of Education, out of the common Road of an University, to bring a Man to
be indeed a Doctor. Which Parents and G^a^dians may do well to observe, when
they dispose their Sons or Relations, that their Brains may not be addled and
hurt with the pride of Disputing, till the time comes that the Higher Powers
have leisure to reso^m the Institutions of this noble Profession. It were
easy, were it proper in this place, to in (...) evident the necessity of my
Advice, by taking a sar^^y of Vniversity-Statutes and Customs, as in (...)
there be occasion, I may hereafter. And truly, (...) be a most laudable Design
in the Worshipful (...) ^birurgecy, ^o fi^ and accommodate thems^lv^^ h^^^^^r^,
and in the mean while not to un^^^^^ (...) themselves, but to take into their
own (...) An^^^ny-Lectures, that only what is necess^ry may be shown there;
which may be done as (...) b^^^ms Men of Reputation, by electing Persons of
their own number to be their Readers. If the Discipline of Physic were ordered
as it is here intimated, how might they in a short time be able to furnish his
Majesty for his Flects-Royal, and his Armies by Land, with Learned Men both in
Ch^^urgery and Physic!

But to return to Sylvius; had he been content to lay aside the Professorian
vanity, he might have escaped with as good success in his Fame as any Man ever
did; because he raised most of his Doctrines from Chymick Experiments, the
great things that enlighten us in the Art of Curing, and verified them with
pleasant and speedy Cures, by joining the use of Plants and Minerals together,
both Chymically prepared, which has rendered him worthy the reading and
imitating: but he would needs follow the Fa^^^ion too, and erect a Fencing
School for Anatomy; and what did he get by it, even many a broken Pate from his
own Scholars, as well as others, ^as he pitifully complains in his 44th
Chapter) of all which, none endevour'd to help their Master, except Regnerus de
Graef, who applied a Plaster to little other purpose, than to get many a Knock
also for his pains; for not only in other parts of Europe, but in England also
the Fencers have had many a Bout with them, and bastled to beat them and their
Triumvirate quite off the Stage. And thus they all serve one another round, as
it is most easy to do, for, there will never want cross-Instances in Anatomy
for new Conjectures, and for mutual Confutation till Doons-day. By which means,
a marvelous seandal and dishonor is brought upon our Faculty, as if we had
nothing certain among us: so that this only Consideration has rendied mothus
sharp, for redargation, that this kind of serious Fooling may be lest off, lest
it gro^y so ridiculous, but public Authority shall at leugth be convinced, it
deserves no other countenance for scuffling, than such a Toleration as is given
to the like Schools at the Bankside and Bear-Garden.

I should here make an end, but that I would, being now unexpectedly in Print,
beg leave to give a Reason, why I have been silent so long since the
publication of my Book entitled Medela Medicinae, which is now ten years ago
complete; for a little after the Publication of it, having heard some small Men
or Note, and of Letters, were set on by their Fr^ternity to prepare Discourses
against me, I thought (...) to give notice then, in an Epistle before another
Man's Book, that they must not expect any Reply from (...) to incompetent
Adversaries; and so they appeared to be at last, to the number of no less than
Four, who came forth after each other with several Books of pr^tended Answer;
yet therein did not offer to und^rmine or touch so much as one of the Pillars
upon which the main Structure of my Discourse was supported; which ought first
to have been removed, if it could have been done, before the reputation of it
could be ruined. But that being not to be effected, as their Leaders very well
knew, because I had said little in my own Sense or Language, but chose rather
to cloth my self with Quotations from Head to Foot, borrowed out of the
Writings of the most Learned Men in the World, to render my self as invincible
as might be; and in regard they saw they could not invalidate me without
condemning my Authors, therefore it was warily done of them to decline an
endeavor of solid Answer themselves, and to put the Task upon their Whifling
Novices, who being Men scarce known, nor ever like to be to any purpose, could
lose no repute though they published nothing worth the name of an Answer; while
the other, standing behind the Curtain, reckoned it enough for them, to cry up
in private everywhere, that I had four Answers given which confuted me. And to
this they added their crafty Insinuations in Discourses among the weaker sort
of People, that I had printed all Men to have the French Pox: than which
nothing could be more dissonant to my Discourse, which only showed what a
wonderful alteration had been wrought in the whole Frame of Humane Nature by
diverse Accidents; and among the rest, by the gradual spreading and propagation
of the effects of that Disease, by the several Ways and Occasions there
mentiond, for almost these 200 years past: which I justified by the Testimonies
of the most eminent Authors, who had found it to be so by manifold Observations
in their long Practice. And as I had found it so in my own for above twenty
years before that time, so after ten years time more spent since in Practicing,
I am so confirmed in every Particular which I printed in that Book, that in the
future Flux of Time and Experience, when Envy against me will be laid to sleep,
those Men that may hap to read it will assent to its Truth. But as for the Four
Champions, I say no more than this, I shall let their Names die with
themselves; Two of them are gone already; the third (I hear) is often buried in
Ale at a place called The Hole in the Wall; and the Fourth has asked me pardon
before Company, confessing that he was set on by the Brotherhood of the
Confederacy.

Nor was this All; but the Design was followed up and down, by slandering, that
I used dangerous Medicines, in regard I had in that Book magnifi^d the good
Effects of Remedies Chymically prepared, and their safety if well made, and
their force above all other, in Curation of the most pertinacious deplorable
Diseases; of which I have lived to see the World, for the most part, so
abundantly convinced, that the more ingenious sort of Mankind have concluded,
that he who is not well-skill'd in the use of those Remedies, is not worth the
name of a Physician. Insomuch that the wiser Sort of the Opposite Party, when
some years ago they saw the great Men of the Kingdom disposed, and had set
their hands to an Instrument, for erecting a new Society of Physicians upon the
Chemical account, they judged it their only Plea to be made use of, to divert
that hopeful and most necessary Intent, to allege in defense of their Diana,
that Themselves were Chemists, and used Chemical Remedies as much as others;
arguing thence, that it was needless to set up any other Society beside their
own. Whereupon, we may take notice, that being then in a fright, their
allegation implies, they were glad to confess the usefulness of that Way which
their Predecessors were wont, in the time of my Youth when I first came to
Practice, exceedingly to decry, and noted with a black Coal all those that used
such Medicines; not sparing even the Learned and most Meritorious Men of the
Faculty; such as Sir Theodore de Mayerne, who was Martyred once before for a
Quack by the College of Paris; and here also in England I have known some
would then allow him no better a Title; to whom I may add that most worthy Man
old Doctor Rugeley, and might name diverse of like worth; who did no other than
what Greg. Horstius, Sennertus, Riverius, and all Men truly Learned and Wise
have done, and do; that is, join the Chymick and Galenick Matter of Medicin
both together, in their Practice, as they see occasion require: But as for the
Doctrine of Galen, and his Way of enquiring into the Virtues of Plants and
Animals, merely by ponderation and preponderation of First and Second
Qualities, it is vain, in comparison of the more excellent way; which is the
examining of their Natures by the Principles, and Operations of the Chemists:
in which number though I be the least of a thousand, yet I have a purpose to
publish some Essays of my own, to discover what may be done by more able Men,
toward an advancement of Knowledge in the Powers of Plants, in the forementiond
way: for, though I have (as I said) been vilely calumniated, yet I think no Man
has at all times, made more constant use of Animals and Vegetables in his
Practice than I have done, as my Bills at the Apothecaries will show. Some
years ago, there was a more ready Opportunity to scandalize me, when my Matter
of Medicine being prepared in my own House, was kept private to my self, and so
my Adversaries might maliciously say of it what they would: Therefore, as soon
as I found the Company of Apothecaries had erected a Laboratory at their Hall,
for supply of their Shops with Medicines of all sorts, of the Chemical
Preparation: so that a Man might be sure, upon the Public Stock and Credit of
the Company, to be served with them faithfully prepared, my Heart rose with
pleasure to congratulate them in an Undertaking so necessary for the Kingdom,
it being the Main Matter wherein their Trade was deficient; because what
Chymick Medicines were used before to make up the Physicians Prescript, were for
the most part bought of private Operators; of whom we could have no Considence
for due Preparation, in comparison of what in reason we ought now to have;
seeing the Security is grounded upon the Reputation of a Worthy Company of this
Honorable City; who cannot well be supposed to prevaricate for Profit, seeing
what is done this way is by Common Consent, which being well managed, will
conduce much more to Profit, Reputation, and Interest, to each particular Man
in his Shop, through the satisfaction which will arise to every Patient, by the
benefit which is like to answer the expectation of each Family, from those
Medicines rightly prepared. And so, from the time that I observed this, being to
form diverse Treatises for Public View, I have cased my self of the Toil I had
taken upon me, and wholly referred Patients with Bills, to receive Medicines
dispensed by the Apothecaries Hands. And if I have any thing of worth that is
my own Peculiar, or that I have learnt by rolling about to observe all sorts of
Practitioners, I freely contribute it in the open way of Practice daily, to
stop the mouths of lazy, proud, and malicious Men; the greatest part of which
are, in plain Terms, ignorant even of Literature, or but Smatterers in it,
though stiff Pretenders, till they hap to be sifted by a complete Man of
Letters. So farewell.

October. 13. 1674. Marchamont Nedham.

An Index of the Chapters, Comprehending all the Diseases of this Book.
Chap. 1. OF Thirst depraved. Page 3 Chap. 2. Of Hunger depraved. Page 7 Chap.
3. Of Loathing Victuals. Page 19 Chap. 4. Of the taking in of Food hindered.
Page 22 Chap. 5. Of swallowing Food hindered. Page 24 Chap. 6. Of the Retention
of Food in the Stomach hindered. Page 25 Chap. 7. Of the Fermentation of Food in
the Ventricle hindered. Page 28 Chap. 8. Of the Expulsion of Food to the Guts
depraved. Page 40 Chap. 9. Of Loathing, Belching, and Vomiting. Page 44 Chap.
10. Of the Separation of Chyle from the Excrements depraved. Page 50 Chap. 11.
Of the Vicious Effervescency of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, together
with Phlegm continually raisd in the small Gut. Page 58 Chap. 12. Of the
Propulsion and Expulsion through the Guts, of what is containd in them
depraved, and in particular of a Costiv Body. Page 65 Chap. 13. Of a Looseness.
Page 67 Chap. 14. Of various Pains of the Guts. Page 78 Chap. 15. Of the
Vomiting of what is containd in the Guts, and namely of the Disease Cholera and
Ileos. Page 93 Chap. 16. Of the Straining Chyle through the fleshy Crust of the
Guts depraved. Page 105 Chap. 17. Of the Motion of Chyle through the Lacteal or
Milkie Veins depraved, and the Dropsy Ascites often following it. Page 106 Chap.
18. Of the Sanguification of Chyle in the right Ventricle of the Heart
depraved. Page 110 Chap. 19. Of the Continual and Vital Effervescency of Blood
in the Right Ventricle of the Heart depraved. Page 118 Chap. 20. Of the Motion
of Blood through the Lungs depraved. Page 146 Chap. 21. Of the Alteration of
Blood by Air Inspired, and Expired, depraved. Page 154 Chap. 22. Of the
Inspiration of Air depraved. Page 158 Chap. 23. Of the Expiration of Air
depraved. Page 169 Chap. 24. Of the Nourishment of the Lungs depraved. Page 182
Chap. 25. Of the Perfection of Blood in the Left Ventricle of the Heart
depraved. Page 189 Chap. 26. Of the Motion of the Heart and Arteries, or the
Pulse depraved. Page 191 Chap. 27. Of Fevers in General. Page 197 Chap. 28. Of
a Fever of One Day. Page 206 Chap. 29. Of Synochal, commonly called Containing
Fevers. Page 217 Chap. 30. Of Intermitting Fevers. Page 240 Chap. 31. Of
Synechal, or Continual Fevers so especially called. Page 287 Chap. 32. Of an
Hectie Fever. Page 290 Chap. 33. Of Malign Fevers. Page 297 Chap. 34. Of a
Universal Languishing, as also of Swenning and the Syncope. Page 300 Chap. 35.
Of the Palpitation of the Heart. Page 333 Chap. 36. Of the Flowing of Blood out
of the Left Ventricle of the Heart through the great Artery to all the Part's
of the Body depraved. Page 338 Chap. 37. Of the N^urishment of all the Parts
depraved, and in special of an Atrophia, or Pining. Page 342 Chap. 38. Of an
over-Fleshy and Fat Constitution of the Body. Page 346 Chap. 39. Of a Cach^xie,
and in special Anasarca, and L^ucophlegmatia. Page 348 Chap. 40. Of the Reslux
of Blood through the Veins from all the Parts to the Right Ventricle of the
Heart depraved, and in special of an Inflammation. Page 354 Chap. 41. Of the
Generation and Separation of the Animal Spirits in the Brain and Cerebellum
depraved. Page 369 Chap. 42. Of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the
Nervs depraved. Page 382 Chap. 43. Of the over-perfecting of Blood in the
Spleen depraved. Page 392 Chap. 44. Of the Generation of Choler depraved. Page
396 Chap. 45. Of the Retention or Excretion of Choler in its Page depraved. Page
407 Chap. 46. Of the Motion of Choler to the Gut hindered, and in especial of
the Jau^dice. Page 412 Chap. 47. Of the M^tion of Choler to the Blood through
the Liver depraved. Page 43^ Chap. 48. Of the Mixing of Choler with the Blood
in the Liver depraved. Page 432 Chap. 49. Of the Preparation of Lympha of the
Glandul's in the Conglobated or great Glandul's depraved. Page 435 Chap. 50. Of
the Motion of Glandulous Lympha through the Lymphatic V^ssits and Th^r^cie
Passage to the left Juguler, or A^ill^r Vein: As also the Dropsy of the Br^^.
Page 450 Chap. 51. Of the Preparation of Spittle in the Conglomerated or
Clusterd, as well upper as lower Glandul's of the Jaws depraved. Page 456 Chap.
52. Of the Motion of Spittle into the Mouth, and Gullet depraved. Page 464
Chap. 53. Of the Generation of the Juice of the Pancreas depraved. Page 466
Chap. 54. Of the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas to the small Gut, and its
Effervescency with Choler depraved. Page 474 Chap. 55. Of the Separation of
Vrin in the Kidneys depraved. Page 477 Chap. 56. Of the Descent of Vrin from
the Kidneys through the Ureters, and its Passage into the Bladder depraved.
Page 498 Chap. 57. Of the Retention of Vrin in the Bladder, and its Excretion
through the Vrethra depraved. Page 500 Chap. 58. Of the Excretion of Sweat
depraved. Page 506
The Author and my Worthy Friend having both largely Epistoliz'd to this Work,
I think it needless to add farther, save to let the Reader know, that where he
meets with
. it signifies an Ounce.. it signifies a Dram.. it signifies a Scruple. semis;.
-- Half. M. -- an Handful, when placed in a Receipt. M. -- Mix them, when at
the end of a Receipt. Sp. -- Spirit. Sir. -- Syrup.
The Authors
Cholagogue Electuary. Chap. 2 Sect. 46 Hydragogue Electuary. Chap. 7 Sect. 55
Carminative Spirit. Chap.9 Sect. 29 Plaster Discussing Wind. Chap. 14 Sect. 58
Egregious Preservative Water. Chap. 28 Sect. 31 Diascordium. Chap. 58 Sect. 22
Of Oily Volatile Salt, being so frequently commended in the most Chapters of
this Book, and kept as a Secret by the Author, see my Advertisement at the end
of the Book.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. Sect. 4. line 8. for there, read thence. P. 10. S. 16. l. 2. those
things which. P. 46. S. 10. Vomiting, and its contracting Motion is turned only
in it self; As, P. 48. S. 22. Matter, seeing it usually follows. P. 126. S. 39.
blot out Chap. 29, etc. P. 144. S. 123. manifest them to. P. 154. S. 3. read as
Nitrous. P. 163. S. 24. hence to the Right. P. 187. S. 23. Inflamable.
The other small ones the Reader is desired to correct.

A New Idea of the Practice of PHYSIC. The Distribution of the Work.
1. IN our delivering a Practice of Physic for our Auditor's sake and profit
compendiously, and indeed not much unlike the Platerian Method we will first
propose those Diseases, which are more single, seeing the knowledge of Compound
and Complicated Ones is easilier opened if the former be known.

2. And seeing Man's Health is manif^^ted by the perfection of all his
Functions, and his Sickness by the hurt and deficiency th^reof; we judge it fit
to treat of the Diseases in order that are obvious to Physicians in practice
according to the diversity of the Functions in Man that are hurt, because they
either constitute, produce or follow them.

3. All which serve either to preserve the Individual, or to propagate our Kind.

4. The Functions which are to preserve the Individual, are well-divided into
the Natural Functions, s^rving to the various change of Food, and the Animal
Functions in the knowledge of any Things by the External and Internal Senses,
and hence consisting of the various motion of the Mind and Body.

5. So we will distribute our Practice into three Books, which shall treat of
the Diseases belonging to,

I. The Natural. II. The Animal Functions. III. Those pertaining to Generation
depraved.
6. For rarely is one Function only hurt in the Sick, but for the most part
there are more hurt together. Which if they depend one of another, or of the
same cause only, the Sick shall be said to be troubled with only one Disease,
which has its denomination from the chief and most grievous, or most notable
Symptom: but if they do not depend one of another, and arise from diverse
causes, then shall the Sick be said to be afflicted with diverse Diseases, and
those of a differing Name.

7. Those things which are received into Man to preserve Natural Life* are
either Meat to be swallowed, or Air to be sucked in.

8. Although there be the greatest necessity for such as Breath to suck in Air,
and Man cannot want Air so long as Food; yet because breathing of Air seems to
be ordained to alter Food in the right Ventricle of the Heart, in some only,
not in every living Creature, we will rather begin at the taking of Food baing
viti^aed, and then handle the ways how breathing is hurt, where Food carried
out of the right Ventricle of the Heart in and by the Lungs, has need thereof.

The First Book of the Practice of PHYSIC.
OF Diseases either constituting, or producing, or following the Natural
Functions hurt.
CHAP. I. Of Thirst Depraved.
1. WE therefore assign the first place among Natural Functions to Thirst,
because the first Natural Passion of Man newly bor^ is to Thirst, and by
sucking Milk out of the Breast asswages his Thirst.

2. This Thirst is vitiated chiefly, when it is either augmented or depraved;
for seldom is it lessened or taken away with loss to Man; neither can we
believe that Thirst, or its Cause, is truly taken away in certain raving
People, with dryness of Mouth, and burning heat of Body, because they are
insensible and do not observe it.

3. I take Thirst augmented to be deduced for the most part from too sharp
Choler, carried down into the small Gut, and there so raising an effervescency
with the Juice of the Pancreas, (or Sweet-Breads* flowing thither, that thence
are elevated Salt Vapors, but not bitter to the Ventricle (or Scomach) and
Gullet, and there produce a sense of Drought.

4. This Choler being too sharp, or its Salt Vapors, if they pierce through the
Lacteal Vessels to the Heart, (the like may be said of the same Choler carried
thither by its passage through the Liver) and infect the Blood too much with
its saltness, nothing hinders but that the Spittle then should turn more or
less salt or sharp, which will less temper Thirst, and rather augment it.

5. Another cause also of Thirst augmented, is, a Salt Humor distilling from
the Head to the Gullet and there producing a perceivance of Drought and Thirst*
and then either falling thence also down to the Ven^^icle, or drawing forth
Matter for Salt Vapors in the small Gut, by which in like manner a greater
Thirst is stirred up.

6. Besides the now-re^ited Internal Causes, more External Causes of augmented
Thirst may ^^^car^ And 1. indeed the Aer heated by the Fire or S^^^. ^. Food
salted, or aromatically sharp and dry.

7. In like manner the Exercise of Body, and vehement motion do increase
Thirst; and among the Passions of the Mind, Anger chiefly, or a great terror,
and also prolonged Watches; and the Body both too costive, and too loose; much
Sweating* Urine voided plentifully; a notable evacuation of Blood, Milk, or
Seed, etc.

8. And in like manner as the Lixivial Salt either abounding or too sharp in
Choler, augmm^nts Thirst; so the other parts in Choler being vitiated, seem to
deprave it; which seeing it may be manifold, both on the account of the
manifold parts of which Choler is composed, wherein every one may be faulty; it
is difficult exactly and distinctly to prosecute, and accurately to describe
every one of those Kinds, and the causes of its depravedness.

9. Add that both the Juice of the Panereas, and Phlegm of the Guts can not a
little deprave Thirst, by waxing vitiously fervent with Choler, by a
vitiousness peculiar to it self.

10. The Cause of depraved Thirst can be attributed to none particularly of the
six non-natural Things, so called, yet to a vicious effect, of more things
concurring together with them, by us as yet not to be explained.

11. Thirst augmented is Cured, chiesly with watery Liquors, which dilute the
lixiviat Salt of Choler, and deduce it to the Bladder; and with sour things,
which potently destroy and change its Acrimony; and with Oily Liquors,
asswaging its sharpness, as Milk and Emulsions prepared of only Seeds.

12. So Watery, Acid, (or Sour) and oily ^^quors may fitly be om d^ and then
they will effect more. For Example sake take this following Form;

. Barley-water, xxx. Flowers of R^d Roses ss. Spicit of Vitrol* what suffices
to make a gratefu s we taste; Let hese stand in warm Water of and for three
hours, or till the Water be reddish, called, Tinc^ur, of R^ses; to which when
strained, add Syrup of J^jubs iii. M. and let it be a most grateful Julep.

13. If any cannot take Acids, let him use this following;

. Barley-water xx. Cinamon-water i. Syrup of Violets ii. ss Lapis Prunellae, or
Nitre ^urified by Solution and Coagulation i. M.

14. The party thirsting may use either of these Juleps by spaces, taking ^a
moderate Draught thereof, till Thirst be restrained.

15. If a milky Emulsion do please better, take this following Form;

. Barl^y clears^d and boiled till it burst i. Sweet Alm^nds cleansed ii. with
Barl^y-water make an Emu^si^n to xii. adding Julep of Roses i. M.

16. To make this Emulsion more grateful, and to str^ngthe^ the Sick and W^^k
add some Cina^^^-water; or to discuss W^^^, a little Fenel-water, and use it by
turns.

17. But where Rest cannot be obtained, and is d^^^^^, (...) t^^^ (...) of
White-Poppy Se^ds, with the other things, ^^d make an Emulsi^^ of these; so two
things are done by one la^our.

18. Sometimes to deceive Thirst, especially where the Sick are not pleased
with much Water, some of the aforesaid Lapis Prunellae, or Niter purified may
be kept in the Mouth; in which case also, grateful Pellets of Sugar, and Juice
of Citrons or Barberies are proper.

19. Mutton or Veal-Broth also assuage Thirst, being boiled with much Water and
without Salt.

20. As often as a Salt Catarrh, or the like Spittle is the cause of Thirst
augmented; so often administer such Physic for it, as will temperate that
saltness by Pills of Hounds-Tongue, and such like; and then if Salt serous
Matter abound in the Blood, purge it by Stool or Urine; of which hereafter.

21. Depraved Thirst is cured, by those things which correct the Constitution
of Vicious Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and Phlegm in the Guts, or of
other Humors; which because they are not now so manifest, all universal Things
which do amend any Humors whatever, may with profit be used, and chiefly
volatile oily Salts, but somewhat moderate ones, and indeed joined to watery
Liquors, and by turns given in Wine not too strong.

CHAP. II. Of Hunger d^prav'd.
1. HVnger is called the Appetite of M^ats, as Thirst is of Drin^s.

2. The chief kinds of Hanger vitiated, are when it is Augmented, Diminished,
Abolished, and many ways Depraved.

3. I judge the chief Cause of Natural Hunger to be the remainders of Food
fermented in the Ventricle, and there staying, and still more and more
fermented by part of the Spittle adhering to them, being continually swallowed
down, and at length raising a somewhat sour and grateful Vapor, which
pleasingly affects the upper Orifice of the Ventricle, and so produces Hunger.

4. This Natural Hunger, (especially where Food is withheld somewhat longer
than ordinary) is increased even in healthy People by the Juice of the Pancreas
carried down to the small Gut, and after the separation and farther descending
of Food is finished, only by being opposed by Choler and Phlegm of the Guts
thither flowing, there also in like manner sends unto the Ventricle sour and
grateful Vapors; which seems to be manifest even by Hunger proceeding to
fainting ^its, by reason of Food seldom taken.

5. But in the Sick I take the cause of Hunger augmented, to be f^tch'd from
the over-sowrness of this Juice abounding in the Body, and chiefly carried out
of the Pancreas to the Gut, and thence sending Vapour^ more sour than usual to
the Ventric^e, which increases the Sense of Hunger; and aft^r the Food is
thrust down, they presently renew the same, and urge if more potently.

6. This Acid Juice i^ increased in the whole Body; 1. B^ Acid Food, or things
seasoned with Ac^ds; By t^^ Acid ^i^u^rs, and Wine, as Rheni^h and of the
M^use, especially expressed out of G^^p^s unripe. 2. By cold Air, but clear. 3.
By moderate S^rrow, if long continued, whose strength will be increased. 4. By
a more vehement Motion of Body. 5. By too long Watches; And 6. by the Bodies
being too costive.

7. The most frequent and grievous Cause of Hunger diminished, although it
proceed slowly, I judge is the Spittle too viscous and too fat, and so unfit to
promote the fermentation of Food and their Remainders; yet breeding Phlegm in
the small Gut like to it, whereby the moderate acidity of the Juice of the
Pancreas is dulled, and at length all the acidity in the Body becoms less sharp
and dull.

8. I likewise judge, the Choler being too fat, causes seldom^r, lighter, and
often suddenly the same Hunger to be diminished, arising from the small Gut to
the Ventricle, and then corrupting both the remainders of Food and Spittle, and
prostrating their grateful acidity by dulling the Appetite.

9. Of the six Non-natural Things, so called. 1. Too much Food taken, and
especially fat and tough, will diminish Hunger. And, 2. hot and rainy Weather.
3. Too much Sleep. 4. Rest and slothfulness of Body. 5. Extreme Cares. 6.
Lo^snesses.

10. The Causes of Hunger diminished, if they be most grievous, will quite take
away and abolish Hunger.

11. Hunger depraved, or Longing, generally called Pica, in Women with Child,
Malacia; is wont to vex men rarely, but Women more frequently; and chiefly
either before their Monthly Courses, or when they are stopped; whence they
become almost together Cachectic, or of ill habit of Body.

12. In Pica, unwonted and unfit Food is desired, or things that are not Food,
as Chalk, Coals, Ashes, Pitch, Clay, Turfs, ragg'd Linen, Leather, and I know
not what.

13. Hither we refer Spices, which are indeed Medicines or Seasoners, but not
Food it self.

14. Most commonly the Cause of Hunger depraved, that rages among Women, is to
be drawn from the suppression of their Monthly Courses: for these standing
about the Womb, and so more or less corrupted; and then after being mixed with
the whole Mass of Blood, and infecting it, all the Mass thereof is vitiated and
depraved. From which as the Cachexy is produced, so both Spittle, the Juice of
the Pancreas, and the other Humors in the Body are bred vicious, and together
with the most, and sometimes all the Functions Hunger is also depraved.

15. We altogether judge, that the like corruption and depravation of the Blood,
and the rest of the Humors, let it arise whence it will, sometimes has place in
Men as well as Women, as often as they are troubled with a Longing; As in like
manner the same Men suffer both the Sense and Disease of Suffocation; to Women
indeed more familiar, and which is thought to arise from the Womb, and
therefore called an Vterine Disease, yea, and is cured with the same Medicines
that Women are cured with; wherefore for Reasons following in Chap. 22. we judge
this Suffocation is not to be called Hyderical, but Hypochondriacal.

16. Hunger Increased is to be cured, by giving those which temperate, destroy
and amend the Acid Juice in the Body, and do prevent its increase.

17. Lixiviat Salts both fixed and volatile, do destroy most powerfully this
Acid Juice; as also other things abounding with either of them, Coral, Pearls,
Crab's-eyes, Chalk, Boodstone, Amber, the filings of Steel, and such like.

18. All fat and oily things do dull this same Acid Juice.

19. A Volatile Spirit also made of Wine, or other things, as well more pure, as
diverse ways aromatiz'd, temperates this Acid Juice.

20. Lastly, Any watery things also plentifully taken, do dilute and enervate
the sour Juice.

21. Which if more things were joined together, as the Disease calls for, they
will perform more. For Example, take these following; where first be advised,
That the augmentation and rising of the Acid juice, is to be prevented chiefly
by abstaining from the use of Acids.

22. If the form of a Powder before others be desired; to please such;

. Red Coral prepared, Pearl prepared, of each i. while Chalk ss. whi e Sugar
iii. M. to be a Poud^r, di^id^d into 6 Doses, and twice a day, at least three
or f^ur hours after Meals, to b^ taken in a spoonf^l of strong Wine.

23. Where a Liquid Form is more acceptable, let a spoonful of this fo^lowing
mixture be taken.

. Mint water ii. S^ur^ygrass Water, Tincture of Cinam^n, m^de with Spirit of
Wine recti^^^d by I^^^usi^n, of each ss. Syrup of W^^r^wo^d i. M.

24. Or,. Di^till'd Oil of Mace, and of Junip^r B r^i^^, of each i. M. in a
Glass Let the Sick t^k^ s^meti^^s in a day, 2 or 3 drops of this Oil in a
spoonful of Malago, or any other Spiritous Wine, or in the aforesaid mixture.

25. Or when Hunger increased does oppress, use Broths, both fat, and also such
as come near to the consistency of a Gelly, and not s^ason'd with any sour
thing.

26. I prescribe no Purgers in Hunger increased, because hitherto I know none,
which will kindly purge sour Humors; and furthermore I am taught by large
Experience, that the sour Humors in the Body may be stirred up indeed, but not
purged, unless with very great Gripes, and more hurt than good, and chiefly by
the Physicians that are little solicitous of the grief or trouble of their
Sick, or are blockish, or at least ignorant of this thing.

27. Hunger gradually Diminished or Abolished, will be cured by Medicines that
correct and carry out the Viscous Phlegmatic Humor.

28. Both sour Things, and all that have a lixivial Salt, either fixed or
volatile, and all Aromaties do correct, and by cutting amend the Viscous
Phlegmatic Humors.

29. Which Phlegmatic Viscous Humor also abounding, when corrected, after a
manner is evacuated by Colocynthis, Turpith, Hermodactyls, Mercury as well
precipitated as sublimed, both corrosive and sweet, etc.

30. Let these following Forms serve Students for an Example.

. Mint-water ii. Cinamon-water ss. Syrup of F^n^l i. Spirit of Salt, what
suffices to a grat^ful sow^ness* M.

Or,. Salt of Tartar vitriolated ss. Cream of Tartar i. white Sugar Candy ii.
M. powder it, to be divided into three Doses. Take it once or twice a day in
Rhemish-Wine, or in the preceding mixture.

If any will, they may take of Elixir Proprietatis ss. instead of Spirit of
Salt, and use it by spoonfuls at several times.

31. They who are offended with Acids, may use the following mixture at times,
and that by spoonfuls.

. Mint, Fenel-water, of each i. ss. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae, or any other
Aromatiz'd vi. distilled Oil of Mace iii drops, Sir. of Mint i. M.

32. They who delight in a Medicinal Wine, may use this Form following, or one
like it.

. Alicampane, Acorus Root, of each ii. Sage, Marjoran, Garden Rue-Leaves, of
each an handful; sweet Fenel-Seeds ii. dried Orange-Peel i. Cut and beat them
grossly, then few them in a Bag; which being put into a Tankard, pour upon it 20
ounces of White Wind.

After it has stood a night in a Cellar, it may be given to iii, iv, or v.
either in the Morning f^sting, or at Dinner, or Supper, as it may best please
any, and is obs^rv'd to conduce. New Wine also may be poured in place of the
former, so long as the Aromatic strength comes out of the Bag.

33. When there is need to purge, then. Faetid Pills ss. Pills of Cochia i.
Catholic Extract ss. Oil of Cloves ii drops, M. Make them into fifteen Pills to
be gilded, or done over with Powder of Licor^^h or Cinnamon.

Let the Sick take five, or more of these Pills, as he is observed to be easy
or hard to be purged.

34. If any would have Chemical Preparations also to be added, and in the form
of Pills, then

. Gum-Ammoniac, or Opoponax, etc. cleansed with Vinegar, and thickened ss.
Troches of Albandal, Sublimed Mercury dulcifi'd, of each i. Make them into
fifteen Pills to be gilded.

Order the Sick to take five or more.

35. Which if a Decoction be more acceptable to the Sick, and he can take
bitter things, this following will be convenient enough.

. Liquorish sliced ss. Smallage Root i. the shavings of Lignum Guaiaci iii.
Laurel-Berries, Anise-Seeds, of each ii. the Pulp of Coloquintida ss. Boil
them, according to Art, in Rainwater; in 30 ounces hereof strained, dissolve
the Solutive Syrup of Roses with Sena, that called Di^cnicum, of each i. ss.
Salt of Tartar vitriolated ii. Tincture of Cinamen i. M.

Let the Sick take iii, iv, or v. ounces of this Decoction, once or twice a
day, whereby the Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors may both be corrected, and also
evacuted gently by degrees.

36. Mean while let the Sick abstain from the use of fat and viscous Food. Let
him use clear, and also more warm Air, and drier, at least so made by Art. Let
him increase wakings. if sleep were longer or sounder. Let the Mind be composed
to cheerfulness. Let the Motion and Exercise of the Body be moderate. Let Stool
and Urine, if it may conveniently be, daily answer what is eaten and drunk.

37. Hunger suddenly diminished by Choler overfat, will be cured by amending
that Choler; or if it also abound in plenty by educing it either upward or
downward.

38. Elixir Proprietatis conduces before all others to amend this Choler,
taking v or vi. drops thereof in Wine, or in a convenient mixture, and chiefly
a little before Meat.

39. They who can bear Acids, may instead of it use Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd,
prepared with several Cohobations upon Spirit of Wine rectified.

40. Wormwood and Wormwood-Wine, thence called, amends this Choler. Instead of
which other Aromatic Plants may likewise be infused in Wine, and profitably
taken at Dinner or Supper in a small quantity, such as Mountain Calamint,
Marjoran, Rosemary, Garden-Rue, Hyss^p, Time, Sage, etc.

41. Choler is evacuated by Vomit most commodiously by several Medicines
prepared of Antimony, called Crocus Metal^orum, Glass, and Sapa Vomitoria
prepared of it; a Vomiting Syrup of Sugar and Vinegar, or of Honey and Vinegar,
Mercury of Life, etc.

42. The some Choler is evacuated by Stool, with Rhubarb Sc^mmo^ie, Tamarinds,
etc.

43. Scammonie is suddenly and best prepared, if in a convenient Dose, to xii
or xv Grains, according to the Age of the Sick, or to a greater or lesser
fitn^ss to continue a Purge; if, I say, Scammony be b^aten in a Mortar, and a
little of a convenient Water as of Balm, Succory, Sorrel, or such like be
poured upon it, and the Liquor which is made milky by rubbing be gently poured
out, and the rest of its strength be had also with new Water, the blackish
dregs remaining in the bottom; then to this fore-nam'd Liquor, add ii. of
Cinnamon or Fenel-Water, or any other Aromatic, and also ii or iii of the
solutive Syrup of Roses, or such like, and so it will be a most grateful
D^aught for the Sick. Which that it may work the better, it will be convenient
that half an hour after the Draught is taken, the Sick should drink in Broth i.
or ss of Cream of Tartar.

44. Also these most grateful Tablets of Scammony may be prepared and kept
against need, which,

. Crystals of Tartar i. ss. Diagridium iii. Oil of Cinnamon vi drops, white
Sugar dissolved in Rose Water viii. Make them into Tablets according to Art.

These Tablets may be given most conveniently to Infants, Children, and to such
as are delicate; seeing their highest Dose is from iii. to ss. to Infants ss,
or i. and to Youths ii. may be given with careful governing.

45. They who being smitten with a vain and preposterous terror, do abhor from
the use of Scammony and Scammoniats most gentle and safest, though potent, or
fear their Patients herein, let them use Rhubarb in this following manner.

. Select sliced Rhubarb ii. Crude and the best Tartar ss. Succory-water what
suffises; Infuse them all night in a warm Bath of Ashes, or Fresh Water; to
what is gently strained, add the solutive Syrup of Roses or of Succory with
Rhubarb ss. Cinnamon water ii. or Oil of Anise ii or iii drops; which does most
powerfully and happily correct and take away the squeamish smell of Rhubarb,
and discuss Wind. M. for a Draught.

46. They who had rather use an Electuary to purge Choler abounding, to them we
commend our Cholagogue or Diaprunum, prescribed for the use of the Academic
Hospital by Us some years ago, and commonly used to the profit of the Sick,
both there and elsewhere, by other Physicians as well as by Us; which even
therefore is the more commendable, because though it be used in a small
quantity, it works powerfully and gently enough. The Form whereof we here
communicate to all.

The Cholagogue Electuary, or Diaprunum of Sylvius.

. The Pulp of Prunes sowrish-sweet x. Cream of Tartar, best Scammony, of each
ii. Select Rhubarb x. sharp Cinnamon ss. Yellow Sanders ii. Refined Sugar xvi.
Make it an Electuary according to Art. The Dose is from iii. to ss.

It may be dissolved in a sufficient quantity of convenient Water, and so be
given.

47. Seeing that Depraved Hunger is most various according to the diversity of
the thing desired; Its Cure will only be proposed here by Us generally, which
consists in the purifying and amending of the Blood, and other Humors; which
being done, Longing will of its own accord vanish away.

48. And in this Disease, I have found hitherto that Volatile Salts do avail
before all other Medicines; which seeing there are many, they are to be
selected, which by accurate Observation, we shall note do most profit the Sick.
Wherefore Medicines are to be changed oftentimes, and chiefly where we see
they profit little by them.

49. And so much the more are Volatile Salts profitable, because they gently and
kindly move the Monthly Courses, the suppression whereof is known most
frequently to produce the Longing.

50. The best way of using Volatile Salts, is, if more or f^wer Drops of them be
taken twice, thrice, or oftener a day in Wine, or another convenient Liquor, and
chiefly at Dinner and Suppertime, whereby being joined to the Victuals they
hinder their corruption that might be expected from the vicious Spittle, and by
degrees amend the Spittle, and so by little and little restore the Fermentation
of Food also depraved.

51. In this Disease also it is good sometimes to move Swe^ts gently; and
beware lest the Sick be stifled with Cloths; for it is safer that no Sweat
should bre^th ^ut, rather than one forced; seeing that Sudorifics do amend and
correct the vicious H^mors, though they do not expel them. And I always pr^f^r
those that are liquid and spiritous, before them that are thicker, although
Antimonials, though ^^ver so dry, are here the best, as Diaphoretle Antimony,
and Mineral Bezoard. etc.

52. And according to the diversity of the vicious Humors sometimes abounding
together, you may profitably institute a V^mit or a Purge, which we have in
part handled, and int^nd more hereafter.

CHAP. III. Of Loathing of Victuals.
1. THe Sick do not only desire little or nothing or too much, or what is
strange and absurd; but sometimes loath and are averse to the most, or some at
least, and certain kinds of Food.

2. This Loathing both of some M^at and Drink, does not only overtake the Sick,
but sometimes those that are otherwise Well.

3. Where this is to be noted, that almost All do more loath what is actually
hot or warm, and which do more powerfully affect also the Smell than cold
things, and therefore less moving the Smell.

4. All Loathing is either natural or adventitious.

5. The Natural for the most part, if not always, follows as the Mind of the
Mother carrying in her Womb the young one is affected; and suchlike either
present, and mourring upon the outward S^nses, or absent, and often called to
mind, and sometimes by the vicious Humors in the Body; other-times by prejudices
whencesoever taken, loathing and being avers from things judged ungrateful.

6. The Adventitious Loathing is stirred up after Birth in healthy People,
either by Pr^judice, esteeming Food unclean, ungrateful, or hurtful; or by the
same Food, or suchlike used over-plentifully, esp^cially to nauseousness or
v^miting, or by the same ^^t cleanly enough prepared, or presented: which if
they were taken in Hunger, or any other necessity ^^n pelling, they breed a
loathing of them, and leav a great prejudice against suchlike; which sometimes
indeed is again at length taken away, sometimes continues to the end of Life.

7. In like manner and more frequently is stirred up in the Sick, a Loathing of
certain or the most Food, and chiefly as often as they are given hot or warm;
for by their smell, easily ungrateful to the Sick, a queasiness almost together
raised, promotes and increases their loathing.

8. Neither are many Sick wont to loath Food of one kind, but sometimes of every
kind and taste, and those accustomed and otherwise desired; but not Meat only,
but also often all Drinks, Wine, Beer, and often Water.

9. This Loathing of Food is so frequent a Symptom to the Sick, that sometimes
it is a manifest sign of unhealthiness, and especially in Boy's, testifying a
Sickness beginning or begun by that loathing.

10. It is worthy consideration, that not only Flesh, and Broths, especially
Fat, do loath the Sick, but so frequently all things, both sweet, and
sowrishsweet; and very seldom those things that are more Acid.

11. And sometimes Loathing of certain Meats and Drinks, rises to that height,
and takes away the strength of the Sick, that though the Disease be taken away
for a while, and sometimes long, yea, sometimes wholly, yet it continues; whilst
in others quickly, at least in a short while it is taken away or vanishes.

12. But for the most part, the Loathing of the Sick depends, 1. of the vicious
Vapors produced in the small Gat by a vicious Effervency by Choler, Phlegm, and
the Juice of the Pancreas vitiated together or apart, and rising up to the
Ventricle and the Mouth, notably diminishing Hunger, but more or less depraving
Thirst, and moving chiefly the Smell, or Taste, commonly also Loathing, when
mention is made, or at sight of Victuals.

13. The same also do depend, 2. of the trouble that follows the taking of
suchlike Food, once or ofter, and hence of the wilful prejudice bent of the
same trouble returning, if they be again taken; whence a Loathing, and hence a
Vomiting is wont to be stirred up in some by the memory only of unpleasing or
hurtful Victuals.

14. This Loathing of the Sick is deservedly ascribed to Choler, the Juice of
the Pancreas, and Phlegm flowing together in the small Gut, and vitiated, and
therefore vitiously raising an effervescency; seeing when they are amended and
evacuated, it is taken away and cured forthwith in the most.

15. And as sometimes this, sometimes that Humor is peccant, so also the Sick do
loath Food of this or that Taste before others: which when more are notably
peccant together, they are avers to Food of every kind.

16. And what Humor, and how it is peccant, the conjoined Symptoms to be
fetched from the following Treatise of other Diseases will show.

17. The Loathing of Healthy People will be Cured, by freeing the Mind from
every prejudice, or by degrees accustoming to the use of Food loathed: which is
tried sometimes in vain, other times with success.

18. After the same manner is the Loathing of the Sick to be Cured, which
arises from a Prejudice.

19. But where the Prejudice has its rise from the present vitiousness of the
Humors the C^r^^ ^^l follow, if the peccant humors be corrected or pu^^^d ut.

20. The Humors Peccant are to be corrected by Medicines, partly now proposed
before, and partly to be proposed yet in what follows.

21. The Humors whether fluid, or of their own accord, inclining upward, may be
carried out by a Vomit, and indeed with Vomits already mentioned, or to be here
and there mentioned.

22. The same Humors, seeking no way upward, and very viscous, may be carried
out by Stool, both by Medicines already prescribed, and to be prescribed
hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Taking in of Food hindered.
1. IT suffices not Man to desire Meat and Drink, unless he take the same in at
his Mouth, and lessen the more solid parts by chewing, and thence swallow it
through the Gullet into the Stomach.

2. These Functions are hindered many ways; and 1. when the taking of Liquid
Things usually performed by Sucking, is deficient more or less.

3. It happens, when the Sick cannot either open or shut the Mouth; at least
conveniently either conjoin or disjoin the Lips; or put enough out, or wry
about the Tongue.

4. The Sick cannot open the Mouth, when it remains shut in the Convulsion of
the Muscles of the Temples.

5. The same cannot shut the Mouth, when it perpetually gapes when the lower
Jaw is out of joint, or in the Palsy of the Musel^s of the Temples, or a cross
Wound.

6. The Sick cannot conveniently and sufficiently join together their Lips,
when they are wanting, or have the Palsy, or gape with a great Wound.

7. The same cannot decently open their Lips, when they in like manner are
wanting, or are kept in Convulsion by the wriness of the Mouth, called Cynicus
Spasmus.

8. Both happens imperfectly, when the Palsy or Convulsion is in either side;
whence in the side affected there is no contraction, or too much of, both
vicious and hurtful, in the wrying of the Mouth.

9. The same Sucking is hurt in the closing of the Lips, stopping the way of
the Food.

10. The chewing of solid Victuals is Hurt, when the under-Jaw cannot be drawn
from the upper, or drawn to the same.

11. The first happens by the Convulsion of the Muscle of the Temples, in the
Spasinus Trismus called; the latter by the Palsy of the same, or the
Continuation loosned cross-ways; both in the disjoining of the Jaw.

12. The same Chewing is Hurt by the fault of the Teeth deficient up and down,
or otherwise not enough fitted to themselves above and beneath, or troubled
with Vnsensibleness, Pain, Rottenness, or any other Corruption.

13. The Tongue cannot conveniently be put forth or wried about, as often as it
is troubled with the Palsy, or Convulsion, or a Wound, or a shorter siring of
the Tongue.

14. In the Second Bank we intend to Treat of the Palsy, Convulsion, Pain, and
suchlike; whence may be required, those things which are necessary to clear up
more, and Cure the present D^seases.

CHAP. V. Of Swallowing Food hindered.
1. THe Sick cannot sometimes at all, other times not, unless with difficulty
swallow Meat, or Drink, or both.

2. Both the Tongue serves naturally to Swallow, especially by thrusting Meat
to the Jaws, and the Gullet by thrusting down the same, and Drink received.

3. To this end is required both a movable Tongue, and the Gullet able to be
displayed and folded up, as also its Chanel, as well as the upper Orifice of
the Ventricle open, and not hindered.

4. The thrusting of Food forward to the Jaws, is hindered, as often as the
Tongue is troubled with the Palsy, or Convulsion, or Wound, or Ulcer, or Pain,
concerning all which we intend to Treat elsewhere.

5. The thrusting down of Food through the Gullet, or swallowing is hindered and
abolished; when either 1. the Throat is obstructed by a solid thing filling its
Chanel, to wit, sometimes Flesh growing out in that part affected; other times
by gluttony, or by some Gristle, Bone, or Kernel, hastily swallowed, and firmly
sticking in it. Or, 2. it is pressed by a Tumor near it, as is wont to be in the
Quincie. Or, 3. it is grown together, after its excoriation.

6. The Sick Swallow with difficulty; 1. When the newly mentioned hindrances
are only Light, and not great, and do only in part shut the Chanel of the
Throat. 2. When the Throat is troubled with the Palsy, an Excoriation or
Exulceration. 3. When Vapors, or bitter, and tart, or many Belches rising up
out of the Stomach, do stop and sometimes repel Food that is to be swallowed.

7. Sometimes the Swallowing down of Food is hindered, and not performed without
difficulty and pain, when the upper Orifice of the Stomach is either Inflamed,
or Excoriated, or Vlcerated, or is more or less beset with a fleshy Excrescency.

8. Of the most Diseases before mentioned, and those that hinder Swallowing
down, we intend to speak anon, whence they may be required, which are here
desired both to a farther Knowledge and Cure of them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Retention of Food hindered in the Stomach.
1. IT suffices not that Food is taken into the Mouth, and swallowed down
through the Throat, unless the same stay and be retained in the Stomach a
convenient space, and so long, till it be sufficiently fermented there.

2. This required Stay and Retention of Food in the Stomach is hindered, when it
is expelled, either suddenly after it is taken, or at least sooner than ought
to be, and that either upward by the Mouth when Vomited, or downward through
the Guts by Stool, in the Disease called Lienteria.

3. Either of these disturbances of Food made down or up, happens usually by
the faultiness of the Stomach, or its Food, or a vicious Humor provoking the
Stomach continually, or at least after Victuals.

4. By fault of the Stomach this evil happens, as often as it being inflamed,
or exulcerated, or excoriated, c^n recciv nothing into it, but presently after
is stirred up to contract it self violently, and unload it self of what is in
it.

5. The same falls out by fault of the Food, or other things Taken together
with it, if they be sharp and provoke the Stomach by biting to unload it self.

6. The same happens by fault of other Humors that were before in the Body, if
they incite the Stomach by their Acrimony to a perpetual Loathing, and
Vomiting, or to a Contraction tending downward, and therefore a driving down of
all things received in.

7. Such Humors are often Chol^rie Salt, and sometimes Pancreatical over-Acid,
which being endu'd with a Volatile Acrimony, and rising one against another, do
come up to the Stomach, at least send thither sharp Vapors, fretting and
gnawing it.

8. Sometimes Humors sowrish salt and sharp slide down from the Head to the
Jaws, and hence to the Stomach, and compel it to contract it self, and expel
what was taken in.

9. Of an Inflammation, and any Exulceration, we intend to speak in their
proper place.

10. If this evil happen by sharp Food, more gentle and also asswaging things
ought to be used; or at least Acrimony is first to be tempered and corrected.

11. To this end many oily things conduce, Oil it self, any Milk, Cows Sheeps,
Goats, etc. Flesh-Broths, especially Fat; Emulsions prepared of several Seeds,
especially Sweet-Almonds.

12. A sour sharpness may be tempered, besides with sweet things, Sugar, Honey,
Raisins of the Sun; and sometimes with spiritous Things, or others, which
concentrate sowrness, and yet hurt not food; such as are Coral, Pearl, etc. And
also by much the longer concoction, do by little and little wax sweet, and more
or less lose its acidity.

13. A Lixivial and Aromatic Acrimony, such as is in Peper, Cloves, Rocket, and
suchlike, is tempered by the aforesaid oily and sweet things; and then it is
safer to abstain from them things wholly, or for the most part.

14. The salt sharpness, such as is in Sea and dug Salt, and most salted
things, is wonderfully corrected with unslak't-Lime made of burnt Flints or
Shells, not to be feared any more by any prudent Physician, and to be most
happily used in most Discases in the form of a Lie.

15. As Meat and Sauces, so the vicious and sharp Humors may be corrected with
oily and spirituous things; and that with their contraries, but first tempered,
already mentioned, and hereafter still to be mentioned.

16. The same Humors too sharp, but first more or less corrected and tempered,
as often as they also abound, or are more slow or difficult to be corrected and
restored, are to be empti'd by Medicines prescribed before, and hereafter to be
prescribed.

17. Chiefly then to temper the urgent Acrimony of Humors, and to dull the
sense of the Stomach, and to settle its troublesome contraction; Opium avails,
and any Medicin named of Opium, Treacle, Mithridate, Di^scordium, Roman
Philonium, Laudanum, etc. if used often in a small quantity, other Medicines
being added which kindly temper the most peccant Humors, whose Forms are extant
in several places of this Treatise.

18. We intend to Treat distinctly of Vomiting, and the Lientery, in which the
Excretion or Expulsion of the Stomach, and sometimes and perhaps always of the
Guts is withal hurt.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fermentation of Food in the Ventricle hindered.
1. THat change which happens according to nature to Food taken into the
Stomach, commonly called, turning of Food into Chyle, we incline to call
Fermentation.

2. The chief kinds of this Fermentation of Food hindered, are, 1. when it is
abolish't or diminish't; 2. when Increased; 3. Depraved: which being known,
both that which is too slowly, and that which is too speedily performed, may
easily be deduc't.

3. Fermentation of Food is thought to be Abolish't, when, though it be
retained a sufficient time in the Stomach, yet is cast out again raw and
unaltred, either upward or downward, as it is Diminish't, when it comes forth a
little, or less changed than should be: Whence the Sick get none, or little
nourishment and strength from what they eat.

4. The Fermentation of Food is said to be Increast, when it is done quicker
than ought, whence if Food stay longer than its natural and wonted time, it is
too much changed; that neither so can it afford convenient matter to nourish
the Body; as dough when too much, or too long fermented makes the Bread too
sour, and therefore less laudable. For all good consists in a Mediocrity, evil
in extremes.

5. Where it is to be noted, that the Fermentation of Food Encreast is not very
hurtful to Man, unless it persist too long, because most commonly Food
sufficiently Fermented, makes no long stay in the Stomach, but is forthwith
driven forward to the Guts, and there is severed into profitable Chyle and
Excrements, etc.

6. But where Fermentation encreast persists for a space, there is too much
Food desired, and when all succeeds well, gradually there follows a Plethoric,
and hence an Athletic Habit, which, except it be loosed in time, it is known out
of Hippocrates, to whom Experience subscribes, into how great danger it casts
Men.

7. The Fermentation of Food is Depraved, when it is so changed in the Stomach,
that it affords not a convenient, but hurtful nourishment for the Body as well
containing as contained; whence arise infinite evils; seeing that the Faults of
the first Concoction are not corrected easily in the second; which is always
true of a Depraved Concoction.

8. Among the diverse kinds of Depraved Fermentation of Food, two are commonly
reckoned the chief, known by the name of Loathsome and Sour Crudity.

9. The Fermentation of Food is Abolish't or Diminish't, sometimes by the fault
of Food, othertimes of that which Ferments, or because of the vicious Humors
brought to the Stomach.

10. It happens by fault of Food, when it is taken in either in too great a
quantity, or does more or less hinder or stay the Fermentation by its own
vicious quality.

11. The vicious quality of Food consists frequently in its Fatness abounding;
sometimes in a Volatile Spirit preposterously, and too much taken, sometimes in a
lixiviat Salt, either fixed, or volatile too plentifully also used; in one word
in those things, which potently break the Acid Spirit, and its Operation:
whence the thicker parts of Food cannot be sufficiently cut and separated from
one another; so much can a certain proportion and harmony of many things
everywhere requisite concurring, do to produce the same effect. Any Beer also,
especially watery, does this if swill'd too plentifully, and then it dilutes and
washes away the Ferment, and overwhelms the Meat, hindering it in its
Fermentation.

12. The Fermentation of Food is Diminish't or Abolish't by fault of the
Ferment, both because of its Defect, and also Slowness.

13. The Ferment of the Stomach is Deficient, when there is not enough of it in
the defect of Spittle, or in a continual spitting; or it is carried another way,
by a continual drinking, whereby it is driven forward to the Guts.

14. This Ferment is sluggish, because it is produced Fatter, more viscous, or
more watery than it ought, because of suchlike Spittle, arising from suchlike
Food too long used; and sometimes to be deduc't from the heat of external Air,
or from a vehement exercise of Body or Mind spending the Animal Spirits; and
chiefly where the Animal Spirits are not refresh't with Food abounding with
volatile Spirit, or repaired being consumed and deficient in the Body, seeing
they are very useful to promote the Fermentation of Food.

15. Where more Causes do concur, the aforesaid Fermentation or Food is
hindered, and on the contrary.

16. Some things may Diminish, and sometimes Abolish the same Fermentation when
they are used ill, either for Food or Medicines, and because they weaken the
Ferment, or render the Food unfit for Fermentation, are to be esteemed Poison;
such as are all, which are endued with an excelling power of fixing.

17. The Fermentation of Food may be Diminish't, and after that Abolish't, by
the vicious and especially Choleric Humors over-oily, rising up to the
Ventricle, and either corrupting or weakening the Ferment, or mixing themselves
with the Food, do trouble, hinder, or stop their Fermentation.

18. On the contrary, the Fermentation of Food is Encreast; either, 1. by the
fault of Ferment being more acid and volatile than is wont. Or, 2. by the fault
of Food long continued, which according to the natural Constitution of the
Eater, is easily fermented. Or, 3. because of the Humors having a volatile
acidity, and sliding down from the Head, or rising up from the Pancreas to the
Stomach.

19. The Ferment and Spittle, as also the Juice of the Pancreas, and Humors
falling down from the Head, owe their increased volatile Acidity chiefly to Food
that have in them a volatile acidity, over-plenteously and long taken, and
suchlike Sauces, and Wine, or other delicate and spiritous Drink, but somewhat
acid, as is Mense and Rhenish-Wine, used for some space, though not in too much
plenty.

20. A careful sorrow may in part promote the same, but not too grievous; as
also clear and subtle Air, but not very hot or cold, but a little inclining to
the nature of the Northern.

21. The Fermentation of Food is Depraved into a noisome Crudity by Choler
over-fat and too volatile rising to the Stomach, and not only hindering
Fermentation, but moreover altering and corrupting it. Whence are Belches
raised and lifted up, which distend the Stomach, or gnaw it, sometimes smelling
of fri'd Eggs, other-times stinking Fish, or other things.

22. But as often as the Distension of the Stomach concurs, or those Belches
come up with difficulty, so often it is certain that viscous Phlegm is also
peccant.

23. Sour Humors produce the Acid Crudity, and chi^^^ the Juice of the Pancreas
peccant in aboundin^ or height of acidity, and carried to the Stomach; whence
the Solution and Fermentation of Food is not only too much hastened, but
moreover vitiated and corrupted, Acid Vapors sometimes very troublesome, being
elevated by the same Work.

24. Neither is it a wonder or new thing, that the same Cause, according as if
is more or less in quantity, or more intense or remiss in quality, does more or
less alter and change, yea, hurt some Function, sometimes according to quantity,
other-times according to quality.

25. The Fermentation of Food Abolish't or Diminish't, because of too much of
it taken in, may be Cured often with Hunger only, or Food sparingly taken for a
space.

26. The same may be sooner obtained by using Medicines that promote
Fermentation, such chiefly are Sour and lixiviat Salt things altered, and more
or less volatis'd by a volatile Spirit. Hereto belongs Spirit of Salt dulci^i'd
by iterated cohobation with Spirit of Wine; also Salt of Tartar made volatile
with Spirit of Wine; Salt of Amber, of Urine, Hartshorn; and Salt A^moniac,
its Spirit, or volatile Salt, etc.

27. For all these things do cut Meat, as well as thick and viscous Humors
found in the Body, and carry down those that are Crade to the Fermentation, and
so make them useful for the Body.

28. All these things are most commodiously used, if taken in a convenient
quantity, for the Constitution and Age of the Party, in Wine, or any other
convenient Liquor, at Dinner and Supper. They may also be used not
incommodiously at another time, and chiefly when the Body abounds with viscous
Phlegm.

29. Fat things may be corrected by an acid dulcifi'd Spirit powerfully, but
more weakly and slowly by a volatile Salt.

30. Where the Appetite is prostrated, not only by the over-use, and so the
abuse of Spirit of Wine, but moreover is Diminish't, and sometimes Abolish't,
the dulcifi'd acid Spirit does much conduce, being taken in a small quantity,
and often; as also Elixir Proprietatis rightly prepared.

31. This Medicin will do the same, where any has used long, Food too much
abounding with volatile or fixed Salt; whence the Acid Spirit that is in many
Humors, and altogether necessary, is too much broken and made sluggish.

32. Fermentation of Food Abolish't or Diminish't, by devouring much Drink, and
chiefly watery, to wit, small Beer, or such like, may be Cured, by daily
diminishing the quantity of such Beer, and instead thereof using a little Wine
strong enough, or any other Drink potent enough, and abounding with a volatile
Spirit.

33. Where the said Fermentation is Diminish't or Abolish't for want of
Ferment, the same is to be encreas^d together with Spittle wanting, by
preparing, and then using a mixture of a little volatil-Salt, and more of an
acid dulcifi'd Spirit joined together.

34. So continual Spitting is to be disaccustom'd by degrees. For this commonly
follows the ill manner and custom. And it is good to contain the Tongue quiet
in the Mouth* seeing by its often moving the ^^^^sion of too plentiful Spittle
is promoted.

35. And moreover a perpetual and unseasonable Drinking is to be ^bstain'd
from; for it cannot be, that a Physician should make Men healthy that
continually err in Diet.

36. The Ferment sluggish, and too fat, and viscous, and watery, because of
suchlike Spittle, may be renewed by the newly mentioned mixture, seeing it is
sufficient for all these Indications. Which may sooner be obtained, if the Sick
abstain from suchlike Food, and use in their stead, those things which are of
good and plenteous nourishment, and of easy Fermentation, if he s^un the
cloudy or hot Air; if he be moderate in the Exercise of Body and Mind, and get
moderate Sleep.

37. Where Fermentation is Diminish't or Abolish't, by things that fix the
Ferment, and concenter its Acidity, or make Food taken in unfit for
Fermentation, as Chalk, Ashes, Lime, Coral, etc. ill used, in Loathing, Acids
ought to be used, and such as are more kindly and temperate, and to persist for
a (...) in the use of them, and especially a little before (...); and often
v^l^til Salts may conduce, it talen of (...) Supper, in a mod^rat quantity in
Wine no^ very spirituous, seeing (...) do not (...) ^^^^tation of Food, ^ut by
de^^^^ (...) the nature of fixing and (...). M^^n while ^^ware of any further
(...).

38. I said that kindly and tempered Acids ought to be used; which Rule ought
always and everywhere to be observed in rightly exercising Physic, and
because all the Humors in our Body are by nature temperat, and also because
when they are less tempered, they continually raise up an effervescency too
vehement, and so too hot in us; for it can scarce be, but that then both sharp
and gnawing Vapors are raised, from which no good, but much harm may be
expected. Therefore i 's better to proceed more slowly and safely, than to cast
the Sick into the danger of any harm by hasting too much.

39. As often as the Fermentation of Food is Diminish't or Abolish't by
over-fat Choler rising to the Stomach, so often it is to be corrected by Spirit
of Salt dulcifi'd; or, if it be judged to be peccant also in quantity, it is to
be evacuated by gentle Cholagogues, or light Vomits, especially such as are
prepared of Antimony, such as we have touched above.

40. Fermentation of Food Encreast, because the Ferment is over-acid and
volatile, may be Cured by exhibiting those things, which break and kindly fix
that Acidity, Coral, Pearl, Crabs Eyes, Filings of S^^^, Chalk, and suchlike.

41. Where it is to be noted, that the famed and wonderfully praised
Magisteries of Coral, Pearl, and suchlike, especially prepared by the Oil of
Tartar, answers not the Promises of their Authors, because that by such
Preparation, their power of tempering, fixing and concentrating sowrness is
broken, if not wholly abolish t: It is better therefore only to reduce them
into fine Powder, than to use them corrupted rather than prepared.

42. Their Fermentation Encreast, by reason of Fo^d over-easie to be fermented,
may be Cured, by exhibiting Food thicker, more viscous, and of a more difficult
fermentation, as Bread made of Meal and Bran, and not leavened; Beef salted or
hardened with smoke, etc.

43. A Plethora, that is, an abundance of good Blood, and an Athletick habit of
Body following it, which arises after Fermentation of Food Encreast pessists
for a space, is Cured soon and safely by letting Blood, once, or oftener, as the
matter requires: which if it be neglected, or deferred too long, the Sick are
often cast into present danger of Suffocation; from which they are not sooner
freed, till by Blood let out of a Vein cut, this breathing is made freer, and
so Death otherwise at hand is turned away.

44. Fermentation of Food Encreast, by the fault of Humors sour, and endu'd
with a volatile Acrimony, either descending from the Head gradually through the
Gullet, or rising up from the Guts to the Stomach, is to be Cured, by
exhibiting at times, as is already said, Medicines that do temper, break, and
kindly fix all acidity in the Body by degrees; by abstaining from Drink and
Meat, that is over-sharp, or sauc'd with sour things; by inclining to
cheerfulness, by shunning the very clear and over-sharp Air.

45. A ^isom Crudity is to be Cured, by amending Ch^ler by the often commended
Spirit of Salt dulcifi'd, or any other so prepared, or, if it be peccant also
in encreast plenty, by educing it either by the Mouth with a V^mit, or by
Stoel, with purging Cholag^^^^s abovementioned.

46. Where observe that those Evacuations are to be used in the be^inning in a
small Dose, lest Choler being of it s^^^ very t^^ xil, or after a certain
manner ^ur^^nt b^come fur^^^^, and cause the Disease called Ch^^^ra or at least
a sore Diarrhea, and therefore dangerous.

47. For except it appear that Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors do also abound in
the Body, it is always safer when you purge Choler, to use Cholagogues in a
lesser Dose, for fear of over-purging.

48. Add that, although perhaps Purgers evacuate nothing when given in a small
Dose, they may be repeted, and the Operation of what preceded, will be promoted
by others taken some hours after in a small quantity also; which, where there
is no need, may be done only on the next day, because Purging Medicines have
power, not only to evacuate the vicious Humors, but also to alter and amend the
same, and to prepare them to be commodiously educ't.

49. And this Precept we willingly commend to younger Physicians and Students,
because by so doing they will not only do their Patients no harm, but by such
prudence they will become more commendable to every one; which is only to be
done by any that seeks honest profit by doing well.

50. But where viscous Phlegm is joined to Choler, begetting the Loathing
Crudity, Purging Phlegmagogues are to adjoin'd, beside Spirit of Salt
dulcifi'd, which conduces to its alteration and incision, and then both of them
in a somewhat greater Dose; because the Operation of any Purgers is retarded,
and hindered by too viscous Phlegm, which therefore ought to be promoted by
increasing their quantity.

51. To this end Purgers may be prescribed most conveniently in form of a Pill,
because the Gums are most apt above all other Medicines to loosen and cut
viscous Phlegm, neither can they be easily dissolved in any Liquor, and with
one and the same labor both empty, and carry out the Humors peecant.

52. To this purpose may the following, or such a like ^orm of Pills serve,
which

. Gum Ammoniae, or Galbanum, etc. prepared with Vinegar ss. Select Mastich i.
Troches of Albandal, Rosin of Scammony, of each 25 Grains, M. Make it into 25
Pills and guild them.

Let the Sick take 5 or 7 in the morning fasting, and an hour after drink Broth.

53. The Acid Crudity is to be Cured by exhibiting Medicines often above cited,
which temper or concentrate the Acid Spirit; diligently shuming Purgers before
the Acid Hum^rs are tempered and brought to a serous Nature, which if they then
abound, nothing hinders but that they may be carried out by Hydragogues.

54. The Serous and A id Humors being both tempered, are carried out by
Mechoacan, and Jalapp Root, the most parts of Elder, and Dwarf-Elder,
Gum-Gotte, Haterium, etc.

55. Among the Compounds, I dare commend an Electuarie some years since
invented by Me for the us^ of ^he A^^demie Hospital, and often used to the
profit of the St^^^ the Description whereof I here set for young Physi^^^^^
sake.

The H ^^^gogue Elec^^arie of Sylvius.

. Ju^^^er-B^rri^^ ^^il'd in W^tter, expressed and reduct to the c ns^^en^ie of a
Pulp, the Pulp of Tam^ariads, of ^ach iv. Jalapp-Root i. ss. Relect
S^^mun^nie,. i. Sharp Cinnamon, Sweet Fen^l S^^^^s, of each, ii. Clarifi'd Sugar
x. Make it an Elect^^ie according to Art.

The Dose also of this is from iii. to ss. to People of Age. It is a gentle,
effectual, and no ungrateful Medicin. It may be dissolved in a convenient
Water, as of Parsley, Fenel, or any other, and exhibited in form of a Potion,
or taken by it self and swallowed down.

56. To correct a slow Ferment, and also to amend Phlegmatic viscous Humors, a
Medicinal Wine may be prepared in this following Form.

. Elecampane, Galingal-Root, of each ii. The Leaves of Water-Mints,
Mountain-Calamint, of each M. ss. Anise-Seeds, sharp Cinnamon, of each ii.
Nutmegs i. Cut and Beat them grossly, and put them into a Bag, which being put
in a Glass or Stone, or any other Vessel, pour upon them White-French, or
Rhenish Wine, (as the Sick likes this or that better) as much as y^u please, or
for Example, three pints.

Let it stand twelve hours or more in a cold place, that the Aromatical
strength of the Plants may get into the Wine: Whereof let the Sick drink a
Draught as well at Dinner as Supper, adding in every draught, either Spirit of
Salt dulcifi'd, 10 drops, or Elixir Propri^tatis 5 drops.

When the Wine is almost consumed, more may be poured on, till it cease to be
Aromatical.

If Wormwood-Wine please any, half an handful of the t^ps of Woormwood may be
added, and used, as is directed.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Expulsion of Food to the Guts depraved.
1. THe Food that is taken in at the Mouth, and kept a sufficient time in the
Stomach, and Fermented, is usually thrust forward to the Guts by degrees
through the Pylorus; that is, the lower Orifice of the Stomach.

2. To this end the Stomach is wont to press its Cavity, by contracting it self
by its circular Fibers, and expel downwards what is in it.

3. This Expulsion of Food is either Abolish't, at least Diminish't and is
over-slow and dull beyond Nature; or is hastened and perform a sooner than ought
to be; or is finished a preposterous and inconvenient way.

4. That expulsion is only thought to be Abolish't, or rather Diminish't, when
it is too slow and imperfect, whence a good part of Food stays too long in the
Stomach, and presses it with heaviness.

5. For I think not that this Expulsion can be Ab^lish't, but shortly after the
Sick dies; seeing that these M^tions of Contraction, called by me Natural, of
the P^rts forming a Cavity, and carrying certain things contained, have been
observed by Me, and other accura^ S^archers of the Works of Nature, to be
notable, and so remaining several hours to Extern l ^^nse, th ugh all the
M^tion of the Muscles, called Animal and Volanta^ie, were Abolish't and wh^lly
c^ss nt, yea, even after the Man or Beast was already d^ad.

6. The Expulsion of Food out of the Stomach is perfected, and hastened sooner
than ought, if the Expulsion begin, and be absolved quickly or soon after it is
taken, or at least be not retained in the Stomach, as long as it ought, and is
required to be duly and sufficiently altered and fermented.

7. That Expulsion is tried and finished in a preposterous way, and so is
depraved, when Food is again expelled out of the Stomach, not downward to the
Guts through the Pylorus, but upward to the Mouth through the Gullet, and a
Vomiting is raised.

8. The Expulsion of Food out of the Stomach, is Abolish't, or rather
Diminish't, both by fault of the Food it self, and also of the Stomach.

9. It happens by the fault of the Food suddenly, as often as it is taken in
too great plenty, whence the Stomach being stretched very big, returns
over-slowly and difficultly to its folding together, and in the mean while
suffers a grievous sense of weight and heaviness.

10. This Diminish't Expulsion happens by fault of the Ventricle slowly and
constantly, when the Stomach is either lank, according to its membranous
substance, by the too much and daily use of watery things, clean Water,
especially cold Beer, very moistening and cooling Decoctions, etc. or becoms
weak in its Fibers, by reason of very cold Drink, or stupifying Medicines,
stopping the passage of the Animal Spirits to the Ven^ricle, or thickning them
there, or coagulating them, or otherwise making them sluggish and u^profitable.

11. The Expulsion of the Food out of the Stomach is sooner than it ought,
because it is stirred up by the fault of the Stomach it self, or of Food, or of
other Humors carried to the Stomach.

12. This Irritation (or stirring up) is by the fault of the Stomach, when it
is either Inflamed, or Excoriated, or Exulcerated, whence it is forthwith
provoked to contract it self, and expel what is in it by any Food, though most
temperat and friendly, and taken in a moderat or little quantity.

13. This same Irritation is by the fault of the Food, when it is either sharp,
or at least sauc'd with sharp things.

14. Last of all, the Irritation of the Stomach coms by the fault of other
Humors, when Humors or at least sharp Vapors slide down from the Head, and are
swallowed, or rise up from the Guts (even while the Food is Fermenting) to the
Stomach, and gnaw it with their Acrimonie, and stir it up to fold together, and
to expel the Food contained either up or down.

15. We intend to treat of Vomiting, or the Depraved Expulsion of what is in
the Stomach upward by the Mouth, seeing more things are to be considered about
it in the next Chapter.

16. The Expulsion of Food to the Guts Abolish't or Diminish't, is to be Cured,
1. By promoting the thrusting forward and descent of what is in the Stomach,
using sometimes by spoonfuls the Oil of sweet Almonds or Olives, whereby the Food
becoms more Fluid, and the Pylorus is easier and more opened to give it way to
go out.

17. 2. If it much press and trouble the Stomach, and that the strength of him
so affected be sufficient, by stirring him up sometimes to Vomit, with the
Finger put into the Throat, or a Feather moistened with Oil, and also
compressing the Belly, that so what is eaten may the more easily be sent back,
and driven up, especially things that are liquid and to be Drunk: It will be
better, 3. to hasten the Solution and Fermentation of what is Eaten, (seeing it
is not easily vomited up alone) with such things as are spiritous, and abound
with volatile Salt, or with Aromatics, by which afterward they may be sent down,
or up as the matter requires.

18. 4. Diligently bewaring from any farther cramming in of much Food.

19. 5. By strengthening the weak Stomach with Aromatics mixed with lively Wine,
or its Spirit.

20. 6. By abstaining from things that are very watery, chiefly actually cold or
chill; and instead hereof using spiritous and little Drink, as Spanish, Canary,
or any other strong Wine.

21. 7. By restoring the sluggish and stupefi'd Animal Spirits, by a Medicinal
Wine, or its Spirit infused in Aromatic Plants, and often used in a small
quantity.

22. The Cure of the Inflammation and Excoriation of the Stomach, may be known
by the general Treatise of those Diseases hereafter to be given.

23. Over-sharp Food is to be shunned, at least tempered; and instead thereof,
sweet and mild things are to be used.

24. The Cure of sharp Humors is partly given already, and shall be more known
anon.

CHAP. IX. Of Loathing, Belching, and Vomiting.
1. IN perfect Health, and a natural State, nothing at all is wont to be driven
forward out of the Stomach by the Gullet; so that whatsoever rises that way,
gives us a certain sign of Health weakened, whether it be Food, or any other
thing ascends in the form of a Rifting, Wind, Vapor, or a more fluid or thick
Liquor, and is expelled by the Mouth.

2. Where any thing breaks up in the kind of a Rift, or a Vapor, with noise, it
is properly called a Belch and that avoided Belching; as, where Food or any
Humors are driven forward up out of the Stomach, a Vomit.

3. A Loathing is wont to precede a Vomiting always, and often a Belching, or
an inclination less or less to a vomiting, although that endeavoring to Vomit
be sometimes in vain.

4. Rifts, because of the toughness of their Matter, do cleave more to the
Ventricle, and are more hardly excluded, whence often a swelling of the
Stomach, and troublesome distension accompanies them; which ceases, or is eased
after the Wind is belch't. But Vapors and Rifts do more easily break out of the
Stomach, and but seldom give a notable sound, but only an hissing, whilst
Belches are often loud enough, and make a sound more or less strong, according
to the more or less viscidity of their Matter.

5. Belches have their rise, either, 1. from Food it self, or other windy
things taken, as Chestnuts, Pease, Beans, Turnips, Radishes, etc. Or, 2. from a
Phlegmatic and Viscous Humor, both cleaving in the Stomach, and rarefi'd into
Wind by Aromatics taken, and also found in the small Gut, and in like manner
turned into Wind by Choler, and driven forward to the Stomach.

6. That Choler, as consisting of a volatile and oily Salt, is the internal
efficient Cause of Wind, both every volatile Salt, and especially oily, and also
every part of Plants fit for discussing Wind, Seeds chiefly used by any that
has viscous Phlegm in the Stomach or Guts, and in the beginning raising or
increasing Wind, and at length dissipating them, do confirm.

7. That the material Cause of the same Vapors, is a Phlegmatic and indeed
Viscous Humor, is manifest both by their Antecedent Causes, such like Food,
Sweet Milk, Fishes, and especially Seafish; the extreme parts of Creatures, as
their Feet, which contain a viscous Jelly, etc. And also by their Cure, by only
correcting and educing the Phlegmatic and Viscous Humor, which is wont to be
performed safely and happily.

8. As in a Belch Wind only, so in Vomiting either Food, and that sometimes
Crude, other-times more or less fermented; or manifold Humors, as Watery,
Serous, Phlegmatic, Melancholic, etc. Thin or Thick, White, Yellow, Green,
Ceruleous, Black, etc. Insipid, Bitter, Sour, Sharp, Sweet, sometimes mixed;
Stinking, or without sm^ll; Acrimonious, or mild: Son times Blood, or also
Matter; and sometimes Excrements returning to the Stomach, are cast out sometimes
casilier, other-times more difficultly by the Gullet and Mouth.

9. All Vomiting follows the Stomach, either primarily or secondarily affected,
with its contracting Motion turned upward from its lower part.

10. The Stomach is affected primarily, when the Cause of Vomiting is only in
it, and by its contracting Motion turned; As, secondarily, when the Stomach is
drawn by consent of other parts first affected, and is provoked to turn its
contracting Motion; whether this be by the contracting motion of the Guts also
either wholly or in part changed; whether this happen by the Midrif, together
with the Muscles of the Belly vehemently shak'd, and that upward in a grievous
Cough.

11. The Stomach is primarily affected to Vomit; 1. when it is I^flam'd,
Excoriated, or Exulcerated; for then it is easily stirred up by any Food to any
sort of its violent Contraction, and so to turning of its Motion. 2. When Food
is taken in plenty, and chiefly troublesome and grievous to the Stomach in its
quality, and therefore urging it to its preternatural contraction, and so to
the casting out of what is in it. 3. When sharp Humors slide down from the Head
into the Stomach, and stir it up, and even compel it to contract it self
perversely, by corroding and gnawing it about its lower Orifice.

12. The Stomach is drawn to consent, and compelled to Vomit, by the
contracting Motion of the Guts wholly changed, in that most grievous Disease
called Ileos, in which sometimes also Clysters given are again cast forth by the
Mouth.

13. Vomiting is often raised by the same Motion only in part changed, both in
the Disease called Cholera; and also in any other vicious thrusting upward the
Humors, raising an Effervescency in the small Gut; and also what the Excrements
descent is hindered, and in the regress and ascent thereof following.

14. It is most certainly known, that Vomiting often rises in a vehement Cough,
and strong shaking of the Midrif, a patent contraction of the Muscles of the
Belly happening; which we think is by a conjoined compression then of all the
Bowels contain^d in the Belly made upward toward the Breast, and exceedingly
vexing the Stomach it self with what is in it, and urging it to change its
natural Motion.

15. The Breeding and Cure of the Inflammation, Excoriation, and Exulceration
of the Stomach, is to be required of the General Treatise of those Diseases to
be given in their proper place.

16. A Vomiting raised by what is Taken in, is for the most part quieted of its
own accord, when it is cast out, and represt by the use of a few Aromatics and
Opiats, and so Cured. For Example;

. Mint-Water ii. Tincture of Cinnamon ii. Laudanum Gr. ii. Sir. of Mint ss. M.

Let the Sick take one Spoonful in short spaces between, and the Vomiting will
soon cease.

17. Sharp Humors sliding from the Head into the Stomach, are thence to be
removed with Purgers, often mentioned; or to be corrected with things that
alter and temper the hurtful Acrimonie.

18. The same standing in the Head, are either to be tempered there, or purged
out by the Nostrils, or other most convenient ways, even universal, with
Medicines often named.

19. Of the other Diseases drawing the Stomach into Consent, we intend to speak
here after.

20. A bloody Vomiting rising by Blood flowing out of the Vessels of the
Stomach, or Guts broken, or corroded may be Cured, the Vessels being again
closed) by the following Mixture, profitable also in other exeretions of Blood.

. Plantane-Water ii. Cinamon-water vi. distilled Vinegar ss. Red Coral prepared
ss. Dragon's-Blood ss. Laudanum ii. Gr. Sir. of Myrtle i. M.

This Mixture often taken by Spoonfuls, will cure the most ruptions of Vessels,
and will soon stop the flux of Blood, beyond the expectation of many.

21. Blood gathered together in the Stomach, is almost of its own accord sent
down by Stool, when its Efflux and Vomiting is suppressed. Which if there be any
fear of Blood coagulated too much, add to the aforesaid Mixture of Crabs-Eys
ss. as also Diaphonetic Antimonie i. and use it as aforesaid.

22. The Vomiting of Matter, when it almost follows the Inflammation of the
Pancreas, or any Part near it, or a notable Ulcer, whencesoever it rises, will
wholly be Cured, if the Primary Disease be first Cured, which is to be required
from what follows; and in the mean while often use the Mixture containing
Diaphoretic Antimonie, and Crabs-Eys; it will morover be commodious to take a
drop of the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil in any Liquor, and then to temper
Matter, then to fence, yea, heal the Part primarily affected against any other
harm.

23. The Breeding and Belching of Wind may be Cured; 1. by shunning Phlegmatic
and windy Food, so called. 2. By cutting, and after that, by carrying out the
v^scous Phlegm in the Body. 3. By tempering Choler, if it be over-sharp. 4. By
Discussing Wind already bred and troublesome.

24. Acids, and all Aromatics, and such as are endu'd with a Volatile Salt,
often mentioned, do cut viscous Phlegm.

25. Phlegmagogues described in several places of this Work empty the same.

26. In this case, Spirit of Salt Nitre taken to two or three drops in a
convenient mixture, or ordinary Drink, before all others does best temper
Choler too sharp.

27. Most Aromatics discuss Wind, from which Oils may be distilled from Seeds,
especially Flowers and Rinds. Spirit of Nitre bears the praise before all,
every way useful, seeing it corrects both Phlegm and Choler, and hinders Wind
in its rise, and di^sipates it when it is bred.

28. To curb and discuss Wind remaining as well in the Stomach as Guts, the
following exemplary Mixture may conduce and serve for Students-sake.

. Mint, Fenel-Water, of each ii. Spirit of Wine rectified, or Aqua Vitae of
Matthiolus, or our Carminative Spirit i. best Spirit of Nitre 20 drops,
Laudanum 3 Gr. distilled Oil of Mace 6 drops, Sir. of Mint i. ss. M.

Let this Mixture be taken by Spoonfuls often, or more slowly, as Pains or
Stretchings do more or less urge.

29. Because we have here mentioned our Carminative Spirit, we not unwillingly
communicate its Description to Younger Physicians, seeing we have often
experienced its great Virtues with much pro^^ to our Patients this many years.

The Carminative Spirit of Sylvius.

. Angelica-Root i. Masterwort, Galangal-Root, of each i. ss. Rosmarie,
Sweet-Marjoran, Garden-Rue, Basil-Leavs, the tops of Centaurie the lest, of
each M. ss. Bay Berries iii. Angelica, Lovage, Anise-Seeds, of each ss. Ginger,
Nutmegs, Mace, of each i. ss. Cinnamon vi. Cloves, Orange-peel, of each i. These
being cut and grossly beaten, pour thereon Spirit of Malaga, or Spanish-Wine XL.

Digest them two days in M. B. and Still them dry. Whatsoever ascends let be
poured upon the Mass, digest it two days, and then Still three parts of four.
Keep the Spirit distilled for your use.

30. If any will, he may pour upon what remains common Spirit of Wine, but
rectified xx. and distill it after two days digestion, as long as a strong
Spirit comes away, which may be kept apart, as weaker than the former, but of
much virtue to discuss Wind; if, as is here done, it be joined to convenient
Mixtures, or sweetened with Sugar dissolved in Rose or Fenel-Water, and used
more pure and potent.

CHAP. X. Of the Separation of Chyle from the Excrements depraved.
1. AS all Food needs not to be finished with usual Fermentation in the Stomach,
to wit, Drink either Watery or Spiritous, or enough fermented before, but
chiefly that which is viscous, and has its parts ever-closly connext; such as
are most Meats, especially solid, and among them Bread a little or nothing
leavened; so the Parts of Food which are profitable to nourish the Body
sometimes of their own accord, at least more easily, other-times more
difficultly, and not without thy help of another, do they separate from the
rest of the Parts, being many, rising most commonly from Meat, which are again
sent out by Stool, as unfit to refresh the Body, after some stay in the thick
Guts.

2. The Food therefore being Fermented in the Stomach, and sent into the Guts,
Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle also constantly swallowed,
are mixed there for the most part four singers breadth below the Pylorus, which
Spittle stays but a little while in an healthy Stomach, and void of Food, and
hastens suddenly to the Guts, and together with the aforesaid Humors, if I may
speak safely in Helmont's terms, exercises a very notable Triumvirate, or
threefold sway in the oeconomie of Man's Body.

3. These three being rightly constituted, it is observed that the separation of
the liquid and whitish Part from the thicker Part follows this mingling, and
gets a diverse color and consistency, according to the diversity of Food, or
Medicines used together.

4. The tender, fluid, and whitish Part we call, by way of excellency, Chyle,
which goes forward through the spungy Crust of the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and
Thoracic Passage to the Heart, to get the Form of Blood; whilst the thick,
solid and diversely colored part of Food is thrust down to the great Guts, in
which it gets the name and form of Excrements.

5. We give the priority to Choler in the promotion of this Separation, in as
much as it mildly cuts the viscous parts of Food by its volatile and oily Salt,
and frees the Fluid parts from them, and makes these more fluid, yea flowing.

6. To Spittle we ascribe, that by its promoting the Fermentation of Food more
and more, and by diminishing the viscidity thereof, it makes it all more fit
for its desired Separation.

7. Lastly, We judge that the Juice of the Pancreas, by its somewhat acid Spirit,
does more potently loosen the same obstinate Viscidity of Food, and gives
occasion also by compelling its most viscous parts of flowing together with the
more fluid parts, and presently to flow through.

8. These threefold Humors are required to perform such a benefit to Man's
Food being tempered according to their convenient manner, and degree for this
Work.

9. The chief part of which Choler consists, is thought by me to be a lixivial
Salt, tempered as well by a volatile Spirit, as Oil.

10. And the chief Part constituting the Juice of the Pancreas, seems to me to
be an Acid Spirit tempered, especially with a volatile Spirit.

11. Although the most part of Spittle be deservedly judged Water, yet is it
not that which chiefly promotes the Separation of Chyle, but both the Acid
Spirit, and Lixivial Salt tempered together in it by a volatile Spirit.

12. Although I think that more do concur in the making of all these
afore-nam'd Liquors, yet do I judge that the parts newly mentioned are the chief
in performing this present Separation.

13. As often therefore as one, or two, or all of these three Humors are
ill-order'd, so often the Separation of Chyle from the Excrements will be
vicious; which also may follow the fault of Food ill-fermented.

14. The same Separation is accounted to be depraved; 1. when there is none,
and although the Food be fermented, and brought to the consistency and form of
a Pultis, it is by degrees driven forward whitish through the Guts, not
colored with any yellowness of Choler, the Leanness of the Universal Body
concurring, and a notable decay of all the strength, which is in the first kind
of the Disease called Caeliac, which for distinction-sake we call the
Jaundice-like Flux in the thirteenth Chapter of this Book.

15. The same Separation is depraved. 2. when it is more sparingly and
Diminisht, at least different in degree from the now-mention'd kind; wherein
the Excrements do indeed keep the consistency of a Pultis, and come forth more
or less colored, the Body also pining slowly, and its strength languishing.

16. The same Separation is depraved, 3. when that which is unfit, and
therefore hurtful, being separated from the dreggish part of the Food, goes
forward together with Chyle to the Blood; which whether any call it Encreast or
Depraved, I think there is no matter, if it be clear about the thing it self,
so that thence a convenient Cure may be instituted.

17. The Separation of Chyle from the Excrements is Abolisht, either by the
fault of Food not agreeing with the peculiar Constitution of him that takes it
in, or otherwise vitiously fermented, or of the Humors mentioned Choler, the
Juice of the Pancreas, or Spittle.

18. Food that is incongruous or much loathed, as it will not easily be
fermented, so neither will it suffer it self to be separated afterward into
useful and unuseful parts.

19. The best Food also, and that which agrees and is most grateful to every
one, if upon any account whatsoever it remain crude, and be not prepared to the
separation of its parts that ought to be in the Fermentation, then the
Separation of Chyle from its Excrements will be expected in vain.

20. Although the most volatile and spiritous, together with the watery Parts, do
perhaps separate of their own accord, from the rest of the Food fermented as it
ought, and may be strained through into the Lacteal (or Milkie) Veins, yet the
Oily, Saltish, Acid, Earthy, and other parts also useful and necessary to
nourish the Body, need a farther and new preparation before they can leave the
over-viscous, tart, and other parts less fit to nourish the Body well.

21. This Separation will be wanting as often as the volatile Salt of Choler is
sluggish, or Choler is not carried down to the Guts; either of which has place
in the Jaundice, wherein the Excrements use to come away whitish and not
colored.

22. The Volatile Salt of Choler is sluggish, by reason of very viscous Food and
also fat, yea sometimes spiritous, and also Spirit of Wine; the abuse whereof
the Jaundice, as well as the Ascites Dropsy commonly follows. Which will be
sooner and more potently, if Medicines, or rather Poison that breaks the volatile
Salt of Choler, were taken in or received from without.

23. Choler is not carried down to the Guts, either when it is obstructed, by
turning into Stones, or a stony Crust, or by viscous Phlegm in the passage
thereof into the Guts.

24. That Viscous Phlegm may be mixed with Choler, and cleaving by degrees more
and more to the Passage, may at length obstruct it wholly; or being carried
together with the Juice of the Pancreas in the concourse of the Passage of both
Choler and the Pancreas, and stop the Outlet of Choler especially, being less
potent to cut it; or being in the small Gut, stops the same Orifice, denying
passage to Choler.

25. I cannot think this Separation of Chyle can be destroi'd by the Juice of
the Pancreas alone, or Spittle vitiated; although I may judge that defect may be
promoted by their viscidity and sluggishness, and that Separation sometimes be
Diminisht.

26. The toughness and sluggishness of the Juice of the Pancreas, as also of
Spittle is to be required from the overmuch and prolonged use of Viscous Food,
and chiefly Seafish, and Bread not enough baked, or leavened, or boild, as in
Puddings, and other things very fat, etc.

27. The common cause of Separation of the Useful, from the unuseful Parts of
Food Diminisht, is Choler descending over-slowly or sparingly to the small Gut,
for the Causes newly mentioned, or lighter.

28. If any say those contrary to the aforesaid are the Causes of Separation
Depraved or Increased, he will not easily be deceived. For, 1. Food that most
agrees with the Constitution of every one, and is more greedily desired before
others, will be fermented easilier, sooner, and more, and therefore will afford
more of its Chyle than is wont.

29. The same, if they be of a wholly laudable Juice, will scarce harm the
Body, unless a Plethora and an Athletic Habit be thence feared.

30. The same, if they be of a less laudable Juice, will easily bring on a
Cachexy; neither will the containing Body then be nourisht conveniently, or the
Strength refresht, which we think consists for the most part in the things
contained. Hence we judge it is, that sometimes many both desire and digest much,
and less laudable Food, and in the mean time by degrees grow lean and
defective, or are Cachectic.

31. 2. Food that is of an indifferent Nature, that is, not less containing
excrementitious, than nourishing Parts, and either taken in a less quantity, or
more sparingly, or fermented more potently by the help of some Sauce or Medicin
used, will yield its Liquid, and also Excrementitious Parts easier, and also
more plentifully, to be strein'd and carried through toward the Heart together
with Chyle, and hence gives occasion to vitiate Nourishment any way.

32. 3. Choler sharper than natural, will loosen and receive more of the Food
than ought, though well fermented; whence any may see that the Chyle will also
be less laudable.

33. 4. I judge the Spittle, or Phlegm that rises from it, or the Juice of the
Pancreas can produce this evil so far, as they abounding with a Volatile Spirit,
do more, and so too much ferment the Food sufficiently fermented in the
Stomach, whilst it is carried through the Guts; and so give occasion to
separate useful and also hurtful parts together with laudable Chyle, and to be
carried into the Lacteal Veins.

34. But here is a greater Hurt to be expected, when Choler, or Spittle, or the
Juice of the Pancreas only are peccant; and a lesser when they are all peccant,
because then they almost mutually temper themselves.

35. The Abolisht Separation of Chyle may be Cured, that rises by fault of Food
it self, or Fermentation, in their Amendment, of which before.

36. The same arising from the sluggishness of Chaler may be Cured, by often
using a sharp Volatile Salt, prepared of whatsoever, as the sharp Aromatic
Plants, Scurvie Grass, Cresses, Mustard, Horseradish, etc. whereby both the
viscidity of Choler is corrected, and its Acrimonie restored to the Salt.

37. The same arising from Choler not carried down to the Guts may be Cured; 1.
By Dissolving Choler turned into Stones, by the Juice of Grass, and especially
by the Spirit of Nitre that dissolves any Stones, etc. 2. By cutting Phlegm,
obstructing the passage of Choler into the Gut, by what is already mentioned,
and any thing else before commended, both Acids, and also such things as have a
Fixed or Volatile Salt, whether alone or mixed; such as are the vitriolated Salt
of Tartar, Salt Ammoniac, etc.

38. The farther use of Viscous Food is to be desisted from, and instead of
Sauce, use often the newly mentioned Aromaties, Mustard, Horseradish, and such
like, whereby the over-viscous Phlegm, wherever it be, may by degrees be
corrected.

39. Volatile Salts taken for a space at Dinner, or Supper, in Wine, or other
Drink, will do the same no less succesfully, as we have often said.

40. The Separation of Chyle Diminisht may be Cured the same way, and by the
same means, and that easier.

41. Lastly, The Separation of Food Encreast or Depraved may be Cured; 1. By
taking Food more difficult to Ferment; at least in a more than usual plenty, if
it be of easy Fermentation; and then abstaining carefully from Sauces that
promote Fermentation, and rather using certain things that hinder it, Coral,
Chalk, etc.

42. Over-sharp Choler may be potently tempered with any sour, and chiefly tart
thing, as Verjuice, the Juice of Barberies, Pomegranats, etc. As also viscous
things, both Food, Fishes, especially Seafish; and also Medicines,
Sweet-Almonds, and also their Emulsion, etc.

43. Spittle, or the Juice of the Pancreas, abounding with Volatile Spirit, if
here peccant, may be amended by abstaining from the plentiful use of strong
Drink, and abounding with a Volatile Spirit, and substituting in its place more
watery and somewhat tart, unless any thing else hinder.

CHAP. XI. Of the Vicious Effervescency of Choler, and the Juice of the
Pancreas; together with Phlegm continually raised in the small or thin Gut.
1. CHoler and the Juice of the Panereas do not only, flow together into the
small Gut, when the Food fermented is driven forward out of the Stomach to the
Guts; but continually, and so also at that time are they carried thither, when
no Food is taken in or carried down to the Guts, and of necessity they stir up
an Effervescency in their Concourse there, for the somewhat contrary disp^sition
of their Parts, mild and friendly to Nature in H^alth, that is, as long as both
is well disposed and tempered; but vicious and hurtful where either, or both of
them is intemperate and over-sharp.

2. Because that Phlegm is always observed according to Nature to reside in the
small Gut, and to rise from Spittle continually swallowed down, upon which
account the aforesaid Effervescency is somewhat changed: I take it, that in that
Conflux of these two Humors the more fluid part of Phlegm adhering to the sides
of the small Gut is dissolved, and that the same being joined with the most
part of Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas increasing, pierces into the
Lacteal Veins to the Heart, whilst the tougher and more viscous part of the
same Phlegm, with some part of the other Humors also viscous, goes by degrees
to the thick Gut; and being there mixed with the Excrements, makes them more
viscous and yellow.

3. This Threefold Humor rising from Choler, the Juice of the Pancreas, and
the Phlegm of Spittle, and hasting with the Lympha to the Heart, seems to me to
give the natural Consistency and Coagulation to the Blood; as I judge the
natural consistency of Blood, howsoever vitiated, for the most part to be
attributed to the same threefold Humor variously vitiated.

4. Therefore I am persuaded that the Effervescency is raised up by this
Conflux of these three Humors, because I do not only judge it may be concluded,
that the Juice of the Pancreas is sour, by diverse Diseases befalling Man
unnaturally, but that same is most abundantly evinced by the industry of the
most ingenious Anatomist, (Regnerus de Graaf) my most Beloved Scholar; as is
manifest by his Dissertation of the Nature and Use of the Juice of the
Pancreas, a year since in this University publicly disputed, I being President.

5. It is impossible that such Juice of the Pancreas, which is, any manner or
degree sour should mix with Choler, abounding with a bitter and volatile Salt,
but presently an Effervescency should be raised thence, which may be confirmed
with infinite Examples to be had from Chemistry and elsewhere.

6. That this Effervescency in time of Health is very mild, is even manifest,
because it is not perceived in healthy People; which notwithstanding is often
so manifest and heinous in Sick People, that it bewrays it self by Gnawings,
Distensions, Gripes, Coldness, Heat, Belchings, etc. both in the Region of the
Loins, and in the left Hypochondrium, and also sometimes in all the Belly.

7. Which aforesaid Effervescency is many ways vicious; 1. Because of
over-sharp and saltish-Choler; whence I am persuaded that Thirst for the most
part is Encreast, and the Diarrhea most commonly takes its rise.

8. 2. Because of Choler fatter than natural, whence I take it, that the Heat
in the Region of the Loins only, or besides in the whole Body is produced.

9. 3. Because of the over-Acidity and Acrimony of the Juice of the Pancreas;
whence other things being alike, I judge that coldness is stirred up most
commonly in the mentioned Region of the Loins, and afterward distributed into
the whole Body; which is manifest in the beginning of almost every Intermitting
Fever.

10. 4. Because of the Juice of the Pancreas Tart and harsh, to which I ascribe
the rising of suchlike Vapors, producing the Hypochondriac Suffocation, and
also of Pains wonderfully racking and contorting the Guts.

11. 5. Because of over-viscous Phlegm, from which suchlike Wind is wont to be
bred, distending the Guts and Ventricle, or more-over other parts, chiefly when
Choler is over-sharp; or otherwise the Blood is made tough and viscous, known
by the name of Melancholic.

12. Where Choler and the Juice of the Pancreas are both peccant in their
proper Acrimonie, most grievous pains are stirred up in the small Gut, and the
Disease Cholera or Dysenterie, etc. do often couple them, and almost always an
inordinate Fever; about all which we intend to speak in their proper place.

13. Where moreover Phlegm is very viscous, or otherwise vicious, there the
rise of the Diseases, Suffocation, or Hypochondriac Melancholy, the Scurvy,
Cholic, and other suchlike Diseases more grievous, daily manifests it self now
in this or that, and commonly in a changable form.

14. Of the almost innumerable Diseases that rise from the vicious
Effervescency of these three Humors flowing together in the small Gut, we may
Treat almost through the whole Practice of Physic, seeing the most depend on
it.

15. For by this vitiated mingling, not only hurtful Humors are produced, but
often Wind, Vapors, or ill-Rifts, causing much hurt to Man.

16. Therefore it concerns, that every Physician should search out and inquire
diligently as, the Matter concerns, the Nature and Qualities (both Natural, and
Temperate, and also Preternatural, and changing from its proper temper, which
causes infinite harm to Man) of these three Humors.

17. The Effects and Diseases proceeding from this vicious Effervescency are
most moted and daily, although the reason and rise of them for the most part is
unknown to us.

18. Over-sharp Choler follows; 1. Over-sharp Food, at least sauc'd with sharp
and very aromatical things. 2. Summer-Air, or hot, by any other Cause. 3. An
over-vehement Motion of the Body. 4. Overlong Watches. 5. Frequent Anger and
Cares. 6. Overcostivness.

19. Choler over-fat is chiefly caused by suchlike Food plentifully used, Oil,
Butter, etc. as also by Medicines Aromatical, very oily too often, and long
used, distilled Oils, as also by the Spirit of Wine, especially prepared with
oily things, as that with Anise-Seeds, etc.

20. The exceeding Acidity of the Juice of t^^ Pancreas, arises, 1. by
suchlike Food, Sauces or Medicines used too much, too often, or too long. 2. By
Winter-Air too cold, or at least too sharp. 3. By Fear and any Sorrow, or
grievous Solicitude of Mind. 4. By continuing Watches, which consume the Animal
Spirits, and by consequence increase the Acrimony of any Humors. 5. By a
continued and vehement Motion of Body, exhausting those Spirits. 6. By
Costivness.

21. The tartness of the Juice of the Pancreas arises especially from suchlike
Food, or rather Sauces, or Medicines, and unripe Fruits ill used, Apples, Pears,
Medlars, Chestnuts, Olives, Verjuice, etc. as also from grievous Sorrow
continuing long, chiefly joined with Solicitude.

22. Phlegm over-viscous ows it rise, 1. to suchlike Food, especially
Seafish. 2. To moist, cloudy, soaking Air. 3. To an idle Life, and without
cares, with much Sleep. 4. To rest and sluggishness of Body. 5. To a fearful
and sluggish Mind. 6. To the slow voiding of most Excrements.

23. Every mentioned vicious Effervescency of the threefold Humors may be
Cured, by correcting or purging out its Internal Cause, and shunning or
amending the External Cause; diligently considering whether one only, or more
together be peccant.

24. Those things which correct over-sharp Choler, are proposed in Chap. 1.
Sect. 11, etc. Those things that evacuate it, Chap. 2. Sect. 41, etc.

25. Choler fatter than ought is Corrected, both by abstaining from the use of
Fat things, and by often using Acids, but more temperate, chiefly to season
Food, to wit, the Juice of Citrons, Oranges, sour Pomegranates, Barberies,
Currants, Verjuice; or by mixing some of them with Ordinary Drink, and
especially the Spirit of Salt, or Nitre dulcifi'd, etc.

26. Those things that diminish and temper the over-acid Juice of the Pancreas,
may be required from Chap. 2. Sect. 17, etc. of this Book.

27. I have found hitherto, that when it is too tart, it is Corrected with
Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, and any other Volatile Salt, especially if Oily, before
any other things, often used at any time in Wine, or any other convenient
Liquor.

28. The same being Corrected and Tempered, is Evacuated commodiously with
Hydragogues, of which we have spoken Chap. 7. Sect. 53, etc.

29. Several things do amend viscous Phlegm, of which we have spoken Chap. 2.
Sect. 28, etc.

30. Phlegmagogues educe the same, which we have noted there, Sect. 29, 33, etc.

31. The Physician sooner forbids, than the Sick shuns the External Causes; and
is to be admonisht of the Physician, that he blame not him afterward for the
continuance of the Disease.

32. Those Non-natural Things not naturally enough occurring, which cannot be
shunned wholly, ought to be Corrected as much as can be, Food especially by
convenient Sauces, and such as do amend its Hurt, often mentioned here and
elsewhere.

33. The Air, if it be hot, should be tempered with clean Water, cooling
Plants, so called, or their Decoctions, Vinegar, and suchlike; if moist and
cloudy, it should be Corrected with a clear Fire, and Aromatic Plants.

34. Let Watches be moderate, according to every one's Constitution.

35. So let the Motion of the Body be mean.

36. Let the Mind be free from all grievous Passions, at least let it be freed
from it, as much as can be; which is never obtained by Medicines, always by the
power and weight of Reasons whencesoever drawn; for which therefore, a prudent
and skilful Physician is no less used than a Divine, a Counselor of Law, or an
Orator, as the Instruments not only useful, but even necessary to restore the
lost Health of Man.

37. The Body, as much as can conveniently be, should be kept or made Lax, both
by Food agreeing most to every one's peculiar Constitution, and also sometimes
by Medicines that are called Looseners, Prunes, Currants, Creme of Tartar, the
solutive Sirup of Roses, and such like.

38. The Body also may be kept open, both by soliciting it by a Suppositorie of
boild Honey, and Sea Salt, or Salt-Gem, or of a piece of Roch-Alume, being out
into a long piece, and anointed with some Oil; also by an Emollient Clyster
given, which more-over discusses Wind; The form whereof let this or such like
be.

. Marsh-mallow Root ii. Mallow-Leaves, Melilot-Tops, of each M. i. Boil them in
Barley-Water, strain viii. in which dissolve the Catholic-Electuary, or
solutive Diaprunus, or Laxative Benedictus i. Oil of Roses, or of white Lilies
ss. M. for a Clyster, to be given at any time, and kept in the Body half an
hour or thereabout.

CHAP. XII. Of the Propulsion and Expulsion through the Guts, of what is
contained in them depraved, and in particular of a Costive-Body.
1. BOth Food prepared in the Stomach, and Spittle continually swallowed down,
and hence carried through the Stomach to the Guts, and Choler out of its Bag by
its passage into the Gut, and the Juice of the Pancreas through its proper
Passage, hasting to the Gut, and the Mixture made of all these, are to be
driven forward yet through the long Fistula of the Guts, till the useful Parts
being sent all over through the Lacteal Vessels to nourish each Body, the
unuseful Parts, known by the name of Excrements, are at length Expelled and
Voided by Stool.

2. This Propulsion and Expulsion of the various things contained in the Guts,
as well according to as against Nature, is depraved many ways; whilst 1. it
happens too slowly or sparingly; or, 2. when it is too quick, often, or
plentiful; or, 3. when it is finished with Pain or Vexings; or, 4. done an
unusual way.

3. It haps too slowly or sparingly, when the Body is more or less Costive.

4. It happens too quickly, often, or plentifully in any Looseness.

5. It is done with Pain in Gripes of the Belly, the Colie, Dysenterie,
Tenesinus, etc.

6. It is performed by an unusual way in the Disease Cholera, Ileos, and other
Vomitings caused by the Guts, as also in Wounds and Ulcers piercing through the
Tunicles of the Guts.

7. We reduce as well an over-slow Propulsion of what is contained, as the too
seldom and sparing Expulsion thereof through the Fundament, to an over-costive
Body, of which we intend to speak in this Chapter.

8. The Propulsion of what is contained, proceeds too sl^wly, and hence is
their Expulsion through the Guts too seldom, when the Excrements are voided in
the second, third, or fourth day, or slower, which should be daily at least
once.

9. Which falls out, because what is contained and driven forward, is too
viscous, or too much hardened or dried.

10. The things contained, owe their viscousness t^ the Non natural Things
mentioned in the former Chapter.

11. But their hardness, both to suchlike Food, Bone-like, and Gr^slish, and
also too tart Wind, yielding a firmer Consistency to what is contained.

12. They have their dryness because of Chyle over-plentifully made, and
sometimes by reason of too little Drink used with much Bread.

13. The Excrements move too sparingly, because some part of them is separated
and driven forward into the Lacteal Veins, together with Chyle, of which fault
we spoke in Chap. 10. or they are excluded by another and undecent way, as well
in a Vomiting preternatural, having its rise from the Guts, as in a W und or
notable Ulcer of the Guts.

14. The most things that conduce to cure this Disease are proposed before,
especially such things as agree to ^^^^nd the vis^^usn^ss of Humors and Vapors.

15. Besides a Clyster of warm Cows Milk, and a little Honey, given and
retained for some space conduces much to soften the hard Excrements, and to
dissolve those that are too viscous; for so the Excrements that are softened,
are not only carried out, but Wind also is invited to an easy Outlet, or at
least disposed to cease.

16. The Clyster also prescribed in the former Chapter, may be given to loosen
the Body; or a convenient Suppositorie given, as we have noted there of Alume,
which I prefer before all others.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Looseness.
1. AS often as the Propulsion of what is contained in the Guts, and their
Expulsion happens quicker, and especially oft'ner, or more plentifully than is
wont and ought, so often one is said to be troubled with a Looseness.

2. A Looseness is distinguished into diverse sorts, and specially by reason of
the different thing voided. For, 1. sometimes Food it self is voided, Meat and
Drink, crude, and unchanged, and as they were, if not when taken in at the
Mouth, then as swallowed down the Gullet, in the Disease called Lienteria.

3. 2. Sometimes the same Food is sent out, fermented and duly changed in the
Stomach, but not Separated in the Guts into Chyle, and Excrements, but are
Pultis-like and whitish, such as those that have the Jaundice do often void;
whence I may say, and not foolishly, that this Looseness may be called, a
Looseness belonging to the Jaundice, to wit, one kind of the Disease called
Caeliaca.

4. 3. Sometimes Food both fermented, and severed into Chyle and Excrements,
though as yet confused together are voided, in the other kind of the Disease
Caeliaca; which, for distinction-sake, we name the Chyle-like Looseness.

5. 4. Sometimes not the Food only, but watrish and choleric Humors are often or
plentifully voided in a Diarrhea or Choleric Leosness thence called.

6. 5. Sometimes Phlegmatic Humors, thick and viscous are frequently and
plentifully voided in a Phlegmatic Diarrhea thence called; other-times small
and serous, milder or sharper in the Serous Looseness thence called.

7. 6. Sometimes fat and oily Excrements are voided, in the fat or unctious
Looseness thence to be named.

8. 7. Sometimes more pure Blood is voided in a Bloody Purging, to which I think
I may refer the Plux of the Haemorrhoids; other-times a Liquor like the washing
of Flesh, in the Flux called of the Liver.

9. 8. Sometimes Matter and Purulent, or corrupted Stuff is voided, in any
Purulent Dejection, so called, familiar to a Dysenterie; to which a Tenesmus
seems partly to be referred, and partly to a Phlegmatic Dejection; seeing that
it is a perpetual endeavor to sit down, and void with a little both frothy and
purulent voided.

10. Because in the Lienterie Food is usually voided both unchanged; and a
little after it is taken in, it is apparent it comes by the Fault of the
Stomach presently rising up to expel what was received in; concerning which
Disease, its Causes and Cure, we have spoken before in Chap. 6.

11. Seeing that in the Jaundice-like Flux the Food is voided enough Fermented,
it is manifest that it proceeds from the defect of the Separation of Chyle, and
Excrements, by reason of either the Absence or Sluggishness of Choler; of which
we have spoken in Chap. 10.

12. Seeing that in the Chyle-like Flux, Chyle comes come or less with the
Excrements, the Fermentation of Food, and Separation of Useful and Unuseful
Parts being entire, the straining of Chyle through the Spongie Crust of the
Guts into the Lacteal Veins will be Hurt; of which hereafter in Chap. 16.

13. Seeing that in a Choleric Diarrhea, Choleric and Watery Humors, or Serous,
are effus'd, then that Choler upon the account of its Salt is too sharp and
fluid, and the Phlegm of Spittle, or Juice of the Pancreas, is too watery and
also fluid, is manifest as well by what is voided, as by Thirst accompanying.

14. A Phlegmatic Diarrhea is caused primarily by Viscous Food, and such as do
breed much Viscous Phlegm; and secondarily, by the cold and sharp Air, both
increasing and coagulating Phlegm in the Blood, and also Separating it in the
Brain, or Glandules of the Brain against Nature; whence arise Phlegmatic
Catarrhs, by which sliding down to the Jaws, and swallowed down, this Diarrhaea
is often bred.

15. Also much Sleep, a drowsy resting of Body, dall Wit, rainy, or else moist
Air, etc. helps much to heap up Phlegm in the Body.

16. A Serous Diarrhaea arises most frequently from the Juice of the Pancreas
Serous, and also suchlike Spittle, seldom from watery and serous Humors,
distilling and swallowed down from the Brain toward the Jaws.

17. The Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle, become more watery and mild,
according to the plenty of watery Drink taken in; after that moist Air coming;
or the Excretion of Urine, or a wonted Sweat failing.

18. The same are serous and sharp, or saltish, by the use of both watery and
salted Food, whereby they are not only over-thin and fluid, but over-sharp
also, and Saltish.

19. Phlegm both viscous and watery, or Serous, is separated beside Nature in
the Brain, or its Glandules, perhaps always the Heat of the Universal Body,
and Head especially preceding whencesoever, and a Phlegmatic Humor carried
plentifully to the Brain, being then in the Body or Blood, and presently the
coldness of Air following, and piercing through the most open Pores with a
subtle Air, coagulating the aforesaid Humor in diverse parts of the Brain;
whence whether an Obstruction happen in the Lymphatic Vessels, and the breaking
thereof after too much distension, and hence an Effusion of what is contained;
or a Phlegmatic Humor depart otherwise from the Blood, at least it uses to run
under the name of a Catarrh, sometimes in the Nostrils, othertimes on the Jaws,
and thence either into the rough Artery, or into the Gullet; by which being
carried into the Ventricle and Guts, it seems to afford Matter to this Serous
Diarrhaea.

20. A fat and oily, or unctuous Looseness almost follows the use or abuse of
too fat Food.

21. A bloody Flux always rises from some Vessel of a Vein or Artery in the
small or thick Gut, seldom in the Stomach, or any other part unnaturally burst,
cut, or opened any other way, and sending the contained Blood to the Guts.

22. We intend to speak in its proper place of the manifold opening of any
Vessels, their various Causes, and diverse Cure.

23. The Flux of the Hemorrhoids, not very familiar to certain Sick People, is
either Critical, which uses to ease them; or Symptomatical, much weakening the
Sick.

24. The Flux of the Liver, if ever seen by others, not by me, as I know, is to
be deduced from much serous Matter mixed with the Blood, and also relaxing the
Vessels.

25. The Blood becoms serous by too much use of watery Drink, Water, Beer, etc.
and also of Spirit of Wine it self, whereby at length the firmness of all Parts
is weakened, and the Tone almost gone.

25. Seeing that both Matter and Slime rises from the corruption of the Blood,
and that after an Inflammation in an Aposteme, or an Ulcer either deep or
superficiarie, or an Exulceration whence soever arising; such a thing ought to
have place, as often as the Dejection is observed Purulent or Slimy. But of
these Diseases we intend to speak anon.

27. A Tenesmus consisting of a Mucous and Purulent Dejection, owns a
Phlegmatie, viscous, and also a sharp acid Humor adjoining about the Siege, and
there stirring up a troublesome Vleer by fretting.

28. A Choleric Diarrhaea may be Cured; 1. By correcting the saltish Acrimonie
of Choler by Medicines, in Chap. 1. Sect. 11, etc. And they are to be selected,
(because of its fluidity also increased) which have a mild Tartness, Quinces,
Apples or Pears, according to the Palate of the Sick, prepared either in the
form of a Syrup, or Miva, or Preserve, or any other form. To these belong
Pomegranats, Barb^rries, unripe Grapes, or Verjuice, Plantane, Purslan, etc.
Boles and fat Earths, and all that are sealed.

29. 2. By correcting the over-watriness of the Phlegm of Spittle, or the Juice
of the Pancreas, both by solid and no-wise watery Food, and also by Medicines
imbibing or evacuating the same.

30. Chalk, Hartshorn, or any other burnt Bone, and reduced to Powder by it
self, before many other things do imbibe watery moisture, used in a small
quantity, etc.

31. Hydragogues empty this watery Moisture by Stool; and Sudorifics and
Diuretics by Sweat or Urine, among which I much commend Decoctions made of the
Roots of China, Sarsaparilla, Butterbur, Contrayerva, etc. the Woods Gujacum,
Sassafras, Juniper, Oak, Box, etc.

32. Toasted Rhubarb satisfies to many Indications, and given to i. or
there-about, seeing that it does not only evacuate Water here abounding
together with Choler, but soon corrects the over-loose Body by its mild
tartness.

33. After Choler is corrected, and also too much abounding is gently purged
together with watery Serous Liquor, Diascordium, Treacle, Confection of Jaciuth,
and suchlike may be used, whereby Choler may be reduced to its natural Temper,
and the Guts weakened by frequent Dejection, may be recreated and strengthened.

34. For the sake of Students we will add these following Forms.

Rhubarb tosted ii. Nutmegs ss. M. for a Powder.

Which the Sick may take in the morning in a spoonful of Wine or Broth.

35. When the Blood also abounds with much Serous Liquor.

. Rhubarb tosted, Jalapp-Root, of each i. acute Cinnamon 6 Gr. M. for a Powder,
or with as much Conserve of Damask-Roses as suffices. Make it a Bole to be
taken in the Morning.

36. After such an Evacuation, let the Sick use about the Evening by times, one
spoonful of this following Mixture, which

. Diascordium i. ss. Confection of Jacinth i. Sir. of Myrtle i. Cinamon-Water
ss. Plantane-Water ii. ss. M.

37. As often as all the Blood abounds with serous Liquor, than will the
following, or such a-like Decoction be convenient to educe and diminish it by
Urine or Sweat.

. Smallage, Butter-bur Root, of each i. the shavings of Juniper-Wood,
Millet-Seeds, of each iii. Boil them according to Art in clean Water, in xxx.
Of what is strained, dissolve Sir. of the five Opening Roots iv. Sp. of Salt
dulcifi'd i. M.

Let the Sick take a Draught twice or thrice a day, if he loath it not, warmed,
and especially betimes in the Morning in Bed, whence a Sweat will easilier come
forth; but if not, Urine will come more plentiful, and so the serous Liquor of
Blood will be consumed by little and little, and all the Humors will be more
pure and better.

38. In the Cure of a Phlegmatic Diarrhaea, the vicious Diet is not only to be
changed into laudable and somewhat contrary; but also over-viscous Phlegm is to
be corrected by Medicines proposed in Chap. 2. And after that by Sweats and
Diuretics beforementioned and described, or suchlike, to be expelled out by
the Pores of the Skin or the Bladder, and to be turned in part from the Stomach
and Guts.

39. A serous Diarrhaea may be Cured, by abstaining from farther drinking too
much of watery Liquors; and by taking those things which imbibe Waters,
Hartshorn burnt, Chalk, etc. or by Sweats, or Urine expel the aforesaid things.

40. If nothing else hinder, an Hydragogue may sometimes be taken to empty a
great part of Serous Liquor redounding by Stool.

41. As often as in a serous Diarrhaea, whencesoever arising, the serous Liquor
is Salt and fretting, so often it is to be corrected with Pills of
Hounds-Tongue, of Styrax, or suchlike.

42. As often as a serous Diarrhaea arises from a preceding stoppage in the
Head, so often Medicines must be used to the Brain, by strengthening and
restoring the Glandules or Kernels always then ill-affected to their wonted
intireness; which is soon, safely, and not unpleasantly done by fuming only of
Amber, often and by degrees received in at open Mouth and the Nostrils; by
which often at once I have cured in the beginning such a Stoppage grievous
enough, that it continued not above a Night. More things may be added to this
Amber, if compositions please better, to wit, to make a show, Mastich,
Frankincense, Belzoin, Styrax, etc. and thence a Powder may be prepared for
fuming, and by degrees strow'd upon Live-Coals, and be received in at the Mouth
and Nostrils, as was already said, the Head being covered with a Cloak, or any
other large Covering, that the less of its Smoke should be wasted.

43. An oily and fat Looseness will cease of its own accord by degrees, if the
use of Fat things whatsoever be abstained from: although those things also may
be used, which drink up or correct overmuch Fatness, Hartshorn burnt, Chalk,
Coral, the Ashes of Carduus Benedictus, of Wormwood, and Broom, or their Lie
made with Wine, or the fixed Salt boiled and made out of those Ashes.

44. A bloody Looseness may be Cured, if it arises from a sharp Humor corroding
the Vessels, by correcting and tempering the sharp Humor, and consolidating the
Vessel fretted.

45. Those things that correct a sharp Humor, and perhaps always Acid, are to
be sought in Chap. 2. but the Mixture which consolidates Corroded Vessels, and
wonderfully hinders all efflux of Blood, is in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. which I
having often experienced with good success, do commend to Younger Physicians.

46. The Flux of the Haemorrhoids, as often as it is with ease to the Sick, and
is Critical, is so long to be observed and not stopped; But where it is too much,
and Symptomatical, and weakens the Sick, is then to be hindered slowly by the
former Mixture, or such another Medicin.

47. If much serous Liquor can so dilute the Blood, as to carry some part of it
together to the Guts, out of the Vessels relaxed by it, and produce a Flux like
the washing of Flesh, commonly called that of the Liver, it may be Cured both
by Sudorifics and Diuretics, driving forward the serous Liquor out of the Body
another way; and also by strengthening tart things that repair the Hurt of the
Loosned Vessels; of which we have spoken in this Chapter already: And before
all things, bewaring for the future from too much drinking of watery Drinks.

48. The Tone and natural strength of the Parts being defective, by the abuse
of Spirit of Wine, is hardly Restored, and not easily, unless by somewhat tart
spiritous Liquors used with an exact Diet, scarcely to be expected again of
Drunkards, such as (among Natural Things) are strong Wines, and somewhat tart,
together with a grateful blackness; (among Artificial Things) more prepared of
Spiritous Wine and Quinces, or Pomegranats, or Myrtle-Berries, or suchlike
others.

49. A purulent or slimy Looseness may be Cured, by curing the Aposteme or Ulcer
whatsoever, wherever it be, if it cause it.

50. Beside those things which we intend hereafter to speak in general of an
Inflammation, and Aposteme following it, and an Ulcer, we intend to write a few
things here, which conduce in special against the Diseases in the Guts.

51. When therefore there is an Ulcer in the Thick Guts, and Clysters can come
to the place Diseased, then I much commend this following, which should be kept
very long in the Body, and a new one, if the Matter require, should be often
injected.

. New Cows Milk, and if you please, first steal'd viii. Venice-Turpintine,
dissolved in the Yolk of an Egg ss. Honey of Roses i. M. for a Clyster.

By such a Clyster given, and only one, about the beginning, and so betimes, I
have often Cured a Dysenterie joined with a voiding of Matter.

52. When the Ulcer is in the Small Guts, this following Vulnerary Decoction
will conduce, if some ounces be often taken in a day.

. Sarracens Comfrey-Root ss. the Leaves of Pyrole, Ladies Mantle, of each M. i.
Ground-Ivie M. ii. Male Sanicle, Tops of St. John' s Wort, of each M. ss.
shavings of Hartshorn iii. Boil them according to Art in Smiths-water, in xxv.
Of what is strained, dissolve the Sir. of Marshmallows, of Oak of Jerusalem,
of each i. ss. Tincture of Cinnamon extracted with Spirit of Wine rectified ss.
M.

53. The following Mixture will be useful in the same Case, often taken by
Spoonfuls.

. Plantane-Water ii. Cinamon-Water, Distilled Vinegar, of each ss. Diascordium
ii. Crab's-eyes powdered ss. Diaphoretic Antimonie i. Sir. of Red-Roses i. M.

54. They who like a Conserve better, may use this, or one like it, which

. Conserve of Red-Roses ii. Diascordium ii. Confection of Jacinth i. Hartshorn
burnt and powdered ss. Sir. of Myrtle, what suffices, M. for a Conserve.

Let the Sick take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Conserve often in a day.

55. The Balsam of Sulphur, prepared either with Oil of Anise which is more
grateful, or with Oil of Amber which is more potent, taken often in a day to
two or three drops, with the aforesaid Mixture or Decoction, will serve perhaps
before all other things, as well to cleanse the Ulcer, as to consolidate it.

56. In a Dysenterie, where there is much plenty of sharp Humors in the Body;
in the beginning Rhubarb tosted, and a Grain of Laudanum given will conduce;
and if need require iterate it. Also Treacle, or Diascordium may be added, when
any abhor by prejudice, or fear their Sick in using Laudanum, so often a
commended Medicin by us for its praiseworthy Effects.

57. Nor will it be unseasonable to take the Clyster prepared with Cows Milk,
and other things the same day wherein Rhubarb was taken, by the help whereof
both the Ulcer will be cleans'd, and Gripes asswag'd, and the consolidation of
the part Ulcerated promoted.

58. A Tenesmus in the Fundament may be Cured, especially by applying, and
injecting into the Fundament Medicines which Correct both the sowrish-sharp and
viscous Humor, and thereby cleansing the Ulcer, and lastly consolidating it: To
which end there is scarce a Remedy equal to Balsam of Sulphur, if rightly
prepared with the oily Spirit of Venice Turpintine, or the Oil of Amber, or
Anise, and applied to the Fundament by it self alone, or mixed with other things.

CHAP. XIV. Of various Pains of the Guts.
1. ALthough we intend to Treat of Pains in general in the Second Book among
the Depravations of Animal Functions, yet could we not omit the particular
mentioning of them here, because the Guts before all the other containing parts
of Man's body are usually afflicted, not only with the most heinous, but
perhaps with Pains of all Kinds, so that no otherwhere can all their Kinds be
more opportunely observed, and therefore explained than here.

2. All these Pains are Distinguished. 1. By the Guts affected, whilst one
while the Small, otherwhiles the Thick Guts are grieved. 2. By the Manner
whereby various Pains afflict and affect the Sick; for sometimes it comes with
the Sense of Heat, othertimes of Coldness; again, the Pains are fixed in the
same place, and, as it were, piercing through the part affected, anon they
wander, and with a kind of Tearing, prick between whiles for the most part,
whether they then affect the same part over and over, or go to others; again
they distend and expand the Guts alone, or the Abdomen also; at other-times
they vex the Sick with the molesting Sense of Rending, Contorting, Contusion,
Heaviness, Pulsation, or in some other manner.

3. As often as the upper part of the Small Gut nearest the Stomach laid over
the right Region of the Loins, and under the Mesenterie is Pained, it is named a
Pain in the Loins from the place affected.

4. The Sick use commonly to endure all kinds of Pains, one while burning with
a great Heat, another time Chill with a grievous Coldness; again fixed, and as
it were, boring the Loins, or moreover pricking with wandering Thrust: repeting;
anon distending or beating the Loins, or only pressing them with the Sense of
Weight, or Burning, Corroding, Tearing, or troublesome either with a continual
or interrupted Pulsation, and afterward again returning, or wonderfully
writhing and contorting any other way, scarce to be explained by the Sick, or
by Physicians.

5. The part of the small Gut next to this, and in the left Hypochondrium,
rising out and up more freely from the Loins and Mesenterie, is afflicted often
with Rendings and Distensions, with a notable and sometimes permanent hardness;
although then commonly, though wrongfully, that Evil and Pain is attributed to
the Spleen; and the same Opinion is even now held by certain Physicians blinded
with inveterate or malign prejudice obstinately without any solid Reason,
against daily and manifest Experience, taken from the manifold dissections of
diverse Bodies. I desire not in any wise to note the Physicians that judge and
say the same in Conscience, though never so erring, but the obstinate and
malicious only.

6. If the name of that Pain should be imposed upon me by any void of
prejudice, I would call it Hypochondriacal from the place affected, adding the
name of the urging kind, and surnaming it either Tearing or Distending, and so
forward.

7. The Pain which siezes on the rest of the small Gut, is wont to be named
Iliac from the Gut called Ileum, which is also observed various.

8. In the latter part of the Thick Gut, known by the name of the Right Gut,
there is very often stirred up an hot and pulsing Pain, and also sometimes
tearing in the blind Hemorrhoids, so called, inflamed; as in the Tenesmus a
corroding pain perpetually provoking to Siege; of which in the former Chapter:
sometimes very troublesome gnawing, with more or less itching.

9. In all the other part of the Thick Gut, called Colon, whatsoever Pain is
raised, it is called the Colic.

10. The Iliac Passion and the Colic are distinguished from one another, chiesly
by the situation of either Gut.

11. For the Gut Colon, beginning from the right Groin, rises toward the Liver
about the right Kidney, and is thence for the most part carried crossways to
the left Hypochondrium, under the Gristles of the short Ribs, a great part
whereof it possesses, and presently being writhed to the left Kindney, and the
left Groin, where being writhed in the mannner of an S, it is rolled down to
the Os Sacrum, that it may go and end in the Right Gut: Whence the Pain rising
in the circuit and circumference of the Belly newly described, is truly to be
called Colical; although some only vouchsafe it the name, which vexes and
molests the upper and forepart of the Belly like a Girdle, being ignorant and
unmindful, how often the Colon is rolled to the Navil, and sometimes to the
Bladder, with a remarkable winding through the middle of the Belly

12. But the small Gut gives back more and more from the Center of the
M^senterie (under which we said it lay hid in the Region of the Loins) where
appearing again in the left Hyp^ch^ndre, although j^in'd unto the Mesenterie,
is contorted up and down about the Region of the Navel; and so is ^^ing for the
most part gathered together in the middle of the Boly, sustains there the ^^i^e
Passion very variously.

13. The Guts are affected in all Pains, either in their Tunicles, or Internal
Membrans, according to their Cavity or in the External Membrans, according to
their Superficies.

14. The Internal Causes of Internal Pains ^^^^icting any Guts, are to be drawn
from what is con^ ^in'd in them, one while r^maining as yet in their. Form yet
^^^sistent, other-times changed fir^^ into Vap^^s and Wind.

15. The External and also Immediate or next Causes of Pains ariling to the
Guts, as a N^^dle Sw^rd, etc. we do not here mind, but only those which b ing
admitted into the Body* may and ought to be es^^mned Internal, in as much as
they mix themselves with things contained therein and together with them for
the most part being more or l^^s corrupt, br^^d Pains and other things.

16. That we may assign to every kind their Causes (...) Pains, We judge, 1.
that a Burning Pain for the most part rises from Choler too fat, powerfully and
vitiously raising an Effervescency with the Juice of the Pancreas too Acid; as
it is known that Spirit of Vitriol poured to Oil of Turpentine, raises an
Effervescency joined with a notable Heat and Burning.

17. Sometimes we judge this same burning Pain is produced by the Blood, either
standing still in the Capillary Vessels of the Guts, or by the same burst after
a great distension, Blood being Essus'd, and breeding an Instammation, there
happening a manifest pulsation about the part affected; by reason of which it
is distinguished from the former kind.

18. 2. We take it that a Chill Pain, troublesome with grievous Coldness, takes
its Original from the Juice of the Pancreas very acid and sharp, raising an
Efferv^scency with Ch^ler less fat or little, or also overwhelmed with
Phlegmatic Humors, as we observe that Spirit of Vitriol mixed with any Volatile
Salt, but not oily, raises an Effervescency coupled with a notable chilness and
coldness only sensible.

19. That the Operation of the Acid Spirit in pr^ducing Cold, is much promoted
by Phlegm, Experience the Mistress both of Learned and Unskilful People
reach^th.

20. ^^ea^ depending of the aforesaid vicious Effervescency, is chiefly and
commonly only felt in the Region of the L^ins, where there is a conflux of
Choler, and the Ju^ce of the Pancreas; and coldness commonly urges only in a
place remote from thence, chiefly; to wit, when the upper part of the Gut is
stopped with much viscous Phlegm; which defends the part that it touches, against
the feeling of troublesome coldness, but does not break or hinder the action of
the Joice of the Pancreas of it self breeding c^ldn^ss, although it enervats
and blunts the oiliness and Acrimonie of Choler, to which Heat is indebted as
to its Primary Cause, as often as this Phlegm meets Choler in its Outlet
plentifully or viscously.

21. As therefore the small Gut is more or less stopped with plentiful or viscous
Phlegm, so Heat or C^ld that rises from their vicious Effervescency is felt in
a place more remote, or nearer the Conflux of the aforesaid Humors, Choler, and
the Juice of the Pancreas.

22. 3. The Pain that does, as it were, Bare and is Fixed, I ascribe to the
Juice of the Pancreas, mixed with much sharp and viscous Phlegm, then known by
the name of Vitreous or Glassie Phlegm: And farther, I assign its Boring to an
Acid Acrimony, and its Fixtness to viscousness accompanying.

23. 4. Where the Juice of the Pancreas has not only a very sharp Acidity, but
also Harshness, then there is a wonderful s^^se of Contortion in the part
affected, such as often urges and writhes in the Colic.

24. 5. A Pain with the sense of Weight, is w^nt to be raised by plentiful and
viscous Phlegm peccant before other Humors.

25. 6. From the same Phlegm, viscous and rar^^i^^ into Wind, distending the
Guts alone or also the Belly, arises a Di^tending Pain.

26. From this same Wind arises a Tympanie one while remaining and shut up in
the C^vity of the Guts, at another time piercing o^t (...) them into the Cavity
of the Belly, and there expanding the Inner s^im of the Belly.

27. The material cause of Wind is visous Phlegm, but the Effici^nt Choler
peccant both in its saltish A^immie, and its volatile oiliness: which an^
Aroma^e Oils do prove prepared especially of Se^ds; a s^w drops thereof being
taken, resolvs viscous Phlegm that is in the Stomach or Guts into Wind, and
farther discusses the same.

28. 7. The charp Vapors stirred up by the over-Acid Juice of the Pancrea^
overruling in its vicious Eff^rvescency with Choler pricking the Guts here and
there, do produce Griping and Wandering Pains therein.

29. 8. From Ch^ler peccant in its saltish Acrimonie, and consti^^ting with the
Juice of the Pancreas a Salt corroding Humor, I dare say, the Pain obscurely
burning* and corroding is bred, which a Snuffling in the Head con^^ms, wherein
a sowrly salt Humor distilling from the Brain by the Nostrils, uses to make the
(...) corroding Pain.

30. From the same Choler too sharp, constituting a Salt Humor, and at length
carried down to the Fundament, and Itching Pain is raised, very troublesome to
many sick People; such as Worms there, called Ascarides* sometimes sticking in
the Seige do produce.

31. 9. A Beating Pain seems to me to arise from much Phlegm joined to a little
Acid Juice.

32. 10. A Fain Tearing and Corroding the affected P^^^ without Heat, is caused
by a more pure Sour Juice, neither tempered nor broken by Choler or Phlegm.

33. As the now mentioned Causes are more pure and ^^litarty, or joined to
others variously, and more (...) by them, so th^^ breed some diver^^^ (...)
ab^ve s^id Pains, scarce expl^nable with (...).

34. 1. (...) ^lain may be Cured, by temper^^ (...) with ^^i^s, and chiefy
Spirit ^f (...) and Spiri^^us, and more^^^ (...) ^^e^^i^lly Opia^s, using them
in a various Form. For example let these following Forms be.

Succorie, Sorrel-water, of each iii. Sir. of Diacodium, or White-Poppies i.
Sp. of Nitre 8 drops. M.

Let the Sick take this Mixture at three or four times after some hours space.

35. If any like an Emulsion better, let them use the following or one like it.

Barley cleans'd and boiled till it crack i. ss. White Poppy-Seeds iii.
Cucumer, M^lon-Seeds, of each ii. With the Decoction of the same Barley. Make
an Emulsion of xv. adding Ju^^p of Roses i. M.

You may add ss. of Lapis Pruncl^ae; and let t^^-Sick use two or three ounces
of this by spaces.

36. Where Pain is more urgent, or yields not to these mild ones, prepare the
following Mixture.

Fumitorie-Water ii. Fenel or Cin^mon-Water ss. distilled Vinegar vi. Sp. of
Nitre 6 drop^* Laudanum 3 Gr. simple Sir. of Vi^^^^^, i. (...). M.

Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture, till both the Heat and
Pain be diminished, or Sleep by degrees come on.

37. If Choler be also observed to be peccant in Plenty, nothing hinders but
that it may be ^du^'d with a mild Purge, to which end the following ^^^^serve
very grateful, and also altering may ^vi^^l.

Pulp of Tamarinds ii. C^n^^r^^ (...) x. Elecluarie of the Juice of (...) i.
Salt of Tartar vitriolated i. M. (...) C^ns^^^.

Let the Sick take the quantity (...) a N^^^^g, or some more, for the dive^le
constitution of the Sick, ^ither at bedtime, and hour ^^ter a moderate Supp^r,
or in the morning fasting. It may also be dissolved in a convenient Liquor, and
used in the form of a Draught. Our Cholagogue Electuarie also described in
Chap. 2. Sect. 46. as is there taught, may be used.

38. We intend largely to prosecute the Generation and Cure of an Inslammation
in Chap. 40.

39. 2. A Pain Chill and urging with troublesome c^lda^ss, may b^ Cured, by
tempering the over-sharp A^i lity of the Juice of the Pancreas, with a Lixivial
Salt as well fi^t as volatile, and so with a volatile Spirit it self, as also
oily and w^try Liquors: Which if m^re were mixed, they would perform more.

40. Therefore any Aromatical Spirit of Wine may conduce, as having a volatile
and oily Salt; moreover any Treacle-water prepared with Spirit of Wine, as
receiving much power from Opium of tempering the vi^ious Juice. Hither may
Coral, Pearl, Crabs-Ey^s, Diaphocetic An^im^tie, etc. be reduced. All which
will perform more, if the Body be composed to sw^^t; and more yet, if an actual
Sweat be mildly ^h^ven forward.

41. To this end the following Form may be pres^^^^^d.

^^^el, simple Treacle-water, of each ss. Salt of Wormwood i. Crab's-eyes ss.
Sir. (...) Carduus Ben^dic^us ss. M. for a Draught, to be taken at once.

To which, it pain urge much, may be added ^^^^^^um i Cr. and when it is taken,
let the Sick either fit by the Fire, or let him be fitly covered in B^d waiting
for a Sweat.

42. If to Sweat be troublesome, let him often take a spoonful of the following
Mixture, till as well Pain as Coldness do remit or cease.

Mint-water ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or Tincture of Cinnamon ss. Laudanum
ii. Gr. Oil of Cloves 3 drops. Sir. of the five Roots i. M.

43. Among emptying Medicines, none are proper here while Pain molests, unless
Sudorifies already commended, or Diureties; and to abstain from Vomits, unless
vomiting come of its own accord and easy enough, and then always add these
things which temper sowrness, as fat Broths and suchlike. Neither are Purgers
to be given, unless first the Acid Humor be tempered, or Choler and much Phlegm
also concur, but not very viscous.

44. The Medicines which then conduce, are partly noted above, Chap. 7. Sect.
54, 55.

45.3. A Boaring and Fixed Pain may be Cured, by correcting and tempering both
the Acid Acrimonie of the Juice of the Pancreas, and also the viscousness of
Phlegm accompanying; which is chiefly performed by Aromatic Gums, Galbanum,
Sagapen, Bdellium, Ammoniac, Opoponax, Mastich, Myrrh, etc. as also by any
volatile Salt, and chiefly oily. Yea, how much the more any thing abounds with
Volatile Salt, Oily, so much the more potently and effectually will it correct
glassy Phlegm, so called, the worst Humor. Whence the Oil of Hartshorn is no
less potent than ungrateful Remedy in this Discase.

46. Also the Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil ^f Anise, Amber, or Juniper, or
any other Aromatic Oil, may be convenient in vanquishing this r^b^ll^ as and
redoubled Humor.

47. In finishing this Work also, any Aromatic. Sp. of Wine, more or less
compounded, ad^ing, if (...) please, an Aromatic Oil, and s^mtimes Opium it
(...), ^r Laudanum, and others will condace.

48. The following Mixture taken often by spoonful^ will much profit.

. Mi^t, F^n^l water, of each i. Scurvygrass-W^ter. Aqu^ Vitae of Matthiolus, or
any Aromati^ Sp. ^f each ss. distill^d Oil of Mace 4 drops, Laudanum 3 Gr. Sir.
of Fenel i. M.

49. If the form of a D^^^c^i^n please any better, the f^ll^wing may be
prepared, and three or more ounces taken som^^mes in a day.

The Bark of Lovage Root ii. of the Wood Gua^^^um ss. The shavings of the same
Wood iii. of Sassafras i. B^y-berries ss. the Seeds of M^^^^ane Sil^r, of sweet
Fenel, of each iii. ^^il them according to Art in clean Water, in XL Of what is
strained* diss^lve Sir. of Biza^^ium iv. Sp, of W^ne rec^^^^ d; i. M.

I^ any will have ^^is D^coction also to Purge mildly the H^m^r first corrceted
in part, bo^l in it the Pulp of ^^^^^^is i.

50. ^^^se following Pills will be useful to correct more, and mil^ly ^^^ce the
some glassy Phlegm in p^^^corrected.

(...) G^th ^^um prepared with Vinegar of Squills ii. V^^^^ ^f Mars ^^l^in'd
white, slowly in a (...) ^^i^^k, ^f ^ach i. best Ca^^^^ Red My^th, of ^ach 15
Gr. Oriental Saf^^^ (...) Tr^ches Alh^^dal i. Rosin of Ja^^p* ^f S^^mm ^y of
each i. Oil of the Rind (...). M. t^ (...) (...). Pills, to be gui^d^^ (...)
^^^dred ^^r with ^^ouder of Lico^ish.

(...) Sick take (...) or more of these Pills after Supper at B^d-time, or ^v^,
or so many as may be co^veni^nt in the Mo^^ing ^asting, that the vicious H^mors
may be expell^d slowly and kindly.

51. 4. Pain j^in'd with the sense of Contorsion, and rising from the tartness
of the Juice of the Pancreas coupled together with its Acidi^y, may be cured by
often taking the Sp. of Salt Ammoniac, as an approved Remedy by frequent use in
correcting Sowrness to 3, 4. or more drops, in Wine, or rather in a convenient
Mixture, often prescribed in this Book.

52. H^re also the Tincture of Castor ma^^ conduce, in like manner using a few
drops of it in Wine, or rather to be added to a Mixture, and so take it by
Spoonfuls: For Example,

Penyroyal-Water ii. Fenel Water i. Tincture of Castor iii. Laudanum 2 Gr. Sir.
of Mint vi. M.

53. 5. Troublesome Pain with a sense of Weight rising from plentiful and
viscous Phlegm, may be Cured by Medicius both correcting and cutting it, and
gradually emptying it, mentioned in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, etc.

54. 6. A Distending Pain, stirred up by Wind, may be cured, both by correcting
viscous Phlegm, and over-sharp Choler; and also mildly and succellively by
emptying both peccant in plenty; and also by discussing Wind, or hindering and
stopping their Increase.

55. Beside these things which are all over in this and other form^r Chapters
mentioned to correct and educe both Humors peccant, here we will subjoin
certain external things commodiously to be used in this Disease.

56. Therefore to diss^lve vis^^^s Phlegm, and to discuss Wind then ^^^riling,
the Ointment Martiatum, and (...) comp^ua^^^ ^f Marsh-mal^ws, etc. adding Oil
of Cham^^il^, white Li^^^s, B^ys, etc. will fitly cond^^e, if the Be^^y, and
^^pecially us upper part ^^anointed therewith. For Exampl;

The Compound Vngu^nt of Marsh-malows, or Martiatum, Oil of White-Lilies, of
each ss. Oil of Bricks i. M. for an Ointment.

If all the Belly of Infants were anointed for a time when they go to bed, it
is wonderful how happily Phlegm contained in their Belly will be dissolved, and
Wind bred from thence, distending all the Belly will be discussed, and the
leanness of the Universal Body, as also for the most part too great looseness
following, may by little and little be Cured, as I have experienced it very
many times.

57. Twenty years since I prescribed the following Unguent and Plaster to be
applied to the upper Region of the Belly of a Man at Amsterdam (about fifty
years old that had a great, unequal and hard Tumor in the left Hypochondrium,
the bigness of an Arm, reaching forward toward the right side according to the
most frequent situation of the ^olon, ascribed to the Spleen by other
Physicians, together with other Symptoms of the Hypochordriac Disease beside
Pills made of Gums, often described in this Book: By the help whereof the same
Tumor was softened, and the most part of it taken away.

The Compound Unguent of Marsh-malows, or Martiatum, Oil of Capers, of each i.
Oil of Bricks ii. M.

58. The Plaster which the same Man used succesfully, because I have found it
often effectual in discussing Wind and Tumors thence arising; I here set it
down for younger Physicians sake.

The Plaster of Sylvius discussing Wind.

Gum Galbanum, Bdellium, Ammoniac, of each ss. Male-Frankincense, Red-Myrrh, of
each ii. Opium of Thebes i. Dissolve them in Vinegar ^f Squills; and when they
are again thickened, add Yellow-Wax, Colophonie, of each iii. Natural Balsam,
Oil of Bricks, of each i. Oil of Earth ss. Distilled Oil of Caruas ss.
Venice-Turpentine, what suffices. M. According to Art make it a Plaster.

This Plaster is to be spread upon soft Leather, first formed according to the
greatness and shape of the Tumor to be observed, a Paper being laid upon it and
cut.

59. Volatile oily Salts do potently and also mildly discuss Wind before many
others. In the Use whereof I have observed something worth note, to wit, that
Wind is produced by them, as often as viscous Phlegm sticks in the Ventricle or
Guts, but such Wind as is soon by their force dissipated or breaking forth, or
otherwise ceasing; whence we argue, that the Wind rising from vicious Humors in
the Body, more or less viscous may by degrees be discust and abolisht by the
aforesaid Salts, which Experience also confirms.

60. In the Use of which Oily Salts, this is also notable, that viscous Phlegm
is gradually cut and amended by them; so that whatsoever for the most part,
both Wind, and the Matter thereof required to their Cure, these Oily Salts can
perform it all.

61. To correct the Acrimonie of Choler always more or less peccant, the Sp. of
Nitre conduces before all other things, which also discusses Wind, at least
makes it cease, hindering its farther rise: Of which, and other things belonging
hither, we have already spoken in Chap. 9. Sect. 26, etc.

62. 7. A Piercing and Wandering Pain rising from acid and sharp Vapors, may be
Cured, by tempering that sharp Acidity with Aromatic Medicines, that have a
volatile oily Salt, and especially with Opiats also added, often here and there
described in this Book; and by expelling mildly out the Humors and Vapors
peccant by Sudorifics, which also temper the same; but seldom using Purges,
unless the vicious Humors be first corrected and tempered. Of all which we have
often treated in this Book.

63. 8. A Corroding and Burning Pain caused by sharp Choler, may be Cured with
Medicines sowrly-tart or harsh, Verjuice, Pomegranate Juice, etc. and also with
several ^ily things, Emulsions especially made of Barley, Sweet-Almonds White
Poppy Seeds, and such like; also with viscous Food* as Seafish, and the
Extreme parts of any living Creature, out of which much Jelie may be drawn, the
Feet, Heads, etc.

64. The same Choler, when it also is peccant in too much quantity, is to be
diminished and carried out by mild and somewhat sour Cholagogues, especially
Tamarinds, Cassia, and such like.

65. The Ascarides causing a corroding Pain in the Fundament, are thence to be
taken out alive or dead, and their farther increase to be hindered.

66. Bitter things joined to sweet things kill these Worms, Suppositories of
Aloes, Wormwood, etc, made with Honey and put up, which promoted both their
removal and exclusion.

67. The Medicines hinder the rise of these Worms, that both correct and expel
any vicious and especially Phlegmatic Humors in the Body often mentioned.

68. 9. A Contusing Pain arising from much Phlegm and little Acida^ss, may be
Cured, by diminishing Phlegm^ by Phlegm igogues often recited; and tempering
s^^rness by spiritous, ^^ly, and saltish things both fixed and vol^^l, often
noted.

69. 10. A Rending and Corroding Pain, without heat, not to be ascribed to a
pure Acidity, not diminished by other things, may be cured by Medicines that
potently concentrate and mitigate sowrness; among which the first is Opium.
Hither may all Aromatics b^ reduced, whether Spiritous or Oily often commended.

70. And now it will not be difficult, from what we have said about the Rise
and Cure of several Pains, to find the true Cause and Manner of Curing of
others, as yet more obscure or complicated, and perhaps not explained here.

CHAP. XV. Of the Vomiting of what is contained in the Guts, and namely of the
Disease Cholera, and Ileos.
1. THat which is contained in the Guts according to Nature, is either driven
forward into the Lacteal Veins, in as much as it is useful to nourish the Body;
or is expelled by Stool, in as much as it is unuseful to nourish it: But
against Nature the same is either too much excluded b^ Stool with the Humors
flowing together in a looseness thence called, of which we spoke in Chap. 13. or
in the contracted motion of the Guts inverted, it is repelled upward into the
Ventricle, and thence vomited out in a consistent form, or exhaled or belched
in the form of a Vapor, or Wind; sometimes it is voided either into the Cavity
of the Belly, or out of the Body by Wounds or Vleers of the Guts; of which
elsewhere.

2. Wind therefore breaks out in Belches; and Vapors in Yawning, and the
Hypochondriac Suffocation, wherein oftentimes Wind also is raised; of which we
have in part spoken Chap. 9. there is no Disease comes to my mind in which
Vapors are observed to rise.

3. A Vomiting proceeding from the Guts, differs according to the diversity of
what is voided; for sometimes Food is repelled, being first driven down to the
Guts, other-times Humors carried down to the Guts, and voided either single,
and pure, Choleric, Phlegmatic, Serous; or Bitter, Sour, Harsh, Salt, Sweet,
Insipid, etc. or Yellow, Green, Ceruleous, Black, White, Watery, and Clear, etc.
or variously mixed; one while Excrements, other whiles Blood, or moreover
Matter, or other things rising from the Guts.

4. The primary Cause of all this manifold Vomiting, is the contracted Motion
of the Guts inverted, and drawing, yea compelling the Stomach to a consent
thereto, and like change of motion.

5. This change of Motion begins frequently from the place where the Passage
both of Choler and the Pancreas is inserted; seldom from the Seige; often from
this or that part of the small Gut, troubled with a Gangrene, or any other
grievous Disease.

6. From the place of the Insertion of this double Passage, the motion of the
Guts haps to be inverted, by reason of the potent and violent effervescency of
sharp Humors, then in the Body, or corrupted, or irritated by what is newly
taken in.

7. The sharp Humors that are in the Body, are Choler, and the Juice of the
Pancreas, gone from their natural state, as sometimes also Spittle swallowed,
either Acid or Salt, and carried down to the Guts.

8. The things taken in, that corrupt the aforenam'd Humors, and provoke them
to raise a vicious effervescency, are either Summer-Fruits, Cheries, Plums,
Melons, Peaches, Grapes, etc. also new Wine, or any sharp Medicines, making
either of the mentioned Humors sharper, as also Vomits; or certain Poisons,
Arsenic, Orpiment, etc. whither corrosive sublimed Mercury may, yea, ought to
be referred, seeing that if it be taken pure, uncorrected, though in the least
quantity, it disturbs and corrupts all.

9. As often as Choleric Humors are voided out, as well upward as downward,
with great force and plentifully, together with the troublesome anxieties of the
Midrif accompanying, either of their own accord by Humors before in the Body,
or because of an external error committed in Diet; this Disease is wont to be
called Cholera.

10. In the Hypochondriac Disease, and Suffocation, and the Scurvy it self,
there are sometimes raised, freely Vomitings of various Humors, thinner or
thicker; too Viscous, or Fluid; Bitter, or Acid, or Salt, or Harsh, or Sweet,
or Insipid; Yellow, or Green, or Ceruleous, or Black, or White, or Watery, or
Crystal-like, or of diverse Colors: so that all the differences occurring in
several, or the same Sick People are very difficult to be numbered or reduced
into a certain order.

11. Sometimes Blood also is by force poured out by Vomit; Which I suspect, if
not always, at least most commonly, comes out of the Pancreas, by reason of
some Vessel opened by its over-sharp Juice; and it is driven up to the Stomach,
to be vomited out, there being then also a vicious Effervescency with Choler;
whilst for the most part some of it descends downward to be voided by Stool.

12. I Cured the Widow of a Mariner about 20 years since at Cullen, fallen
through great grief of Mind, contracted by her Husbands Death, if my memory
fail me not, into a grievous and daily Pain of the Loins, and hence into a
spontaneous Vomiting, and Dejection of Matter, left for incurable by Physicians
called to see her, yet restored by degrees with the help of Sugared Wine,
warmed and taken by turns: And seven years after by a grievous sorrow of Mind
brought into such a like vehement Pain of the Loins. I therefore guessing, by
the relation of her former Disease, that Matter lay hid in the part grieved by
a former Inflammation produced and collected, gave her twice an Antimonial
Vomit, and, if I remember right, my Sapa Vomitoria; by the help whereof she
vomited the first day more than a pint, or xx. of Matter well ripened, and by
Stool a good quantity of the same; also by the benefit of the Vomit iterated,
one or two days being interposed, she empti'd again some Matter upward and
downward, though less than before, and was restored to perfect health, in a
short while, some few Cordial Medicines, and such as resist Putrefaction being
given.

13. I judge that Matter therefore procedes out of the Pancreas, because the
place affected answered its Situation; and because I have often found Matter
collected in greater or less plenty in the Pancreas after Death, but not in any
other part, from which there was a way to the Guts.

14. The s^^ne reason makes me conjecture and think, that the V^^iting of Blood
is not to be deduced from the Spleen, of Liver, nor yet the Mensenterie, but
from the Pancreas alone, saving the judgment or observation of others.

15. When the contracted Metion of the Guts begins to be inverted from the
Siege, then I judge an exceeding sharp Humor adhers to it, seeing it is wont to
be Cured with such as only assuage and temper sharp things. For I never had
such a Patient to Cure, that I could make an exact examination of all his
Symptoms, and hence give a solid Judgment of every one.

16. Often its contracted Motion begins to be inverted in this or that part of
the small Gut, with the Vomiting up of the Excrements following, from the Gut
affected, called by Physicians Ileos, and Ileos by Practitioners.

17. I have observed in Dissecting dead Bodies, a twofold Cause of this Evil,
the one was a Gangrene of the Gut, such a wrinkling and pressure together of
the corrupted Gut accompanying it, that all passage downward was denied the
Excrements, and were forced to a miserable return upward, and so an egress by
Vomiting.

18. The other Cause of this evil noted after Death in the Dead by me, was the
entrance of the small Gut, in any part straightened, into the next part, which was
more opened by wonted Wind: Whence likewise all passage through, for the
Excrements by Siege was stopped, and anon their regress and ascent to the Stomach
followed, with a miserable Vomiting of them.

19. I judged that Ingress of the small Gut into the next part, happened after
the aforesaid manner, and indeed one while of the upper part into the next
inferior, other-whiles of the inferior into the upper part; because I had
often observed, 1. That the small Gut was in many places distended with Wind,
and most narrowly contracted for a notable length in the next parts, as well
upper as lower. 2. That the same Sick being pressed with Gripes, wonderfully
moved their Body, and often bowed it on a sudden. And by that bowing often
repeated, it might hap, that Wind pressed farther by reason of the Gut relaxed in
either end, should yield to the opposite extreme part of the Gut as yet
straightened, to insinuate it self into the Cavity of the Gut sufficiently enough
displayed, a straitness presently succeeding of the same Gut freed by Wind,
driven forward violent enough about the next part insinuated.

20. As often as the under part of the Gut enters into the upper, so often
there is hope of Cure, either of its own accord by Food taken in, or by Art, by
Lead or Golden Pills swallowed; but not so, when the upper part of the Gut
enters into the under, because the part included goes on by degrees farther,
whence the narrowness is more and more increased, and all descent of what is
contained is stopped; wherefore of necessity, and surely Death is thence to be
expected.

21. There is also frequent mention among Practitioners of the Gut writhed and
wrapped together, no Example whereof, after diligent search, I could find, and
now scarce think it can be, that the small Guts should be so intricately
complicated, as it were, with a Knot.

22. The Rupture of the Guts is a frequent Cause in Practice, of the voiding
Excrements by Vomit, yet not every one, but such and so great ones, that the
small and also thick Guts falling out through a narrow hole, either by reason
of their proper weight, or for what is contained therein perpetually
approaching, and remaining there, cannot be put back through the same Hole, nor
afford a passage downward, to what is contained sliding thither; whence the
things contained being more and more hardened, and such as sometimes cannot be
dissolved, breed an hard and unsuperable Tumor; and moreover hindering also the
reflux of Blood, give occasion to an Inflammation and Gangrene of the Guts soon
following, and hence to vomit the Excrements out at the Mouth.

23. All these Evils are often increased or bred by Fomentations evilly and too
hot applied; as also by a preposterous and strong rubbing of the swelled part:
Lastly, By Violence used to the swelled Guts to repel them.

24. The Cure of this manifold Vomiting may be perform d diversely, according to
the variety of each Cause.

25. As often therefore as the Irritation of the Guts depends on the vicious
Effervescency of sharp Humors flowing together, to the inversion of their
contracted Motion, so often these over-sharp Humors are to be corrected and
tempered, yea, stupefi'd together with their Effervescency.

26. The Medicines that temper both Choleric Humors, and those of the Pancreas
too sharp, are often proposed before; to which Opiats also often named are
always to be added to assuage the vicious Effervescency, and stupefie the sense
of the Guts at least in part.

27. The following M^xture to be ^^ken by Spoonfuls in little spaces, may
conduce in the faultiness of the Acrimony of any Humors, whether Salt or Sour.

. Diascordium ii. Confection of Jacinth i. Sir. of white Poppies i.
Plantane-Water ii. Fenel-Water i. M.

28. When this Vomiting is stayed, if the aforesaid Humors seem to abound,
after they are sufficiently tempered, they may be empti'd out and diminisht by
Stool, giving Purging Cholagogues, or Hydragogues often mentioned.

29. If the Vomiting cannot be staid by reason of plentiful Humors in the Body,
endeavoring an Outlet upward strongly, nothing hinders but that a gentle
Vomit may be given; moreover adding those things which also temper, allay, and
vanquish their too great Effervescency after a certain manner, and so necessity
urging, Opiats themselves in a small quantity. For Example;

. The Vomitive Vinegar and Sugar ii. Laudanum, half, or a whole Gr. Mint-Water
what suffices M. for a Draught.

30. This Vomit being taken, if a Loathing or Vomiting still continue, after a
good part of the Humors peccant is voided upward or downward, use the Mixture
before prescribed, or others alike, according to the diversity of the Humor
that is most pe^cant.

31. For if the Acid Juice abound, then

. Mint, Fend Water, of each i. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus ss. Old Treacle ii. or
Laudanum 2 Gr. Sir. of Myrtle i. M.

32. If Choler abound in Acrimonie, then

. Plantane, Purslan-Water, of each i. Sp. of Salt duleisi'd ss. Diascordium i.
ss. or Laudanum 2 Gr. Sir. of Purslan i. M.

33. As the Juice of the Pancreas, so also Spittle, and the other over-sharp
Humors sliding down from the Head are to be Corrected, Tempered, and Empti'd
out.

34. When the Disease Cholera is raised by Summer-Fruit, and usually soon
corrupted, then the too much Effervescency that is raised in the small Gut is to
be asswag'd with the best Opiats; to which end one of the three newly
prescribed Mixtures may be used as the Matter requires, till that fierce Motion
of the troubled Humors sometimes troubling all things in the Body to Death, be
stayed and asswag'd.

35. Vomiting Medicines wrong taken, or in too much quantity, causing a cruel
Vomiting, are asswag'd and overcome with Opiats only. Whence I here again
commend the former approved Mixtures, or others like them, seeing it is easy
to form more such.

36. Among Poisons producing enormous Vomits, and for the most part deadly, we
mentioned Arsenie, and Orpiment, as also sublimed corrosive Mercury. All which
because of their Latent or manifest Acrimony, are most happily tempered and
prepared for a more mild voiding, by oily things, as fat Broths, any expressed
Oil, Milk, Butter, and suchlike; among which Milk uses to be curded by them,
and then voided; wherefore thus far it is profitable, that Poisons curding it,
do more readily join themselves to it, and thereby lose their strength. Fat
things are so long to be used, as Pain, Loathing or Vomiting remain.

37. Opiats also often mentioned and approved, may besides be profitably used;
as being such that do no less temper all Acrimonie, and assuage the following
Effervescency, than stupefie the outward Sense.

38. The Treatise and Cure of the Hypochondriac Disease, and Suffocation, as
also of the Scurvie, seeing they are Diseases complicated of several and most
others, will be more commodiously delivered beneath.

39. Whencesoever the Blood comes which is void^d by Vomit, because it always
indicates and follows a Vessel broken and opened, it requires a ready
Consolida^^^n of the Vessel Hurt, without which so hurtful an Efflux of Blood
cannot be asswag'd. For which the Mixture prescribed in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. or
an other like it may conduce.

40. If Blood be thought or feared to be Clotter'd in the Cavity of the G^ts,
to Dissolve it, add to the same Mixture Crab's-eyes, Diaphoretic Antimonie,
Sperma^^eti, and suchlike; as is there noted Sect. 21. for it will not be
hurtful to use such also, although there be no Blood standing in the Fistula of
the Gut.

41. For this Golden Rule is continually to be observed by Prudent
Practitioners, That in dubious and uncertain Cases those Medicines may be used,
which can only profit, and (...) ways hurt the Sick, whether troubled or not
troubled with the Dis^ases conjectured.

42. The voiding of Mat^er by Vomit and Stool, is not to be slai'd, but mildly
promoted, seeing it is a Humor wholly unnatural, and in every part hurtful to
Man; Its new rise also is to be hindered as much as may be, seeing it is bred of
Blood, which is the Fuel of our Vital Fire, and the Sustenance of all parts of
the Body, as well containing as contained.

43. Among all the things that more or promote the Voiding of Matter, I prefer
and commend Antimonial M^dirias, as those that I have observed moreover to have
power to correct the Harms befalling the Body by Matter, and hinder the new
producing of Matter, seeing that Antimonie, as well rightly prepared as
administered, serves no less to purify Man's Body than Gold.

44. The continual breeding of Matter out of corrupt Blood, is staid also by
Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil, and any other, taken sometimes in a day to two
or three Drops, whereby besides a certain cleansing and consolidation of the
Vleer is to be expected, and perhaps more certain than by any other Medicin.

45. To this end also conduces Diaphoretic Antimonie and any other altering
Medicin prepared of Antimonie, and especially a Balsam made Artificially of its
Flowers.

46. The contracted Motion being inverted along all the Fistula of the Gut, fat
Broths are to be used, as well taken in at the Mouth, as applied and injected
into the Fundament, whereby any Acrimonie of any Humors, wherever it be or
occur, will be asswag'd, and the troublesome Irritation of the Guts appeased.

47. To this fame end both Fomentations, and Emollient Clysters, so called, may
be prepared, and often used. For Example;

. Marsh-malow-Root ii. its Leaves, Malows, Mulleyn, of each M. i. Line, Fengree
Seeds, of each i. ss. Boil them in clean Water; bathe the Fundament with what
is strained warm; and of viii. of the same, adding Oil of Wh^te-Lilies i. new
Butter ss. or Hens-fat, or any other that is convenient iii. Make a Clyster,
and give it often.

48. To allay the same Irritation, and temper Sharp Humors, both with External
and Internal Medicines, Anodyns, yea, Narcoties may be added, and Emulsions, or
Opiat Mixtures be used, and many such like. For Example;

. Cleans'd Barley boiled till it crack i. ss. cleans'd sweet Almonds, white
Poppie-Seeds, of each iii. With Water wherein the Barley was boiled, make an
Emulsion of xv. adding S^r. of Diacodium i. ss. Fenel or R^s^ Water i. M.

Let the Sick take a Draught by short Spaces.

49. If any judge a more potent Mixture to be taken in less quantity, will be
better accepted, or more useful, let them use this following often by Spoonfuls.

. Plantane-Water ii. Fenel-Water i. Confection of Jacinth, of Alkermes, of each
ss. Laudanum 3 Gr. Sir. of white Poppies i. M.

50. If any desire a Medicin in a more solid Form, let him use this following.

. Piascordium, or New Treacle ss. Confection of Jacinth i. M. for a Bole; Half
or a whole Dram whereof may be taken by spaces.

51. They who can take nothing beside Pills, for them prescribe these following.

. Laudanum 4 Gr. Make them into 8 Pills, to be Gilded.

Or.. Pills of Hounds-tonge seruple; i. Laudanum 3 Gr. M. Make it into ten
Pills.

Let the Sick take often one of either of these Pills, till the Vomiting be a
little asswag'd, and some sleep comes on, which is to be observed; not
neglecting those things that are outwardly to be administered already mentioned.

52. The most things that are necessary to Cure an Inflammation and Gangrene of
the Guts, may be required from the general Treatise of both to be delivered in
their proper place: Although I judge a Gangrene of the Guts incurable.

53. The Upper Part of the Gut thrust into the Under Part, will never (at least
in my judgment) return; but the Under being thrust into the Upper, will not be
so difficultly repelled by Golden or Lead Bullets, swallowed down with Oil of
sweet Almonds, or of Oliv^s, or one or two ounces of Quicksilver taken.

54. Seeing that the Breeding, and Cure of the manifold Rupture cannot be
absolved in a few words, we intend (God willing) to treat of it now, or
elsewhere in a particular Chapter.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Straining Chyle through the fleshy Crust of the Guts hurt.
1. CHyle severed from the Excrements, is not only driven on downward by the
contracted Motion of the Guts, but is also by the same force pressed and strained
through their Fleshy and Spongie Crust into the Lacteal Veins.

2. This Straining through the Chyle is depraved, and more or less hindered or
diminisht in the Chylelike Looseness, of which in Chap. 13. Sect. 4. and 12.
When either, 1. the Orifices of this Fleshly Covering are over-laid, or stopped
with a Viscous Phlegmatic Humor: Or, 2. the same Fleshy Crust is fretted up and
down, and the part of the Gut closed up with a Skar, the Pores also tending to
the Lacteal Veins being stopped, as it sometimes happens after grievous Dysenteric
Loosnesses raised especially in the small Gut: As I have often observed in the
Dissection of Dead Bodies.

3. And this Evil is wont to be followed with some, and sometimes a notable
Pining and Leanness of Body continuing till Life be ended, which also spares
not fat Bellies.

4. The former Kind may be Cured by Medicines that both Cut and Attenuate
Viscous Phlegm, and so by degrees Correct it, and when it is more or less
altered, especially if it abound also, by such as Empty it out, often mentioned.

5. The latter Kind is Incurable together with Leanness, whatsoever following
it. For as yet there are no Medicines known, which can dissolve a Skar^made in
the Small Gut, or repair a new Crust, and such an one, as will give the Chyle a
passage through to the Lacteal Veins.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Motion of Chyle through the Lacteal Veins depraved, and the
Dropsy Ascites often following it.
1. CHyle strained through the Fleshy Crust of the Guts, and admitted into the
Lacteal Veins, ought to be transferred and driven forward through the same to
the Cistern, or common Receptacle or Passage of the Thorax situated about the
Loins.

2. This Motion is depraved, when it is hindered in one or more places; and
Chyle moves too slowly forward, or is quite Stopped, and Stands still.

3. Chyle is hindered in its Motion through the Lacteal Veins, when being too
Thick and Tough, it is driven forward too slowly.

4. Chyle is made over-viscous, because of suchlike Food taken too
plentifully, or too long.

5. Chyle is stopped in its Motion, and stands still in the Lacteal Vessels, when
they are Obstructed, sometimes by the forementioned Chyle over-viscous
Coagulated in them; other-times by the Phlegm of the Guts Driven forward into
them and there Coagulated.

6. Phlegm of the Guts is Driven forward into the Lacte^l Veins, as often as it
is Dissolved by the Motion of the Body, or vehement Exercise, or Heat of the
Air, w^^^ sort soever, of the Sun, Fire, Bath, etc. as also sometimes by a
Feverish Burning, and other things then also concurring in the Body;
especially Dissolved upon taking hot or warm Drink, and so becoms fluxil and
fluid.

7. The same Phlegm is Coagulated, as also over- Viscous Chyle in the Lacteal
Veins rarely by Coldness of the Air suddenly following Heat; to wit, when the
Body is carried out of an hot place into a cold, out of a Bath into a Cellar,
or open Northern Air; and the Belly being less covered than ought, admits sharp
coldness through the open Pores; but more frequently by Drink too cold taken in
abundance, soon hasting to the Guts, and not only powerfully cooling both the
Guts themselves, with all parts near them, and so the Lacteal Veins, but
thickning and coagulating what is Contained in them.

8. The over-Viscous Chyle, or Phlegm of the Guts being thus Coagulated in the
Lacteal Veins; and an Obstruction made in more or fewer of their Branches, is
stopped, and settles presently in the same whatsoever is driven into them out of
the Guts, either of Liquor rising from the continual conflux of Choler, the
Juice of the Panereas, and the Phlegm of Spittle, or of Chyle, or Drink only
drunk plentifully; and it does by degrees more and more distend the same so
far, that at length they burst, and consequently either first this manif^ld
M^isture received into them, and intercepted in its Motion, is poured out
between the Membranes of the Mensenterie, or presently after into the Cavity of
the Belly.

9. I take this often to be the Breeding of the Dropsy Ascites, and chiefly
when it is produced suddenly by much Drink, as in a Burning Fever: with an
urgent and permanent Thirst joined, I remember has been done within three days
time.

10. This Obstruction may be Prevented, 1. By taking heed of using over Viscous
Food, and especially from Ravening any.

11. 2. By Using Medicines that Correct and Educe Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors,
often mentioned.

12. An Obstruction made, or prudently conjuctur'd to be in the Lacteal Veins
by the aforesaid Contrary Causes, mutually may be Cured by Medicines that do
powerfully Cut, especially Sudorific Aromatics, rather taken often, than
together and at once only. For so I have observed, that Obstructions are more
happily, easily, quickly, and safely Opened.

13. To this end therefore the following Mixture, taken at short spaces by
Spoonfuls to break forth the Sweat, may be used, and afterward to be given when
it comes forth, though not so often then.

Parsley-Water ii. Fenel, simple Treacle-Water, of each i. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac
20 drops. Sir. of Carduus Benedictus i. M.

Or, Fematory-Water iii. Scurvy Grass Water Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, of each
i. distilled Vinegar ss. Crab's-eyes powdered ss. Salt of Wormwood, Diaphoretic
Antimonie, of each i. Sir. of the five Roots i. M.

14. The Lacteal Veins will of their own accord Close again after their
Obstruction is taken away, as happens to a Vein opened.

15. The Waters Collected in the Cavity of the B^lly, by various Humors flowing
out through the Vessels Burst, and producing the Dropsy Ascites, being peccant
in Place, will be removed out of that place, both by strong Hydragogues, and
also Sudorifics, and a Paracenthesis or boring the Belly.

16. The Hydragogues are often proposed in this Work, among which the best are
prepared of Elder, or Dwarf-Elder, Jalap-Root, Elaterium, and Gum-Gotte; not
neglecting Crystals of Silver.

17. Sweats to this end may be given usefully, both by what is taken in often,
and newly mentioned, and especially by a moist or dry Bath joined together.

18. And if these profit not in a short time, you must hasten to a
Paracenthesis, not that common one so very dangerous; but a new one that is so
very safe, by a Silver hollow Needle gently thrust into the Belly, about four
fingers breadth below the Navel, and so many at its Sides, and drawn out again
after a sufficient effusion of Water; and again at another time or day thrust
into the same Hole, except it be judged fit to make a new Hole elsewhere.

19. This Chirurgical Operation is void of danger, because the Needle being
drawn out, there will no more Liquor run, but apply the Plaster Diapalma, or
the White one boiled, or any like it, whereby the bored Place is not only
fenced against all the injuries of External Air, but its Consolidation promoted.

20. But this Paracenthesis must not be delayed, lest whilst it is too long
delayed, the Humor collected in the Belly get an hurtful Acrimonie, and by
degrees corrode and corrupt the Membranes, and hence the Substance of all the
parts contained, and so make the Disease incurable.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Sanguification of Chyle in the Right Ventricle of the
Heart depraved.
1. CHyle carried continually to the Passage of the Thorax out of the Lacteal
Veins, and there confused with the Lympha, whencesoever flowing, goes forward
with it into the Jugular, or Left Axillar, and hence the Cava or hollow Vein,
where it is mixed with the Blood, with which it is driven forward into the
Right Auricle, and then Right Ventricle of the Heart to be changed into Blood.

2. We think that this Change of Chyle into Blood, begins in the Jugular, or
Left Axillar Vein, but chiefly in the Trunk of the Hollow Vein connex'd to
them; and absolved in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and perfected partly in
the Lungs, partly in the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and Great Artery.

3. The Chyle has its Rudiment of Blood (if I may be Judge) from the Blood
Descending to the Heart, with which it is confused in the aforesaid Vessels.

4. The Chyle also receives its Form of Blood from the Choleric Blood Ascending
to the Heart, and as well flowing together in the Right Ear of the Heart, as
especially in its Right Ventricle with the Lymphatic Blood, with which we said
Chyle was mixed, and raising an Effervescency of great Moment, because of its
different, yea somewhat contrary disposition of both in certain parts of it.

5. The same Chyle obtains its Last Perfection of Blood, by the continued and
contemper'd Effervescency newly mentioned, more accurately to be explained in
certain Circumstances in the next following Chapters, because of the Breathing
Air in the Lungs, the Left Ear, and Ventricle of the Heart, and the greatest
Branches of the Great Artery.

6. By the power and benefit of this Effervescency, we conceive the Vital Fire
breaks out and rises, which no less changes the fat of Chyle coming, than of
Blood returning from what place soever, and by rarefying the Oily Parts, and
also loosly uniting all the other, reduces it into one Mass
Heterogeneally-Homogeneal, and so Chyle it self into true Blood by the same
labor.

7. This Sanguification of Chyle is depraved especially, when the Blood is bred
least laudable and vicious by it, Serous, Phlegmatic, or peccant in any other
Proper or Common Sensible Quality; which sometimes manifests it self with a
Cachexie, other-times Anasarca, or Leucophlegmatia; or else with Leanness, or
any other apparent fault in Nourishment.

8. Every Cause of Sanguification Vitiated, is either in Chyle it self, or in
the Choleric Blood Ascending, or in the Descending Lymphatic Blood, or in some
External Cause, or in more concurring together.

9. The Cause of Sanguification Depraved, is to be sought in Chyle it self, and
to be found as often as it is produced Vicious, because either Food or Spittle,
etc. is Vicious; of which formerly.

10. The Cause of Sanguification depraved, is in the Choleric Blood Ascending
to the Heart, (which abounds with Choler) as often as vicious Choler is mixed in
the Liver in a greater or less quantity, or otherwise.

11. Choler is mixed with the Blood in a greater quantity, when it is bred more
plenteously in its Bag, by Aromatic Food, plenteously used and abounding with a
Volatile Salt; or it is over-plentifully effus'd out of its Bag, because of the
greater fluidity given it, either by Heat of Air, or Food both too Sharp, and
also Spiritous, or by a strong Motion of Body, or by vehement Anger, or by
Watchings, and suchlike.

12. Choler is mixed in less quantity with the Blood, when it is bred more
sparingly by Food destitute of an Aromatic strength, which is wont to produce
Phlegm, such as is Seafish, and suchlike, continually used; or it is more
slowly effus'd out of its Bag, because of its fluidity diminished, and
thickness increased one while by cold and sharp Air, other-times by Food newly
mentioned, and Cold Drink too frequently used, other-whiles by a grievous
Sorrow of Mind, or Great Terrors coming unexpectedly; as also by much and long
continued Sleep, and daily Rest of Body, etc.

13. Choler is mixed with the Blood, not only in too great or too little
quantity, but sometimes over-Sharp or over-Fat; and so far also it vitiates it.

14. Choler is made too Sharp by the Heat of Air, the abounding Acrimonie of
Food, or rather of its Sauces, such as is in Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, Mastard,
etc. by Watchings, too much and protracted Exercise of Body, continued Anger,
especially when joined with Solicitude.

15. Choler becoms Fatter, especially by too much Use of fat Food, at least
dressed with much Fatness, Butter, Oil, etc. whither may be referred distilled
Oils often used.

16. The Cause of Sanguification Depraved, is in the Blood descending to the
Heart, (and because the Lympha is mixed with it, it is called Lymphatic Blood) as
often as the Lympha is found either over- Acid, or Salt, or Phlegmatic, or
Watery.

17. The Lympha becoms over-Acid, because of Food both Sour, and seasoned with
very Acid things used too plenteously, and long, or because of Northern Air,
and Solicitude of Mind, Sorrow or Terror, sometimes by Waking, and too much
Wearying the Body, etc. happening.

18. The Lympha is made over-Salt, easily and as frequently by cold and sharp
Air piercing the Universal Body, and especially the Head warmed, and running
down with a Sweat, begetting the Stuffing of the Head, that is, a troublesome
Sense of Heaviness, not only in the Head, but in the Joints also; whence as a
Salt Liquor distills afterward through the Nostrils in a following Snuffle of
the Nose; so likewise then it seems even consentaneous not only to Reason, but
also to the Affliction of the Sick then often urging, and so to daily Experience,
that there is produced all over a Salt Humor in the Conglobated Glandules, and
after that effus'd into the Habit of the Body, and the Muscles, as also driven
forward through the Lym^hatic Vessels toward the Heart.

19. The Lympha is over-Phlegmatic, by reason of ^he prolonged Use of
over-moist and cold Air, the too ^uch eating of suchlike Food, especially
Fishes, ^ulse, Potherbs, etc. Beer not enough boiled or fermented, Well-Water,
etc. an heavy Life, and Void of Care; much and long Sleep, and many suchlike
things.

20. The Lympha becoms over- Watery by the over^se of Rainwater, or any other
too thin, and over^oist Air, mean while neglecting as well Spiritous as
^ucculent and Acid Food.

21. Sanguification is immediately vitiated by an ex^rnal Cause, when there is
an Error committed in ^e or more Non-natural things (so called) in that time,
when laudable Chyle and Blood is carried to the Heart, by the Air first hot,
and suddenly cold; by Drink very piercing Spiritous or mixed with Ice,
especially abundantly Used; by vehement Agitation of the Body; by a grievous
Passion of Mind, Wrath, Sorrow, Fear, Amazement or Solicitude vexing, etc.
whence either over-sharp Choler, or the Juice of the Pancreas over-Acid, or
over-Sharp, or the Phlegm of the Guts over-Viscous, is carried all over, and
especially toward the Heart, in which it so corrupts either the Chyle, or the
Blood before well constituted, that the Blood cannot but be bred bad of the
Chyle flowing to it.

22. The Sanguification of Chyle depraved, according to the diversity of the
Cause, may be diversely Cured. For, 1. as often as it depends of Choler too
Plentiful, mixed with the Ascending Blood, it ought to be diminisht by
Cholagogues often mentioned.

23. The new Rise of the same Choler is to be stopped by shunning, or at least
moderating the Non-natural Things, so called, that produce it, which were newly
mentioned; as also by using more liberally those things which we said bred less
Choler.

24. 2. When Sanguification is depraved, by too little Choler tending to the
Heart, it ought to be increased, by using somewhat more plentifully those
things, which we have asserted, do breed Choler more plentifully; and also by
Shunning those things which we have taught, according to Experience, to be
contrary to its breeding.

25. 3. As often as Choler too Sharp depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, so
often it is to be Tempered by Medicines often proposed before, and especially in
Chap. 1. Sect. 11, etc. and in Chap. 10. Sect. 42. besides by shunning all
things in Sect. 14. of this Chapter, which make it too sharp.

26. 4. If over-Fat Choler deprave the Sanguification of Chyle, it ought to be
Corrected with Acid Medicines, but the more temperate ones, such as are
prescribed in Chap. 2. Sect. 38, etc. and in Chap. 11. Sect. 25. farther
Bewaring of the abuse of Oily and Fat things, of which in Sect. 15. of this
Chapter.

27. 5. If the over-Acid Lympha deprave the Sanguification of Chyle, it is to
be corrected and amended by Medicines prescribed in Chap. 2. Sect. 17, etc. and
elsewhere.

28. Mean while diligently Abstain from farther use of Acids, and the other
things mentioned in Sect. 17. of this Chapter.

29. 6. When over-Salt Lympha depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, then
Medicines approved in Chap. 13. Sect. 41, and 42. may be convenient; as also
Aromatic, mild Sweats, by the help whereof the Saltness of the Lympha is by
degrees corrected.

30. In this case Hydragogues also conduce, often used, in a small Dose, after
some contemperation of the Salt Acrimonie.

31. 7. When over- Phlegmatic Lympha depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, then
are Medicines to be given that Cut and Correct Phlegmatic Humors in the Body,
prescribed in Chap. 2. Sect. 28, etc. and such as Purge them so prepared for
being Empti'd, therein Sect. 33, etc. also shunning those things that we have
said here and elsewhere do breed Phlegm.

32. 8. As often as over-Watry Lympha depraves the Sanguification of Chyle, so
often abstain from the over-Use of any Water; and if it abound in the Body, it
is to be expelled both by Exercises enough Potent, and by the Bath, etc. with
Sweats, not very great, but often repeted; to which end Spiritous and Aromatic
Sudorifics may also be used, whereby the Animal Spirits almost deficient may be
repaired, and the Animal Strength preserved, yea, increased by the same means.

33.9. As often as the Sanguification of the same is depraved (all the Humors,
and so Chyle it self being rightly constituted in an Healthy Body) in the time
of the Distribution of Chyle by one, or more External Causes, either inevitable
or unexpected, numbered in Sect. 21. so often those things that cannot be
shunned, ought to be, as much as may be, corrected and tempered, at least the
Harms that come by them to every one should speedily be amended and taken away.

34. So if any have been in the cold Air, as soon as may be, let them come to a
clear Fire, or go into a warmed Bed; at least let them cover their Bodies well
with Bed clothes, whereby they again expel out of the Body the cold received.

35. So, if any have abused piercing and spiritous Drink, if good part of it
yet remain in the Stomach, let them send it out again by a Vomit raised, by
putting one Finger into the Jaws, or a Feather moistened with Oil, unless they
can of their own accord promote it, which is easy, yea, familiar to many.

36. But if the Drink be already gone more into the Body, like a Surfeit, its
breathing out is to be patiently expected, if then Thirst still urge, by using
Sour Drink no way Spiritous or Watery, such as is Mineral Wells, always taking
heed of any excess.

37. But if Drink with Ice or otherwise very cold shall have been taken,
Aromattes and such as abound with a Volatile Oily Salt used by tums may conduce,
which naturally are fit to overcome the harm of drinking with Ice, soonest,
safest, and most pleasantly. They will perform this the more happily, if by
their help a Sweat be also moved or promoted.

38. So, as many as vehemently move their Body, either by Running, Leaping, or
otherwise, whence Sweat also came forth; they should carefully take heed of the
cold Air, and rather betake themselves to a Warmed Bed, to compose themselves
to Rest, and that they may shun a greater harm.

39. So, as many as have been moved with a Vehement Passion of Mind, should
endeavor to assuage ^t by themselves, or others, and to reduce the Mind to
former tranquillity; which Reason and Discourse can do by mildly composing the
Rational Soul with so^id Reasons, whencesoever taken; yea, by confirm^ng and
hardening it against any things that cannot be changed, to bear them patiently
and stout^y.

40. The manifold Harms following those Vicious ^xternal Causes, ought to be
Corrected variously, and as soon as can be, seeing that by the Functions ^urt,
or other proper Signs, they are known to the ^hysician^; of which all over in
this Treatise.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Continual and Vital Effervescency of Blood in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart hurt.
1. CHyle is not only carried to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, some hours
after the Food is taken in, whereby it may be changed into Blood, but
continually by the Blood returning from every Part; and that partly being
furnished with bitter Gall, partly by having Acid Lympha, there is raised in
the same place a mild, yea, Vital Effervescency.

2. We call it a Lively Effervescency that is raised in the Right Ventricle of
the Heart, because the natural Preservation of our Life depends upon it.

3. For by the Conflux of the Volatile Oily Salt ruling in the Gall, and
constituting the chief part of the Sowrish Sweet Spirit; of these, I say, being
somewhat contrary, there is raised a gentle, and to Nature friendly Fight,
described by Us with the Name of an Effervesceney, in and by which the Fiery
Parts lying hid, and shut up in both are loosed from their Fetters, and being
freed, infinuate themselves into the Oily and Fat obvious Parts, both of the
Blood, and also of Chyle, as the proper Subject of their Action, rarefying the
same; and moreover do so change and alter the other parts more or less mixed
with them, that Life may be continued, and Blood moved any whither; and the
necessary Reparation of all the containing and contained Parts, perpetually
more or less Consumed, may be perfected and absolved.

4. It haps that this Effervescency, very necessary for Life and Nourishment,
is Hurt; 1. When it is either wholly Abolisht, or Ceases at least for a time.
2. When it is Diminisht, and is Lesser or Weaker. 3. When it is Increased, and
is Greater or more Potent. 4. When it is Hastened, and is too Swift. 5. When it
is Retarded and performed too Slowly. 6. When it is Depraved and observed to be
Unequal or Inordinate.

5. I. Where this Vital Effervescency is wholly Abolisht, Death is at hand;
because the Vital Fire of the Heart, or rather of the Blood, which by its help
used to be continued in the Heart, is presently extinguished by the same.

6. This Vital Effervescency is Abolisht. 1. By the fault of the Choleric Blood
Ascending, and that either for Want of Choler: as often as it is effus'd with
great force into the Small Gut, and hence Choler is excluded out of the Body,
as well upward by Vomit, as downward by Stool, in the Disease Cholera; whence
no wonder if the Sick perish sometimes then in a few hours.

7. Or because of the high Volatility and Acrimony of Choler, whence the Blood
is not only more Dissolved, but the Lympha also more sluggish; as we judge it
happens in the Pest, and all Malign Fevers, in which the Sick so often are
suddenly and unexpectedly extinguished.

8. The same Vital Esservescency is Abolisht, 2. By the fault of the Lymphatic
Blood Descending, which is by reason of the over Acidity of Lympha, whereby
Choler is not only oppressed and, as it were, suffocated in the Heart, and
together with Choler the Vestal and Vital Fire; or the Blood it self extremely
coagulated, is made unfit for its naturally following Rarefaction.

9. We scarce ever think that such a Defect can be thought of Lympha, for which
the Vital Effervescency may be Abolisht, unless perhaps the Passage of the
Thorax be somewhat Pressed, Wounded, or Burst, and therefore the greatest part
Standing still, or Run out another way. Neither seems it probable that all the
Conglobated Glandules, from which we judge the Acidity of the Lympha procedes,
can be so affected alone, that therefore the Acid Lympha should be deficient in
the Heart. For as often as the Body is congealed with Cold, the extreme Parts
are not less, but more seized on by it, than the internal Glandules that lie
hid; in which besides the Lympha is not so much diminished, as corrupted by
Cold, although then its Motion be both altered and disturbed; as we observe it
falls out in the Stuffing of the Head, in which all Motion of a Humor both to
the Nostrils, and also to the Jaws, is Stopped first with an Heaviness of the
Head; (whence the name Gravedo) afterward the Humor Distills more plenteously,
and often thinner and sharper than is wont; to wit, Sowrish Salt, and then this
Disease is properly called either Coryza, whilst it runs out by the Nostrils,
or Bronchos, whilst it is carried down to the Jaws and begets an Hoarsness; as
a Cough, when it slides down farther into the Sharp Artery of the Lungs, and
provokes and compels them to a more moved and violent Expiration.

10. The same Vital Effervescency is Abolished; 3. By too many Vapors raised in
the most vehement Effervescency, and so employing all the space in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, and hence in the Vessels of the Lungs, that the Fire
then also breaking out, is choked by them, and extinguished, otherwise it had
been Vital; neither is there further place granted to the new Effervescency
presently following.

11. The Vital Effervescency is Abolished by too many Vapors in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, not only in as much as the space in the Vessels of the
Lungs is denied to new Blood that should raise an Effervescency, and
consequently undergo a Rarefaction; but also in as much as the Lungs being
extremely distended by the aforesaid Vapors, can neither be farther unfolded,
nor reciprocally complicated, nor yet Respiration very necessary to temper the
Heat of Blood can be perfected.

12. But the same is yet abolished. 4. By too much Blood filling all the
Vessels, Veins and Arteries, in the Plethora, called at or in the Vessels, and
Athletic Habit, and that for want of Space to receive the Blood, although
meanly to be Rarefi'd, after a due Effervescency.

13. The same Vital Effervescency is Abolished. 5. By the over-potent Vital
Fire raised in the Heart, rarefying the Blood more than enough, and to an
Height; whence by the defect either of a Space large enough, in which it may be
received, or sufficient Cooling, whereby the hot Blood might be tempered, our
Vital Fire is often Suffocated in the most Burning Fevers by its own fault.

14. The Effervescency of Blood sometimes Ceases in the Right Ventricle of the
Heart for a time, not only short, but often very notable; to wit, for one or
two days, the Pulse and Respiration to be concluded, taken away to outward
Sense, as is always in the most grievous kind of Hypochondriac Suffocation, and
the Syncope, and also sometimes in a lighter kind of the aforesaid Suffocation,
and Swouning Fits, joined with the Pulse stopped to Sense, such as is frequently
observed in these Regions.

15. For we must not pass it by, that the Pulse and Respiration are not always
taken away to Sense in every Hypochondriac Suffocation, or lighter Swouning
Fits; although they be perpetually more or less hindered or diminished, seeing
the Voice it self and Speech sometimes are more or less hindered.

16. The chief Cause of this Effervescency, Ceasing for a notable time, is
viscous and also Acid Phlegm, not too much exceeding in plenty (otherwise it
would be Abolished with Death following) joined to the Lympha, and hence to the
Descending Blood, and carried to the Heart.

17. The Cause of the same Effervescency Ceasing a short while, about a
quarter, half, or a whole hour is judged by me to be a Viscous also and Acid
Vapor, or Wind-piercing out of the Small Gut through the Lacteal Veins and
Passage of the Thorax to the Heart.

18. For as this Viscously-Acid Phlegm is more plenteous or solid, or more
consistent, or less in quantity, or more Vaporous; so it will hinder our Vital
Effervescency more, or longer, or less, or shorter while, and seem to take it
away at least to External Sense; seeing it may deservedly be doubted, whether
indeed and actually it be taken, or may be taken away without the Patient's
Death: the solution and determination of which Doubt, will depend on the
Prejudice or Opinion of every one given about the following Question; to wit,
Whether Life can remain without a continual and new Sustentation and Generation
of the Vital Fire? Or whether the same could be extinguished for a while, and
again be kindled and restored in the Heart of its own accord, or by help of
Medicines, before that a deadly Corruption possess the Blood, and the other
Humors.

19. Our Vital Fire may be said to be kindled and restored in the Heart of its
own accord, when Acid and Viscous Phlegm being joined in too much plenty with
the Descending Blood, does so oppress Choler coming with the Ascending Blood,
that for a space there is no power of it observed, till by the help of this
same Choler, the aforesaid Phlegm being reduced and brought back by degrees to
some mediocrity, a new Fire rises up and restores Life to the Body, perhaps
taken away for a time.

20. By the help of Medicines, our Vital Fire may be said to be kindled and
restored, when in the aforenam'd Diseases, one or two Drops of some very
Aromatic Oil, with a little Aromatic Spirit of Wine, or any other convenient
Liquor, once or often poured into the Mouth of the Sick, who is in the Agony
of Death, pierce to the Blood infected, and worst affected with the aforesaid
Viscously-Acid Phlegm, may raise, or stir up suddenly, or by degrees, the Vital
Fire it self, languishing or extinct, by correcting or amending Phlegm, and
also strengthening and relieving Choler.

21. But an ingenious Searcher of Truth may question, Whether such an Aromatic
Oil, fitly called Balsam of Life, or any other like it, (whose stupendous
force in such a case is not unknown, as well to them that are Expert in the Art
of Chemistry, as Skilful in the Practice of Physic) be joined to the Blood,
almost condenst to Death by Phlegm Viscously-Acid in the Right Ventricle of the
Heart, or elsewhere?

22. As much as I am able to attain by the best of my Understanding, that I may
study to satisfy this Question, saving to every Man his particular Judgment, I
judge it no wise absurd, to think that this Conjunction of the Aromatic, and
then truly Vital Oil with Phlegm, Viscously-Acid, too much thickning Blood
happens in the Vessels of the Lungs; seeing that nothing offers to hinder, that
some part of the overthick Blood may be driven forward into the Artery of the
Lungs, before either the Pulse or Respiration be taken away to Sense. This
being asserted, it will not be difficult to explain, how the strength of the
Aromatic and Vital Oil should pierce easily to the Right Ventricle of the
Heart, as I conjectured, then more or less opened, and also by the Blood it
self not less coagulated in the Artery of the Lungs, then too much in the
aforesaid Ventricle, and therefore less fluid.

23. These things being inserted, as it were, by a Parenthesis to incite Wits;
note, that the wonted Effervescency, and hence the Rarefaction of both sorts of
Blood flowing together to the right Ear of the Heart, and therefore both the
reciprocal Expansion and Contraction of the Heart, and the Pulse it self is
more or less hindered and stopped by both the mentioned Causes, to wit, Phlegm,
and a Vapor Viscously Acid; which is observed therefore not to be in the
Syncope, and certain kinds of Hypochondriac Suffocation, hitherto to be reduced
altogether to Swounings.

24. Among the six Non-natural Things, an Unexpected grievous Sorrow of Mind,
or Terror, and sometimes the biting Cold of Air or Water, makes that Cessation
of the Vital Effervescency sometimes, and oftener in Persons disposed to it,
because of the Viscous and Flatulent also, and Acid Humors now already in the
Body, in Women especially, and others of a more fearful Nature.

25. II. This Effervescency of the Blood Descending and Ascending to the Heart,
is Diminished, and so becoms Less or Weaker, by the fault of either the
Choleric or Lymphatic Blood.

26. Of the Choleric, when Choler is not sharp enough, or is too little in the
Ascending Blood.

27. Choler is produced in the Body not sharp enough; 1. Because of the
over-cold and moist Air. 2. Because of Phlegmatic, Watery, Oily, Acid (but not
Sharp and Aromatic) Food and Sauces overlong used. 3. Because of much and deep
Sleep. 4. Because of Rest and sluggishness of Body. 5. Because of the Mind void
of Care, fearful and sad. 6. Because of the Monthly Courses, or wonted Sweats
suppressed.

28. Choler is found too little in the Ascending Blood for the same Causes
newly mentioned, and chiefly by a Choleric Looseness, or overgreat emptyings of
Choler wrong done, whence the natural quantity of Choler is diminished.

29. By the fault of the Lymphatic Blood the aforesaid Effervescency is
Diminished, when the Lympha of the Glandules in the Blood is not Sour enough,
or too Little, or over-Viscous.

30. This Lympha is found in the Blood not Sour enough. 1. Because of Hot or
Rainy Air. 2. Because of Phlegmatic, Watery, Oily, or Aromatic, but not Acid
Food and Sauces. 3. Because of much and deep Sleep. 4. Because of sluggishness
and too much Rest of Body. 5. Because of the Mind void of Care, or Angry. 6.
Because of the Monthly Courses, or a wonted Looseness suppressed.

31. The Lympha comes too Little to the Blood for the same Causes newly
recited, and especially because the Lympha stands still, or is carried another
way, by reason of the Glandules ill affected, in the Stuffing of the Head, and
other suchlike Diseases.

32. The Lympha is too Viscous in the Blood. 1. By suchlike Food long used. 2.
By the Cold and Sharp Air. 3. By a grievous and long-continuing Sorrow of Mind.

33. III. The same Effervescency of both sorts of Blood flowing together in the
Heart is Increased, and becoms Greater or more Potent by the fault of either,
or of both

34. Of the Choleric, when Choler is too Sharp or Plenteous in the Blood
Ascending.

35. We named the Causes of over-Sharp Choler, in Chap. 1. Sect. 6, and 7. And
Chap. 11. Sect. 18. And Chap. 18. Sect. 14.

36. Choler is too Plenteous in that Blood, both when it is found more than
naturally Plenteous in its Bag; and when its Descent to the Gut is hindered; and
also when it abounds, that is, is provoked by an External or Internal Cause, to
Pour it self out any way, as is wont to be in the Disease Cholera, and several
Burning Fevers.

37. The Gall is too plenteous in its Bag, chiefly by the frequent use of
Bitter, especially Aromatic and Sharp Sauces and Medicines.

38. The Descent of Choler to the Gut is hindered, by reason of any Narrowness
whatsoever that is in its Passage to the Gut.

39. Summer-Fruits frequently stir up the Disease Cholera, of which in Chap.
15. Sect. 8. Chap. 29, etc.

40. We intend to give you the Causes and Manner of the rise of Burning Fevers,
below in Chap. 29, etc.

41. Let it suffice that we have here noted Choler may abound by an inward
Cause; that is, be provoked and compelled to pour it self out of its Bag, as
often as some of a Volatile Acid Liquor pierces thither together with the Blood,
and forces Choler to raise an Effervescency; whence no wonder, if it runs out
at any Passage given, and now being carried to the Guts, stirs up Vomitings, or
Choleric Loosnesses, or being carried to the Liver, and thence rushing to the
Heart, breeds Burning Fevers.

42. The Vital Effervescency in the Heart is increased by the fault of the
Lymphatic Blood, when the Lympha is not so Plenteous, as Volatile and Sharp,
though too Little flowing to the Heart with the Descending Blood.

43. And such is the Lympha, by the abuse of Sauces, or such like Medicines,
such as are Wine of the Maise and Rhenish, a little Sour, and also Spiritous,
strong Wine Vinegar* Citron Juice used with Spiritous Wine, Spirit of Nitre,
etc.

44. But if Choler, together with Lympha, be peccant after the aforesaid
manner, who sees not that this Effervescency of both sorts of Blood must yet be
hurt and encreast of necessity.

45. IV. The same Effervescency is perfected more Quickly, because of too
little Phlegm in the Blood, and Choler, and Lympha therefore too sharp, and
less temperd.

46. Phlegm is too Little in the Blood; 1. Because of Summer, and subtle hot
Air. 2. Because of Food, or Sauces, and Medicines very sharp and Aromatic too
plenteously used, and others neglected, which are wont to breed Phlegm. 3.
Because of a vehement long continued motion of the Body. 4. By prolonged
Wakings. 5. By grievous and persevering Cares and Solicitudes of Mind 6. By a
Phlegmatic Diarrhaea, or any other preternatural Defluxion or Flux of a
Phlegmatic Humor, in a Distillation of Rheum, Cough, Dropsy, etc.

47. V. On the contrary, the same Effervescency proceeds over-slowly, by reason
of the abundance of Viscous Phlegm especially in the Blood, and some kind of
sluggishness of Choler and Lympha following it.

48. We related the Causes of over-Viscous Phlegm, in Chap. 2. Sect. 7, and 9.

49. VI. The self-same Effervescency is Depraved, and becoms Vicious several
ways, when it is observed either Unequal, sometimes Greater, again presently
Lesser; one while too Quick, presently over-slow: or is Inordinate, and again
ceases a little or is interrupted; again presently repetes and becoms more
Potent, no order being observed, as it happens sometimes in several kinds of
Hypochondriac Suffocation, in which the Pulse is felt sometimes weak, rare,
little, comprest, yea, sometimes none at all; again it is perceived strong,
frequent, great or wonderfully troubled with a notable Palpitation of the Heart.

50. The Cause of this Unequal Effervescency, is the Unequal Quantity of
Choler, or Lympha, or the Liquor arising from the forementioned threefold
prevailence in the Guts, or of other Humors (that as yet perhaps are wont to be
mixed with the Blood, and not as yet enough perceived by any) joined to either
Blood.

51. For where More of Choler enters into the Heart with the Ascending Blood,
the Effervescency will be Greater, and Quicker, whence also a Greater and more
Frequent Pulse; where on the contrary Less of it comes, there will be a Lesser
and also Slower Effervescency raised, and also the Pulse Lesser and more Rare.

52. But where more of Lympha shall come with the Descending Blood to the
Heart, there will proceed a Less and Slower Effervescency, together with a Less
and more Rare Pulse; contrarily where Less of it shall flow out, there will be
a Greater and Quicker Effervescency produced, and a Greater and more Frequent
Pulse.

53. When the Nature and Strength of the Liquor rising out of the Threefold
Humors that Flow together to the Small Gut, shall be more clearly discerned by
us, we can more solidly and certainly determine of the Harms that follow their
vicious Constitution. Which also is to be understood of other Humors, if, as we
suspect, there may yet be more, which are mixed either immediately or mediatly,
with the Blood flowing back to the Heart.

54. We therefore note this here, that so we may stir up others to search the
Truth with us, that as yet lies hid to Physicians in many things, intending to
rejoice and congratulate (as we have done to others already) their greater
felicity perhaps in searching out the same thing before us, and always to
return due thanks to God, the Giver of all Good, for the benefit bestowed on
Mankind by any; not intending to envy any ones pains, diligence, invention,
and other things thereto appertaining, or to blame with Reproaches after the
manner of certain sluggish, lazy Men and ill-employing their leisure.

55. We judge the Cause of the Inordinate Effervescency of Blood to be the
Unequal Flowing to the Heart, not only either of Choler or Lympha, etc. only or
together, but of both, or of more. Whence there is a greater Confusion and
Disturbance in it, one while with a notable Palpitation of the Heart, presently
with its Motion and Pulse taken away to Sense, in the Hypochondriac Suffocation
so often observable.

56. Although the Palpitation of the Heart, and grievous Swouning arises
sometimes from Humors carried with the Blood to the Heart, producing a vicious
Effervescency; yet we think that it is oftener produced by Sharp Vapors elevated
from the Small Gut, because of a vicious Effervescency there also raised, and
then carried to the upper Orifice of the Ventricle and Gullet, and also to the
Heart through the Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Thorax, disturbing the
Effervescency of the Blood, and irritating the Heart.

57. I. Seeing the Effervescency of Blood wholly Abolisht is Incurable,
diligent heed must be taken, that it (as often as may) should be Shund and
Prevented in time; which will be, 1. where the Defect of Choler is to be feared
by the Disease Cholera, after the hurtful Effervescency of Choler then raging,
and its too great Effusion into the Guts is allied, (of which see Chap. 15.
Sect. 26, 29, and 34.) by Repairing and Renewing Choler, by the use of any
Sharp and Oily Aromatics, as the Distilled Oils of the Leaves and Flowers of
Rosmary, Majoran, etc. of the Seeds of Anise, Fenel, Carua, etc. of the Rinds
of Citron, Oranges, etc. of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, etc.

58. These Aromatic Oils, if they be united artificially with the Spirit of
Wine, are called by some Balsams, or Elixirs of Life; whereof one or two drops
being given in a convenient Liquor, especially Wine, do restore the Vital
Strength Languishing for the defect of Choler, and seem to snatch those out of
the Jaws of Death that otherwise were dying, do sometimes raise again those that
were esteemed for dead.

59. Hither also do appertain all Volatile Salts; though they that are Oily, are
more effectual than the rest, and therefore to be preferred.

60. The Abolisht Effervescency of Blood may be Prevented; 2. Where there is
fear thereof both in the Pest, and also in Malign Fevers, by reason of the
High Volatility and Acrimony of Choler then peccant, by Fixing, and
Coagulating, and Tempering it by very Tart Acids, Verjuice, crude Alum, Acacia,
or in place thereof the thickened Juice of Hypocistis, or Wild Plums, etc. Among
Chemical things, the Spirit of Nitre, Salt, Vitriol, Sulphur, Alum, and
suchlike are deservedly approved and commended, especially often distilled,
and made more mild with the rectified Spirit of Wine.

61. By all these Choler will not only be corrected, but the diminisht
consistency of the Blood will be restored, and the sluggishness of the Lympha
also amended, and so the Vital Effervescency of Blood for diverse Causes almost
Abolisht, will be preserved and restored.

62. The same Abolishment of Blood vitally Effervescent in the Right Ventricle
of the Heart, where by reason of too much Acidity of Lympha, there is fear lest
the Vital Fire be oppressed and suffocated together with Choler, at least the
Blood too much coagulated by it, cannot conveniently be rarefi'd, may 3. be
prevented by Correcting, and Breaking the faulty Acidity of Lympha by the
forementioned Oily Volatile Salts, and Aromatic Oils as well pure, as farther
elaborated into the forementioned Balsams of Life. Which seeing they hitherto
conduce, may deservedly be used almost in all danger of Life, that happens
without great heat, manifest both to the External Senses, and lying hid in
Malign Fevers, and especially burning and vexing the Midrif.

63. Not only the excedeing Acidity of Lympha may be diminished by the same
Oily Volatile Salts, but Choler also pressed, and almost oppressed, may be
strengthened, and the over-Coagulation of Blood it self be diminisht and reduced
to its natural state.

64. The Abolishment of the same Bloody Effervescency, where the necessary
space for rarefying Blood is so employed, that the Extinction of the Vital Fire
is nigh endangerd by too many Vapors, both in the Right Ventricle of the Heart,
and Vessels of the Lungs, may, 4. be Prevented by Dissipating the aforesaid
Vapors already produced, and Hindering their new breeding.

65. The aforesaid Aromatic Oils, and any, but especially Oily Volatile Salts do
dissipate and discuss Vapors; always selecting those things, which are prepared
of the parts of Plants apt of themselves to discuss Vapors, and suchlike things
found out by Experience.

66. A new production of Vapors may be hinderd by the same Aromatic Oils, and
Volatile Salts, as also by any others that cut the Viscousness of the Phlegmatic
Humors, as Acids, but chiefly by the Spirit of Nitre, whose Power in curing
this Disease is singular and stupendous.

67. The same Abolishment of the Effervescency of Blood, may be prevented. 5.
Where all the Vessels are filled with Blood in a Phlethoric and Athletic Habit,
by Diminishing the Abundance of Blood, by a sufficient Letting it out with
opening the Vein once, or oftener, as the matter requires, and need urges.

68. The same Abolishment of the wonted Vital Effervescency in the Blood may be
Prevented. 6. Where there is fear of a Suffocation by too potent a Fire arising
in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, rarefying the Blood too much in the most
Burning Fevers, by Tempering that Heat whencesoever arising, and especially by
Acids taken together with Drink, and aforementiond in Sect. 60. farther, by
changing and correcting the hot Air for colder, the close for more open, the
still for more blown, the moist for drier.

69. Because we think that our Vital Fire for the most part arises from Choler,
especially when it is too burning; therefore being guided by Reason, we judge
that those Remedies are especially then to be used, which most conduce to
correct Choler, such as also we have mentiond, Experience Accompanying.

70. The same Vital Effervescency ceasing for a longer or shorter Space both in
the Syncope, and Hypochondriac Suffocation may be Cured, by the so often proved
Aromatic Oils, and any Volatile, but especially Oily Salts; always making
variety of Mixtures, together with choice of Simples, according to the
diversity of Symptoms Accompanying.

71. For as where the above-named Suffocation urges, Castor, and its Tincture
extracted with rectified Spirit of Wine, and the Spirit of Salt Ammoniac are
deservedly preferrd before many others; so where Cold much urges, as well
Externally as Internally in the Syncope, or other Diseases like it, I commend
the Distilld Oil of Cloves, (before all others as yet found out by me) which is
not ungrateful; nor do I disprove the Oil of Turpentine less grateful, seeing
that with the Oil of Vitriol, it stirs up an Effervescency joined with a great
heat.

72. For Example take this following Mixture.

. Penyroyal-Waten ii. Simple Treacle-Water vi. Tincture of Castor ii. Distilld
Oil of Mace, of Amber, of each three drops. Sir. of Fenel ss. M.

Let this be Used in the Hypochondriac Suffocation, taking it often by
Spoonfuls.

73. To this Mixture may be added Sp. of Salt Ammoniac i. whence it will be
much stronger; or you may add 3, 4, or 5 drops of it to every Spoonful; or
apply to the Nostrils a Glass with a narrow neck, containing the aforesaid
Spirit, in the most grievous kind of this Disease; for by its sharp smell, the
Sick for the most part are wont to be raised, both from that Suffocation, and
from the Epilepsie.

74. In fear of the Syncope, or other lighter Swounings, joined with troublesome
and formidable Cold, prepare the Mixture following, of Medicines commonly to be
sold in the most Shops, in like manner to be taken by Spoonfuls in short spaces.

Mint-Water ii. Aq. Vitae Matthioli i. or Tincture of Cinnamon ss. Oil of Cloves
6 drops. Sir. of Scurvy Grass i. M.

75. I commend the afore-nam'd Volatile Salts, and Aromatic Oils, not only
because I am taught it by daily experience, but because Reason persuades the
same: Reason, I say, drawn from the Analysis of those Salts and Oils, and of
Swounings, and from the Efficient Cause of Hypochondriac Suffocation, Viscous
and Acid Phlegm, or likewise Viscous and Sour Vapors, or Tart ones also put
together. For those Salts and Oils have power to dissolve and cut that which is
Viscous, and to temper and correct that which is Sour and Tart, and again to
discuss and dissipate what is Vaporous and Windy.

76. Where the Sick, more like Dead than Alive, cannot open his Mouth nor shut
it, much less duly swallow any thing, then it will be commodious, instead of
the prescribed Mixtures, to have 3, 4, or more drops of the approved Aromatic
Oils, either Simple or more Compounded, or only confused and a little shaken,
or by greater Art and daily Circulation more intimately joind with the
rectified Sp. of Wine pourd into the Mouth of the Sick to the Jaws, by a Silver
or Gold Funnel, whereby they may pierce both into the Ventricle and Guts
(whence for the most part the Cause of so great an Evil is driven forward every
where) and into the Sharp Artery of the Lungs unto the Blood it self sticking
in the Vessels of the Lungs, and every where correct and amend the urgent harm.

77. Among the Antecedent Causes, and Non-natural Things, Sorrow of Mind may
and ought to be prevented, both by Philosophical and Theological Reasons
defending the Mind in time against every trouble; the Same now present and
urging should be taken away and overcome with them, although for the most part
it is slowly and by little and little.

78. The Mind also may be defended and prepared against the Fear to be expected
and foreseen, to bear stoutly any Adversity; whence the Mind will then be less
affected by the Terror given, whose harms will again presently vanish; as on
the contrary a Timorous Mind will be smitten more potently, and more
grievously, esteeming every contrary thing, though the least, for the most
grievous, being not fitted, or used to bear or endure any thing.

39. All are affected powerfully by an unexpected Terror; though the Fearful
and Sluggish more powerfully and longer; The Stout and Wise lightlier and
shorter, for Reasons newly given.

80. When the Vital Effervescency of Blood ceases by the pinching Coldness of
Air or Water, the Body of the Sick is not only to be carried into milder Air,
but not hot, or the Parts affected to be removed out of chillish Water, but
moreover the Sense is to be stirrd up in the External Parts with stronger
Frictions, yea, Medicines prepared of Aromatic Oils, and Volatile Salts, and
especially such as also will move Sweats are to be given, or pourd in at the
Mouth; whereby the Coldness and its Cause, together with the Blood, or Lympha
that flows back piercing to the Heart and more inward Parts may be driven out.

81. By the benefit of these Medicines, the Harm of Viscous and also Acid
Humors, and Wind that were before in the Body may be Amended: and for
Preventions-sake the same may be taken, as often as the Body is to be exposed
to over-Cold Air, or to go into Water.

82. II. The Effervescency of Blood Diminisht in the Heart, because of Choler
less sharp, may be Cured; 1. By Changing the Over-Cold, and Moist Air into
Hotter and Dryer, at least prepared by Art with a clear Fire, and Aromatic
Plants dispersed in the Chamber.

83. 2. By mixing Aromatic and Sharp Sauces with Meat, as also abstaining from
very Phlegmatic, Watery, Oily, and Sour Food.

84. 3. By detracting something from Sleep, and daily protracting Watchings.

85. 4. By exercising the Body more and more, even to a mean Weariness.

86. 5. By busying the Mind with Cares and Solicitudes, nor abhorring from
Anger not too vehement; chiefly studying for Gladness, and driving away Sorrow
and Fear.

87. 6. By Rindly moving the wonted Monthly Courses, and Sweats, by Medicines
described and to be described often, and especially in their proper place.

88. The aforesaid Effervescency Diminisht by too little Choler containd in the
Ascending Blood may be Cured, by the forementiond means, when it has the same
Causes which Choler less sharp had; but when it follows a Choleric Looseness, or
too great Evacuations of Choler evilly instituted by imprudent Persons, both by
compressing and suppressing that overgreat Efflux of Choler, if it still
continue, by more gentle T^rt things and Opiats, often already mentioned here
and there; and also by repairing the Defect of Choler, by Sauces or Medicines
both Aromatical and Sharp enough; also in several Chapters mentiond, as
Mustard, Horseradish, Cresses, Scurvy Grass, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Cardamoms, etc. For by the help of these Choler will not only become Sharper,
but also more Plenteous in the Body, and consequently the Effervescency of
Blood will be Increased being before Diminisht.

89. The same Effervescency Diminisht, because of Lympha not Acid enough may be
Cured; 1. By Changing the Air hot by the Sun, or any Fire with cold Air, and
betaking himself into a place Underground, or otherwise cool; and by
correcting the Moist or Rainy, chiefly by a clear Fire, especially prepared of
odorous Woods kindled in a Chamber, or in any other Lodging-place.

90. 2. By often using Sour Sauces and Medicines, the Juices of Citrons,
Oranges, Currants, Barberies, Vinegar, Sorrel, Spirit of Salt, of Vitriol, of
Sulphur, of Nitre, etc. by the help whereof the thence diminisht Effervescency
of Blood will be Encreast by little and little, together with the deficient
Acidity of Lympha. Which that it may be sooner, Phlegmatic, Watery, Oily, and
very Aromatic Food and Sauces are to be shund together, at least diminisht.

91. 3. By Diminishing Sleep, and daily Increasing Watches.

92. 4. By Exercising the Body more and more with moderate stirring.

93. 5. By Busying the Mind with Cares, and a sorrowful Solicitude.

94. 6. By Restoring the familiar Monthly Flux, or Looseness suppressed.

95. The same Effervescency of Blood Diminisht by too little Lympha, may be
Cured; 1. By Increasing the same gradually by Sour Sauces and Medicines before
mentiond, daily used at any time in a small quantity.

96. 2. By taking away every Obstruction of the Lymphatic Vessels, or any other
Narrowness, and the Cause of the Stoppage, and also of the Bursting of those
Vessels, and so of the Effusion of Lympha, by Medicines Dissolving and Cutting
Phlegm Coagulated in the fore-nam'd Vessels, and chiefly Sudorifics often
prescribed in this Treatise; always observing that those are used with greater
success, when the Body is composed to Sweat kindly, and especially when the
same is driven forth; for so that hurtful Obstruction is opend easier and
quicker.

97. Lastly, The aforesaid Effervescency of Blood Diminisht by the Lympha too
Viscous, may be Cured, by using the above-mentiond Cutting Medicines, both Acid
and Salt, and especially Volatile, such as are the Spirit of Salt, either simple
or dulcifi'd, and all Volatile Salts, especially Oily, so often and deservedly
recommended by us, daily and in less quantity taken, both without and with Food.

98. Mean while Viscous Food is to be shund; as also the cold and sharp Air,
and a grievous and continued sorrow of Mind: Instead whereof Food of easy
digestion is to be used, Wheat-Bread rightly fermented, of Flesh, those Flying
rather, then Watery adding Aromatic Sauces; and so go into, or make by Art the
Air warm and dry; and let the Mind be disposed to Cheerfulness, and recreated
with grateful Objects.

99. III. The Effervescency of Blood Encreast, may be Cured; 1. When over-sharp
Gall is its Cause, by Correcting and Tempering it chiefly by the above-recited
Acids, to be vari'd according to the peculiar Constitution of every Sick
Person, and more or less to be alterd by adding other things.

100. It may be Cured; 2. When the Gall being too plenteous in its Bag, goes in
too great plenty to the Heart, by Diminishing and Emptying it with Cholagogues
already often described by us, and chiefly in Chap. 2. Sect. 42, etc. but used
in a lesser Dose: Lest otherwise an over-Purging or other grievous Symptoms be
stirrd up.

101. They must also Abstain from farther use of Aromatic and Sharp, and
especially Bitter Sauces or Medicines.

102. The same may be Cured; 3. When the Descent of Choler to the Gut is
Hindered, by a Phlegmatic Obstruction that is in the Passage of Choler to the
Gut; by Dissolving it with such as Cut, as before in Sect. 97. and in Chap. 2.
Sect. 28, 30, etc. yea, everywhere described.

103. And if the Obstruction of the Passage to the Gut be Gravelly, it may
commodiously be Dissolved, both by the Decoction of Grass, or Water distilld
after a previous Fermentation, and also by the best Spirit of Nitre daily used
with other things, and also by others more special for this Gravelly
Coagulation.

104. The same may be Cured; 4. When Choler Swelling of its own accord, that
is, by an Internal Cause, is provoked to an Universal Effusion of it self, by
Thickening and Fixing both Choler, and the Volatile Acid raging in the Body,
chiefly by Sulphurs of Minerals or Metals, called Narcotics, or rather Anodyns,
as also the diverse Boles, and Sealed Earths, especially extracted about the Gold
Mines; by which that dangerous, and often deadly Effusion of fierce Choler may
also be Prevented.

105. We gave you the Cure of the Disease Cholera, in Chap. 15. Sect. 34. as we
intend anon in Chap. 29, etc. to give the manner of curing Burning-Fevers.

106. The same Effervescency of Blood Encreasd, may be Cured; 5. When the
Lympha, both Volatile and Sharp, though Less in quantity, is carried to the
Heart, and is the Cause thereof, both by Abstaining from farther use of Sauces
or Medicines, that have a Volatile and Sharp Acidity, and what is noted in Sect.
43. and by Taking by fits sour Things more Tart, and diluted in a sufficient
quantity of Water,

107. IV. This Effervescency of Blood perfected more speedily, because of
over-Little Phlegm in it, and Choler and Lympha therefore over-sharp, and too
little Temperd, may be Cured; 1. By Repairing and Increasing the desired Phlegm
with Food that breed much Phlegm, Broths prepared of the extreme parts of
Living Creatures, the Heads and Feet of Calvs, Sheep, etc. Fishes, especially
Seafish, Cows and Goats Milk, etc. By Abstaining in the mean while, at least
sparingly using very Sharp and Aromatic Sauces, or Medicines.

108. 2. By changing the Air any way Hot or Subtle into Cold and Thicker.

109. 3. By composing the Body from vehement and persevering Motion to Rest.

110. 4. By changing prolongd Watches, with longer and deeper Sleep.

111. 5. By freeing the Mind from grievous and molesting Cares and Solicitudes.

112. 6. By stopping and curing a Phlegmatic Diarrhaea, or any other
preternatural Deflux or Efflux of a Phlegmatic Humor, as is explaind in its
proper place.

113. V. The Effervescency of Blood proceeding too slowly by the Abundance of
Phlegm, especially Viscous, and therefore the Sluggishness of Choler and
Lympha, may be Cured with the Diet and Medicines proposed both in Chap. 2. Sect.
28, etc. and also in this Chap. Sect. 96, etc. and elsewhere.

114. The Depraved and Unequal, or Inordinate Effervescency of Blood, by the
Unequal Flux made to the Heart, either of Choler, or of Lympha, or of the
Liquor arising from the Ternarie of Humors Flowing together to the Small Gut,
or of any other Humor only as not enough observd, or of More together, whether
in the form of a Liquor, or Vapor, may be Cured; both, 1. by Correcting the
Fault of every Humor any way peccant: And, 2. by Restraining the vicious
Effervescency of more flowing together: And, 3. by Amending or Discussing
vicious Vapors, or Wind then raisd: And, 4. by Composing the Mind troubled with
any grievous Passion, the most frequent and potent Cause of diverse Humors
confusedly moved: And, 5. by Shunning or Tempering the Air or hurtful Food, the
more rare, and l^ss potent Cause of the aforesaid agitation of the Hamors.

115. 1. How and by what means the ^au^^ of every Humor in Man's Body hitherto
known, oug^^^ ^e Corrected, is often said before.

116. And because I made mention in Sect. 50 and 53, of this Chapter, of other
Humors that (to my knowledge) as yet are not known and seen by any; which I said
I suspected not without cause, were in Man, and also were mixed with the Blood
returning to the Heart, either immediately or mediately, and being vitiated,
did wonderfully sometimes disturb the Effervescency of the Blood, nor yet have I
named or shown them, this deservedly movd a famous Physician, who was pleased to
peruse these precedent things being Printed, to advise me, that I would at
least in a word or two explain what I had said, lest I should seem to have
deceivd any one, and lay open some of those Humors that were conjectured by me:
To whose acute and exact judgment, as I always attributed much, so I judged his
Counsel in this Matter to be followed by me.

117. Many things sometimes testify, both in Healthy and Sick Persons, that
something from the Testicles, or other parts ministering to the generation of
Seed, especially in those that are vigorous, and produce much of potent Seed,
goes through and passes into the Universal Body, which may much and strongly
affect it. To which saying, not only Effeminate Gelded Persons give assurance,
but both Men and Women more cheerful to Venery, and sometimes stirrd up by an
unexplicable fury of natural Lust, and especially at meeting the Object
potently moving the Senses, and wonderfully making commotion in the Fancy;
whence, when they cannot obtain their Wishes, or it is not convenient, the
infinite Histories full of commiseration noted by Physicians, do teach and
evince with how many Evils those miserable People are therefore thence vexed
and oppressed.

118. This same is confirmd by sweet and grateful Flesh of Gelded Brutes, Oxen,
Weathers, Capons, etc. much differing from the Flesh of Ungelded Brutes, Bulls,
Rams, Dunghil-Cocks, etc. rank and ungrateful in taste.

119. Add that Brutes no less than Men are wont very much to fatten after
Gelding; and Men made Eunuchs, before ripeness of Years, do seldom send forth
much of a manly Beard, or get a Man-like Voice.

120. That all these things are to be deduced from a Spermatic Vapor dispersed
through the parts of the Universal Body, as well containing as contained, many
things evince, which to set forth in many words cannot be done here.

121. Beside the Testicles, there are observd, up and down in Man's Body,
Glandules more or less differing from the rest, as those of the Kidneys, and
those other called Tracheales, in which that a Singular Humor is produced, and
immediately or mediately to be communicated to the Blood, their singular Fabric
proves.

122. Among these deservedly may the Glandule Thymus be numbered, of the kind of
those that are Conglomerated, whose proper Voiding Vessels, as they are
hitherto unfound out by all Anatomists, at least to my knowledge, so the Liquor
whatsoever carried through them, and so its true Use is even now unknown to all.

123. And because I being detaind perpetually with manifold Businesses, could
not be at leisure hitherto to search according to my wish what I desired of
these and other things, I have often exhorted many of mine Auditors, ingenious
and industrious in Anatomy, to search these and suchlike parts more
diligently; whereby, if it may be, they might search out these and many more
things, that as yet lie hid from us, and manifest to the Studious with the
praise and commendation of their name; which lastly I here make public again,
and wish happy success to every one.

124. Therefore until the Mentiond Humors, or Vapors be seen by Us, we will be
silent a while concerning their various Vices and convenient Remedies, whereby
returning into the way we may teach, As often as more Humors together, and that
diverse ways are judged to be peccant, and therefore more intricatly to vitiate
the Effervescency of Blood, so often those things are to be sought out by and
premised before others, which do chiefly help the more urgent Humor, or
distemperature, or else the general Remedies so to be tempered, that they may
together amend the Harms of every one, and cherish or increase none. Where
there is ^^ed of an experienced Judgment by the long use ^^^^hings, and of an
accurate Observation of those ^^ing's that Help and Hurt; which things being
^^g^cted, a Physician, very Careless, cannot but of^^^h deceived to the
detriment of the Sick.

125. 2. Opiats restrain any Effervescency of Hua^^^s before many others, and
universally: to which ot^^^ ^^hings may be added that also temper Them, as
(...) ^^^er requires, and according to the diversi^^^ (...) ^^^rs most peccant,
whose forms we have of^^^ (...).

(...) We have often prescribed in this Treatis^^ and ^^pecially in Chap. 9.
Sect. 23, etc. those things (...) Amend and Discuss Vapors and Wind.

(...) Solid Reasons compose the Mind troubled (...), and di^arbing all the
Humors in the Body (...) ^o the Sick Min^^ by Manly reasoning, and by potently
compelling its Assent both to former serenity, and also leading and confirming
it patiently and stoutly to bear the most troublesome things, when they cannot
be alterd.

128. 5. By what means both hurtful Food, and vitions Air, ought to be shund or
corrected, is often told before.

129. Seeing that the Unequal Afflux to the Heart, one while of Choler, anon of
Lympha, or of any other hurtful Humor which stirs up an Inordinate
Effervescency of Blood in the Heart, arises as well from diverse Passions of
Mind, as the other Non-natural Things diversely, but suddenly and reciprocally
invading the Sick, it may be Cured, also by diverse helps, as well Spiritual,
consisting in a consequent reasoning, as Corporal known by the name of
Medicines, often to be changed, or ingeniously to be mixed, according to the
diversity of accompanying Symptoms.

130. Seeing all these things may without difficulty be had out of what is
aforesaid, lest we should cause loathing by continually repeting them to the
Reader, we will rather hasten to what follows, studying brevity.

CHAP. XX. Of the Motion of Blood through the Lungs affected.
1. THe Blood raising an Effervescency, waxing Hot, and Rarefying in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, opens its Passage by degrees more and more, till by
that displaying the provoked Heart contracts its musculous substance by the
help of the Animal Spirits, and also presses out the Blood containd into the
Artery of the Lungs; out of which being pourd through the substance of the
Lungs (which seems most probable to me) into the Vein of the Lungs, goes on
unto the left Ear of the Heart, and its left Ventricle.

2. And whilst the Blood goes through the Lungs, it is mildly temperd in its
Heat and warmness, and more or less condensd by the Air sucked in, lest the
newly kindled Vital Fire in the Heart and Blood should be Suffocated by
over-plenteous Vapors raisd up by too much heat.

3. This Motion of Blood through the Lungs is Affected. 1. When there is None;
2. When it is too Slow; 3. When it procedes too Swiftly; 4. When the Blood is
driven forward another way, than it ought.

4. I. There is No Motion of Blood through the Lungs. 1. Because of its Defect
in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Hollow Vein being greatly wounded, and
almost all the Blood, that should otherwise flowd to the Heart, effusd within
or without the Body.

5. 2. Because of its Coagulation and Concretion, although I can scarce imagine
a sudden exceeding great one, unless perhaps in the most grievous Syncope, by a
Sour sharp Humor carried abundantly to the Heart; as we observed has often been
done by sour Spirits infused by a Syringe into some notable Vein of a Dog.

6. 3. Because of the Contraction of the Heart ceasing in a most vehement
Apoplexy, by reason of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves to
every part hinderd.

7. 4. Because of too much Filling again of the Vessels of the Lungs, both
often in an extreme Plethora, and seldom in any Obstruction of most of the
Vessels of the Lungs.

8. When this Universal Motion of Blood through all the Vessels of the Lungs,
is very much hindered, and ceases, or is Extinguished by the defect of Blood; or
Suffocated by its plenty, or standing still; they soon die, unless suddenly the
Blood abounding be diminisht by breathing a Vein, or flowing more plenteously
be turned another way, as the Matter requires.

9. When the Blood ceasing to move only in some Vessels of the Lungs by reason
of an Obstruction stands still there for some time, it breeds a Peripneumonia,
that is, an Inflammation of the Lungs.

10. II. Blood is moved more slowly through the Lungs; either, 1. because of
its Viscousness, produced by Phlegm alike Viscous, whencesoever arising.

11. Or, 2. because of the Narrowness of their Vessels, though not extreme.

12. Or, 3. because of the Scarcity of the Animal Spirits moving the Heart more
weakly; whether they have been consumed too much by Grief, Watchings,
solicitous Meditations, Cares, Wearyings of the Body, etc. Or if they have not
been repais'd by protracted Hunger, at least the defect* or neglect of
Spiritous Food.

13. III. Blood is moved more speedily through the Lungs; Either, 1. because of
its encreast Fluidity by any serous Humor abounding in it.

14. Or, 2. because of overgreat Heat in the Heart stir^d up any way, together
with a more potent and therefore swifter Rarefaction of Blood.

15. Or, 3. because of a Sharp Humor or Vapor carried together with the Blood
to the Heart, and provoking it to a more frequent contraction of it self, and
expulsion of the Blood contained.

16. IV. The Blood driven forward through the Lungs, is moved another way than
should be; 1. When it breaks forth into the Sharp Artery, out of its Vessels
corroded or burst, and is anon cast out by the Mouth in the Haemoptoc, that is,
Spitting of Blood.

17. 2. When it is essus'd into the Substance of the Lungs, out of its Vessels
any way opend, and produces a Peripneumonie.

18. 3. When it falls out of its Vessels Wounded into the Cavity of the Breast,
where being gatherd and changed into Matter, constitutes an Empyema, or
Spitting of Matter.

19. The Vessels of the Lungs are often Corroded by sharp, and salt, or sour
Humors falling down out of the Head to the Lungs; seldom, if ever, by suchlike
carried together with Blood to the Lungs.

20. The same Vessels are Burst; 1. By a Cough, Crying aloud, Leaping, or any
other over-vehement M^ti^n of Body.

21. 2. By Blood waxing too potently warm in the Heart, and withal too much
Distending the Vessels of the Lungs by waxing too thin.

22. The same Vessels are Wounded by any sharp Instrument, a Knife, Sword, or
any other like it struck into the Lungs through the Breast or Midrif, piercing
and cutting their Vessels.

23. I. The Motion of Blood in and through the Lungs Deficient, because of its
defect in the Right Ventricle of the Heart cannot be Cured.

24. A strong and sudden Coagulation and Concretion of Blood is to be esteemd
Incurable; but that which comes by degrees, and is gradually encreasd, may be
Cured by Medicines that break and temper the oversharp Acidity, and so such as
are both Spiritous and Oily, and especially have a Lixiviat Salt; although
volatile oily Salts do chiefly conduce to Man, as consisting of all and every
thing that is aforesaid, and are not only transfused, most speedily every way
in the Body, but do potently enough, though mildly effect and perfect the
desired amendment of the oversharp Sour Humor, if diluted, and often used in a
convenient Liquor.

25. Among the Medicines commonly known, Crab's-eyes are deservedly mentiond,
being dissolvd in Wine a little Sour, or in a little distild Vinegar, (whereby
they may the easier mix with the Acid Humor peccant in the Body). For Example;

. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each i. ss. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae i. distild
Vinegar ii. Crab's-eyes pouderd ss. Sir. of Scurvy Grass i. M.

Or,. Mint-Water ii. ss. Simple Treacle-Water vi. Tincture of Castor ii. Sp. of
Salt Ammoniac i. Oil of Orange-Peel 6 drops. Sir. of Fenel i. M.

The first Mixture will be less effectual, but more grateful; the latter less
grateful, but more efficacious; both used by Spoonfuls, will conduce to temper
the too sharp Acid Humor; although the latter is to be preferred, when any thing
of Tartness shall be observd to concur, whose chief sign is any Straitness
tending to the Hypochondriac Suffocation, whether it rise up to the Jaws, or
stick about the Midrif, and beget inexplicable anxieties to the Sick,
continually threatening a present Swouning.

26. The Contraction of the Heart ceasing in a vehement Apoplexy, will never
be Cured, nor easily prevented, unless by very Spiritous and Aromatic Liquors
often used, Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae, Apoplectic Waters and suchlike; mean
while not neglecting other things that correct and educe the Antecedent Causes
of the Apoplexy to be proposed elsewhere.

27. A Plethora of Blood is soon and safely Cured, by a sufficient Emptying of
it by opening a Vein; whether it be together and at once, or by repeted turns,
according to the peculiar nature and strength of the Sick. For there are many
who cannot bear to have much taken away together, but soon fall into a
Swouning; by which seeing none can at any time receive any good, I had rather
that it should be prevented, as often as may be, and every Cure be done
securely rather than rashly, seeing it often happens to those rash
Blood-Letters, that they educe Life together with the Blood: Whereof there is
no danger, if the Blood be taken in a smaller quantity by short spaces, to be
stopped as soon as the least sign appears of a present Swouning; and after that,
if the Disease still require, again to be taken away with more benefit to the
Sick.

28. The Reason, Generation, and Cure of an Obstruction and Inflammation
following it, shall particularly be treated anon in Chap. 40.

29. II. The over-slow Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cured; 1. By
Correcting its Phlegmatic Viscousness, by Medicines that Cut and Attenuate,
whether Spiritous, or Salt, or Oily, or sometimes Acid, used either alone, or
prudently mixed, often proposed.

30. 2. By taking away the present Straitness of the Vessels diversely according
to the diversity of the Causes peccant; but of these things elsewhere.

31. 3. By Repairing the want of the Animal Spirits contracting the Heart too
weakly, both by taking often Food very Spiritous, strong Wine, and especially
its Spirit, as well simple, as many ways Aromatiz'd with the addition of diverse
things, seldom alone and pure, often broken and diluted with the mixture of
grateful watery Liquors; and also by shunning, and moderating Cares, and
Watchings, night Studies, prolongd Weariness of Body, etc.

32. III. The over-swift Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cured; 1. By
diminishing its Fluidity by Thickning Food or Medicines.

33. Of Food use Feet, and other extreme parts of Brutes abounding with Gelie,
and so Fishes, and especially Seafish.

34. Let the Drink be Red Wine, and a little harsh, or Steeld Beer, or made
Medicinal with any more grateful Astringents.

35. Among Medicines we mention Diascordium, new Treacle, and every kind of
Sealed Earth, Hartshorn, etc.

36. The Pills of Hounds-Tongue correct the Salt Serous Humor before all other
things, taken daily once or twice to two or three Grains; instead whereof these
of Styrax following may be prepared and used in like quantity.

. Styrax Calamita, Juice of Licorice thickened or extracted, Olibanum, red
Myrrh. Opium of Thebes, of each ss. Oriental Saffron i. with Sir. of white
Poppies as much as is sufficient. Make it a Mass of Pills.

37. If Troches please better, use the following form, or one like it.

White Henbane, white Poppie-Seeds, of each ss. Male Frankincense, red Myrrh,
of each i. best Saffron ss. Juice of Licorice thickend i. Sugar of Marsh-malows
ss. Gum-Dragon dissolvd in Rose Water i. M. to be small Troches according to
Art.

Let the Sick keep one of these often in his Mouth, and swallow it by degrees.
Also Opium of Thebes ss. may be mixed with Them, whence any Acrimony of Humors
may more powerfully be corrected.

38. 2. The over-quick Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cured, by
tempering its Heat encreasd in the Heart by Sour and Watery things, of which
consists Sempervivum Majus, Plantane, Nightshade, Sorrel, etc. that allay the
heat of Blood more mildly or more potently.

39. 3. The same over-quick Motion of Blood through the Lungs, may be Cured, by
Tempering the sharp Humor (carried to the Heart) by those that are Spiritous,
Oily, and especially Opiats, and others often mentiond; and also when it
abounds, Educing it by Hydragogues often mentiond.

40. Sharp Vapors also carried to the Heart, are to be Temperd with the same,
and Discussd by Spiritous Diaphoreties, having both a Simple and Oily Volatile
Salt. Their new Production ought to he hindered especially by Opiats and
Anodyns, most convenient to the Constitution and Accompanying Symptoms.

41. IV. The Blood Essus'd through the Lungs Moved another way than whither it
ought, may be Cured; 1. In the Spitting of Blood, the burst or corroded Vessels
being speedily Consolidated by the Mixture described in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. or
one like it, being often taken by Spoonfuls: presently Turning the Blood from the
Lungs that flowd too plenteously in a Plethora by a Vein opend in the Arm, or
in either or both Feet; Lastly, The Sharp Salt, or Sour Humors that descend
from the Head, being Corrected by those before mentiond in Sect. 35, etc.
Opiats, and mild Aromatics. Also by Curing, or Shunning Coughing, Shouting,
Leaping, or any other too vehement Motion of the Body.

42. When the Vessels of the Lungs are distended near breaking by the Blood
Kindled, and waxing too thin, the Blood is to be let out speedily by Opening a
Vein, and temperd, moreover taking cooling Julaps in a sufficient quantity,
especially prepared of those that are Watery and Sour. For Example;

Barley-Water xx. Julap of Roses iii. Oil of Sulphur prepared by a Glass-Bell,
as much as suffices for an Acidity grateful to the Sick. M.

Let the Sick often drink a moderat Draught, till the Heat be observd to be
moderat.

43. The Cure of a Peripneumonie is to be seen in Chap. 40.

44. The most Wounds of the Great Vessels of the Lungs are wont to be deadly;
but the Cure of the Lesser, and also of Spitting of Matter, shall be given
elsewhere.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Alteration of Blood by Air Inspired, and Expired Depraved.
1. THe most do judge that Respiration was ordaind to temper the heat of Blood,
overheated by the Effervescency newly described in the Right Ventricle of the
Heart, because a more evident Heat is observd in the Universal Body, and
especially in the Heart of those living Creatures that have Lungs, and
therefore a double Ventricle in the Heart; which that it is allayd and temperd
by the Air Inspired, is evident by inconveniences following the Air that is
less fit to moderate it.

2. As I do not deny that this is, so I judge the Air inspired does chiefly
conduce again to condense the Blood much rarefi d in the Right Ventricle of the
Heart.

3. But how, or after what manner and way the Inspired Air alters the Blood to
both these ends, is not so manifest. I think it is, in as much as the Nitrous
and somewhat Acid parts are dispersed in the Air, that are able to condense the
hot and rarefi'd Blood, and mildly lay its heat.

4. I distinguish between the Somwhat-acid and Nitrous parts of the Air; seeing
that the more or less Acid is more simple, and the Nitrous more compounded, to
wit, of Acids, but not any, but such as are also Oily, joind with a lixiviat
Salt; which the artificial, that is, Chemical Solution and Composition of Nitre
makes manifest.

5. That manifold parts fly in the Air, not only Watery, Fiery, and Earthy, but
also Oily, Spiritous, Lixiviat and Acid Salts, diverse ways more or less mixed
with all of these, the many Experiments not unknown to sedulous Searchers of
Chemical Changes do evince, although most abstruse to Lazy Counterfeit
Philosophers everywhere, and prattling Cavillers; which sometimes, if the Matter
require, we intend to publish, for their sakes who are good and addicted to one
Truth, with many others out of our own Observations, as yet unpublished, by the
blessing of God, plenteous enough, though our Adversaries snarle at it.

6. This Tempering to be made in the Lungs no less useful, than necessary by
Air Inspired is Depraved, either when there is None, or too Little, or sometimes
too Much.

7. There is no Tempering of the Blood, when very hot and quiet Air is the
cause; whence a Man often falls into a grievous Swouning, or Death it self; The
Blood being highly rarefi'd and fluid, and therefore overwhelming and
suffocating its internal Fire, for want of the newly mentiond Nitrous or Acid
parts.

8. The Blood is more sparingly temperd by the Air Inspired, with the same
Cause but lighter, when the Sour and Nitrous Parts are fewer or more sluggish;
at least fewer are sucked in by Inspiration, than were desired to temper equally
the present and urging heat, and rarefaction of Blood.

9. Fewer Parts of Acid or Nitrous Air are drawn in, because of Inspiration it
self hindered, which is to be explaind in the next following Chapter.

10. The Nitrous or Acid parts are too Few or Sluggish in the Air by very great
Heat or Moisture in it; a Sign whereof moreover, if not also a Cause, is
usually a great Calm of Air.

11. The Oily parts of the Air rarefie potently, but the Salt and Sour are
allayd and become too sluggish by the Beams of the Sun, both Fiery and
Spiritous, the most frequent cause of the hot Air; as being dissolvd by watery
or rainy Moisture, they are weakened; whence no wonder if such being suckd in,
are less fit to temper the heat of the Blood.

12. The use of Bellows so very useful in moderating the heat of the Air by a
mild agitation, evinceth the quiet Air to be less fit to temper the Blood, than
when it is but a little moved.

13. As it is evident that Cold is produced by any Wind, or by the motion of
the Bellows from the Sense of Cold in the external parts receiving the Air so
moved; which I judge is partly by the discussion of the Fiery Parts collected
about us, the heat of the Air urging, and therefore producing a greater heat in
us; partly by the bringing together and gathering of the Nitrous and Acid
Parts, first either broken, or driven away every whither and removed from each
other by the fiery Parts; at least by more plenty and efficacy of those fiery
less perceived by Sense.

14. The Blood carrid through the Lungs, is too much Temperd, that is, Condensd
and Coold by the Air Inspired, when the Nitrous or Acid parts abound in the
Air, by which often especially in the Winter-Season, the North Wind blowing,
and in the Regions near the cold Zone, and chiefly when the Universal Body was
first too hot, then Blood is so coagulated in the Lungs, that it begets an
Obstruction in its Vessels, or middle windings of the Lungs; whence follows
always a Stoppage of Blood it self, and sometimes a Bursting of the Vessels by
their Distension, and an Effusion of Blood, together with a Peripneumonie
encreasd by the Blood continually flowing to it; and after the Aposteme is
opend, a Consumption of the Lungs called Phthisis, and afterward for the most
part Death.

15. The Tempering of Blood in the Lungs Abolisht and Diminisht, may be Cured,
by changing the very Hot Air with Cold, whether Natural or Artificial. For such
Air Caves and Cellars under ground, not seldom Nitrous are wont to contain.
Such do we make by Art by diluting Nitre, or Salt Ammoniac in Water, and
presently pouring it out on the Chamber-floor; or by sprinkling sharp Vinegar
alone, or mixed in like manner with Water; or in like manner casting sowrish
Plants, or their Leaves and Flowers in the Chambers, by the help of all which
we increase Sour and Nitrous Parts in the Air.

16. The great Calm of Air by the Winds quite laid is artificially to be stird
by Bellows, or any other way stirring up the Wind.

17. The moisture of Cloudy Air is corrected, by making a clear fire with Wood.

18. The following Chapter will teach how Respiration hindered may be Cured.

19. The too great Condensation, and Cooling of Blood carried through the
Lungs, may be Cured, by changing the over-sharp and cold Air, for hotter and
more calm; and by kindling in a fit Chamber, Fires great enough; and by using
Medicines that allay the Nitrous and Acid parts of Air admitted.

20. How to Cure the other harms following this chill Air Inspired, and before
mentioned, shall be shown beneath in Chap. 40. where expressly shall be handled
of an Inflammation.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Inspiration of Air Depraved.
1. WE said in the former Chapter, that the Air was both Inspired, and also
Expired mildly to condense, and cool the Blood waxing hot out of the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, and driven forward through the Lungs to the Left
Ventricle.

2. This Inspiration of Air happens, as often as at the expanding of the Midrif
downward, and elevating the Thorax upward, the Lungs adjoind to both are
together dilated; as we judge we have proved it abundantly in many things in Our
Eighth Physical Disputation.

3. The same Inspiration of Air is Depraved; 1. When it Ceases, or is Abolisht.
2. When it is not sufficient, and therefore is too Frequent. 3. When it is with
pain and Difficulty.

4. I. The Inspiration of Air is said by me to Cease, when there is no need
thereof; which happens both in the Syncope, and in some kinds of Hypochondriac
Suffocation; in which a Man sometimes may want all Respiration, at least
manifest to Sense for a notable time, (to wit, whole days without the change
of Life with Death) of which only true Physicians are wont to speak, judging by
what is observd by Sense, yielding the Imaginary Respiration to imagining
Doctors.

5. But then there is no necessity of Inspired Air, because there is no notable
Burning of Blood raisd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, there happening no
notable Rarefaction of the same; wherefore the Blood having no heat there needs
no Tempering, its desired Rarefaction no condensing; but the Ventricles of the
Heart are not very much expanded, or otherwise provoked to contract it self in
such a Disease; whence the Pulse then is Deficient to Sense of necessity. Of
which see also Chap. 19. Sect. 14, etc.

6. The same Inspiration of Air is said by me to be Abolisht; when its need of
being inspired does urge, there being a notable Effervescency and Rarefaction
of Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Pulse remaining great and
strong enough, though for a short space, yet the Inspiration it self Ceases,
and is suddenly taken away, in the forementiond Suffocation or Strangulation.

7. The Inspiration of Air so necessary to Life being full of motion is
Abolisht, either by the fault of the Thorax and Midrif, or of the Lungs and
Ways.

8. I think that Inspiration cannot be Abolisht by the fault of the Breast, or
Midrif alone, although when both are deficient together in their Motion,
nothing hinders but that it may be.

9. They are Deficient together in their Motion, when all the parts are
destitute of the Animal Spirits, and hence of Sense and Motion in the most
grievous Apoplexy, whence Death succedes certainly and suddenly.

10. The Inspiration of Air may be Abolisht by the fault of the Lungs, when the
sharp Artery is straightened after any extreme manner.

11. The Inspiration of Air may be Abolisht by the fault of the Ways tending
to the Lungs, when either the Mouth and Nostrils together are quite stopped, or
the Throat is obstructed or comprest excedingly, in the Suffocating Catarrh so
called, the Squinsie, Strangulation, etc.

12. The Inspiration of Air is not sufficient, and therefore also Frequent;
Both, 1. by the fault of the Blood carrid through the Lungs; and, 2. of the
Breast; and 3. of the Midrif; and, 4. of the Lungs; and, 5. their Ways.

13. 1. This happens by the fault of Blood carrid through the Lungs, as often
as it being too much Kindled and Rarefi'd in the Heart, cannot be enough
temperd by the Air, inspired in its wonted quantity and manner; but requires
more of it than is usual; wherefore, the Expansion of the Breast and Midrif is
both Greater, and especially more Frequent to help that defect, and that more
Air may be inspired; seeing that it is more easily hastened then augmented; add
that an often iterated Inspiration of a little external Air, is more convenient
to temper continually the Blood too much raising an Effervescency, than too
great plenty of it coming more seldom.

14. 2. The Inspiration of Air is not sufficient, and therefore too Frequent by
the fault of the Breast* when it cannot be lifted up, and expanded enough, and
as much as ought, both because of the Gristles of the Breast too much hardened,
and especially because of a Pleurisy hindering the Dilatation of the Breast, by
reason of the Pain accompanying.

15. 3. The Inspiration of Air is not Sufficient, and therefore too frequent by
the fault of the Midrif, either when it cannot conveniently be stird up in its
double and reciprocal Motion, because of its proper Disease, especially an
Inflammation, or when it cannot be enough expanded downward by want of spa^e in
the Belly, and other Impediments there; as it usually falls out in a grievous
Dropsy called Ascites, or when the Child lies high in the Womb, the Stomach or
Guts distended with Wind, etc.

16. 4. The Inspiration of Air is not Sufficient, and therefore too frequent by
fault of the Lungs, when their Universal Substance, or at least the most part
is too little spongie, and too small, or they are troubled with a
Peripneumonie, or urged only with a moderate Straitness of the notable Branches
of the Sharp Artery.

17. The Substance of the Lungs is too little Spungie, as often as it is too
Fleshy and Solid, such as I have often found in the Dissecting of several after
Death; or also wrinkled, such as have been sometime in like manner observd ^y
me: although I think it very hard, if not impossible to render the adequate
Cause of this Disease; yet I conjecture that the Substance of the Lungs becomes
too Fleshy and Solid, as often as it is both lightly fretted, and again
consolidated and nourished so, that by degrees its Flesh becomes more solid by
the too sharp, together with the too viscous Blood in the middle part between
the Arteries and Veins.

18. I refer the Wrinkling of its Substance to be taken from the over-Tart and
Sharp Blood rather po^ently contracting, than truly nourishing it there ^ightly
fretted; unless perhaps it happen by Matter or Water likewise tart, gatherd in
the Cavity of the Breast, and by degrees piercing and binding it.

19. 5. The Inspiration becomes more Frequent, because not Sufficient, by the
fault of the Ways grant^ng passage for the Air to the Lungs, when the N^^trils
only are more or less stopped, both continually in an Hurt, or by Chance, etc.
commonly inbred, or by an external Cause, often accidental, the harm being
adventitious and permanent, and often by spac^s ^n a Disease that troubles
sometimes more, other^imes less, as in the Stuffing of the Head, a P^lypus, etc.
and sometimes by External Things put up the Nostrils, whence the Inspiration of
Air is then to be made with open Mouth; which will therefore be more hindered,
and so more frequent; and yet more, if the Sick be to speak or walk for a
space; especially if he must hasten.

20. The same may hap, if the Entrance of the Throat be more or l^ss st^pt with
thick and viscous Phlegm, or the Tonsills be Inflamed, or otherwise Swelld, and
stop up the way at least in part of the Air to be Inspired, in which Disease a
more frequent Inspiration is observd, whether it proceed from a Straitness of
the Ways alone, or the Trouble come (which to me is most probable) by the
over-cold Air too plenteously sucked in at once; to shun which, a more frequent
and also less Inspiration may be orderd.

21. III. The Inspiration of Air which is with Difficulty, is generally called
Dyspnaea; the chief kinds whereof are an Hard Breathing, Orthopnaea Asthma,
Incubus, and Hypochondriac Suffocation, joind with the Fear or Sense of
Strangling: To which we may add an Interrupted and Hindered Inspiration in the
Hicket, Sighing, and pricking pains of the Pleurisy.

22. In a simple Hard Breathing, the Inspiration is wont to be little and also
quick; but in an Orthopnaea less quick and much greater, and indeed with the
Neck straight, and stretched forth; as in an Asthma there is observd, besides a
more difficult Inspiration proceeding, with Labor, a Wheazing or Snoaring in
the Breast, together with a Cough, in which often something is spitted out, often
nothing; with the Nightmare to them only that sleep, and especially on their
Backs, a Dream of weight pressing the Midrif, and threatening a Suffocation is
joined; whence Melancholic People are often wont to dote wonderful things to
themselves, of a certain or uncertain Person hated. The Jaws are so streind in
the Hypochondriac Suffocation depraving Inspiration, (more commonly befalling
People awake than asleep) that the Sick think themselves in danger of
Strangulation.

23. In an Hicket, Inspiration is interrupted by uncertain and unequal
Intervals, by reason of the Convulsive Motion of the Midrif, sometimes more,
othertimes less; which suffers a continued though lesser Interruption, joind
with oftness whilst Sighs do urge; as in a Pleurisy it is chiefly interrupted,
as often as the Feverish Heat urging more, there is an endeavor of more Breath.

24. Every Dyspnaea is stirrd up, both for the most part by Wind, or Vapors
produced in the Small Gut by Phlegm rarefi'd by Choler, and rising up partly
through the Stomach and Gullet to the Mouth, hence perhaps piercing farther
into the Pipes of the Lungs, with the inspired Air; and partly, being carrid
plenteously through the Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Thorax to the upper
Hollow Vein, hence the Right Ventricle of the Heart; lastly, the Vessels of the
Lungs, and their spungie Substance it self, stick there, and so hindering their
explication no less requisite than complication, thence strangely and sorely
vexing the Sick; and sometimes by viscous Phlegm falling down out of the Head,
and seizing on the Pipes of the Lungs, and producing a diverse narrowness in
them. Whence according to the simplicity or complication of these Causes, and
so a greater or less harm, sundry kinds of the Dyspnaea do arise, and sometimes
less, other-times greater.

25. In the Asthma and Orthopnaea for the most part both Causes concur,
although in the Asthma, which is called Hidden, Vapors or Wind only seems (in
my thoughts) to molest; and that the same do effect all in the Hard Breathing,
and Hypochondriac Strangulation, whosoever attentivly examins, and weighs all
the Symptoms then befalling the Sick will easily acknowledge.

26. We intend to give you the Breeding, and Cure of the Hicket, Sighs, and the
Pleurisy, in the next and 40th Chapter.

27. I. We have related something of the Cure of the Syncope, and the most
grievous kinds of Hypochondriac Suffocation, in Chap. 19. Sect. 70, etc. which
may there be seen.

28. The Inspiration of Air Abolisht, the Breast and Midrif being deficient
together in their Motion, by the defect of the Animal Spirits in the most
grievous Apoplexy, is Incurable, because any impediment cannot be soon enough
taken away, by which the rising of the Nerves is so comprest, that Passage for
the Animal Spirits through Them to the lower parts is denied.

29. The Inspiration of Air Abolisht, because the Sharp Artery is much
straightened, may be esteemed for Incurable, unless the Blood, Matter, Phlegm, or
any other thing which fills it, be soon expelld with strong Expiration; or the
Band that straitens it in its Strangulation be taken away.

30. The same Inspiration Abolisht, the Mouth, and Nostrils being both stopped,
may be Cured, by taking away forthwith the Causes stopping, lest otherwise
Death follow in a short while.

31. So the Inspiration of Air Abolisht by an Obstruction of the Jaws, and
chiefly of the Throat, may be Cured, by speedily removing any Cause of an
Obstruction, either by drawing it out, or by forcing it into the Gullet, and
hence to the Stomach.

32. The same may be Cured, there being an extreme Straitness of the Throat
because of the Squinsie molesting, by curing the Squinsie any way, by letting
of Blood in the Limbs to turn it away, and under the Tongue to draw it forth,
and by Cataplasms and Gargarisms, both of a potently Cutting, Ripening Faculty,
and suchlike.

33. If the Inspiration of Air be Abolisht by the compression of the Throat by
an Halter, it may be Cured if the Halter be loosd or cut in time.

34. II. The over-Frequent Inspiration of Air; 1. Because of the encreasd
Kindling and Rarefaction of Blood in the Heart may be Cured, that Heat being
allaid, as well by Letting Blood, as by temperat Acids, or Salt Nitre, either
pure, or after it has been fired by the help of Sulphur into the Salt, or Stone
called Prunellae.

35. 2. The Inspiration of Air not sufficient, and therefore ton Frequent,
arising by the hindered due explication of the Breast, the Gristles being of a
bony hardness, and so inflexible, cannot be Cured, unless by softning the
Gristles; which what Medicines can perform, is known as yet but to a few;
although there have been some, who have even softened any Bones, bowed them
variously, and again have hardened them according to their pleasure, which is
admirable.

36. The Cure of an Hindered and over-Frequent Inspiration, because of the Pain
of the Pleurisy follows the Cure of the Pleurisy, to be had in the general
Method of Curing any Inflammation, of which see Chap. 40.

37. 3. The Inspiration of Air two Frequent and hindered, following an
Inflammation of the Midrif, may be Cured, that being cured according to the
forecited general Method.

38. The same Inspiration hindered, because the Midrif is hindered in its
expansion, may be Cured, in the Dropsy called Ascites, by emptying Water out
of the Cavity of the Belly any way; when the Woman is with Child, by sending
out the Birth; in the Tympanie, when the Stomach or Guts are distended with
Wind, by thrusting them forth, or by their own ceasing.

39. 4. The Inspiration of Air not Sufficient and too frequent, following the
Substance of the Lungs, either made too Fleshy and Solid, or Wrinkled, is by me
esteemed Incurable.

40. The same caused by a Peripneumonie, may be Cured, it being Cured after the
manner of other Inflammations.

41. The same when to be ascribed to a mean straitness of the notable Branches
of the Sharp Artery, may be Cured, the Cause of that Straitness being taken
away, sometimes Internal filling its Branches more or less, sometimes External,
and sticking in the substance of the Lungs and compressing them; of which in
general we must speak elsewhere.

42. Here you may observe, as often as the Sharp Artery is stopped with Phlegm,
whether fluid, or viscous, or sharp, or mild, or with Blood clotterd or
dissolvd, or with Putresi'd Matter thick or thin; or sometimes in those that are
duckt in the Water, piercing into the Lungs, so often the Cure may be begun and
promoted, sometimes only by letting out the Water receivd in, more oft^n by a
Cough stirrd up by what is containd in them; whose expulsion sometimes either
those things that Cut, or Thicken may help, being vari'd according to the
variety of what is to be thrown forth, often to be taken in a mean quantity.

43. You may also observe, that here a Vomit is sometimes commodiously enough
ordaind, seeing Experience confirms that the Expelling of what is containd in
the Sharp Artery, is also promoted by a vehement endeavor of Vomiting; except
in the Spitting Blood, in which always a Vomit is dangerous.

44. 5. An Inbred and stubborn harm, either at Birth, or after Birth, risen by
chance possessing the Nostrils, and hindering Inspiration, a straitness being
made there, compelling it to be more Frequent, is seldom wont to be Cured,
because it is an hard thing to take away an old Growing together, or
Obstruction of those Parts.

45. The same Inspiration hindered because of a Stuffing in the Head, or a
Polypus, is wont of its own accord to return to its perfectness after these are
Cured.

46. As often as Inspiration is hindered by any kind of Things put up into the
N^strils and stopping them, so often it is again finished, those being drawn
forth.

47. Inspiration hindered by viscous Phlegm stopping the Entrance of the Throat,
may be Cured by Gargarising, the Phlegm being removed and spit out.

48. The Inflammations of the Tonsils, or Greater Tumors, are to be Cured,
partly by the general Method, partly by Gargarisms, before that Inspiration
thereby hindered can be restored.

49. III. A Dyspnaea arising from Wind or Vapors, produced by Ch^ler, from
Phlegm in the Small Gut, may be Cured; 1. By Amending Phlegm peccant in any
Quality, and by Emptying it when too much in Quantity, by Remedies often
forecited.

50. 2. In like manner by Correcting Choler, if peccant in any Quality, or by
Evacuating it, if abounding, by Medicines often proposed.

51. 3. By Dissipating or carrying out Wind or Vapors by Stool, with the help
of Carminative Clysters so call d, or by excluding them upward in the form of
Belches, before they pierce into the Lacteal Veins, by Remedies sometimes
already prescribed.

52. 4. By Discussing the same more potently, and also driving them out
together with a mild Sweat, as soon as ever they have pierced to the Lungs, and
stick in them; and that by the often m^^^iond Aromatic Sudorifics.

53. A Dyspnaea coming from viscous Phlegm (...) down out of the Head into the
Jaws, and p^ss^^^^^ the Pipes of the Lungs, may be Cured; 1. By H^dring its
coming into the Head by any Aromatic Medicines, Rosmary, Sage, etc. so often
minded before, and often to be used daily at any time in a little Dose.

54. 2. Both by Cutting, and Attenuating it gatherd in the Head, by the same
Aromatics, and by Carrying it out, both by Stool by means of Phlegmagogues
often proposed; and also through the Nostrils, with the help of things that
promote Sneezing; and also through the Mouth, by the means of Medicines to be
Chewed.

55. 3. By Cutting the same carried into the Lungs by the newly named
Aromatics, and if there be a Cough by spitting it out by Aromatic Bechics also
containd in the Mouth, and exceeding slowly swallowd, whereby some part of them
may pierce to the Lungs.

56. As those Medicines are to be always preferrd before others of the same
Kind and Nature, which are noted by the long experience of many to be more
special and useful for any Disease; so also here are they to be chosen before
other Aromatics, which both others, and their own Observations have shown to be
more convenient for every kind of a Dyspnoea: Neither must we pass by the
singular Constitution of every Sick Person; seeing that according to it, we may
daily experience that there is choice to be had of Medicines otherwise excelling
in the same Disease; which none that is well verst in Practice, and attent to
those things, which daily happen diversely, will ever deny.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Expiration of Air Depraved.
1. THe Air attracted into the Lungs by Inspiration, after it has done its
Office, ought to be again put forth, whereby a place may be gotten for other
succeding Air, and this exclusion of Air is called, Expiration.

2. This Expiration is chiefly Perfected by the Muscles of the Belly, both
drawing down the Thorax, and compressing all that was containd in the Belly,
and driving them forward toward the Midrif, and so compelling the Midrif
upward, and consequently by mild^y pressing out the Air containd in them by
straitning the Lungs; the proper Motion of the Midrif together concurring,
making a greater straitness in the Breast.

3. This Expiration of Air is Depraved; 1. In Sneezing, wherein after some stay
of Inspiration begun, gun, the Air is at once put forth suddenly, and with a
great force, though suddenly ceasing, or by abrupt force chiefly through the
Nostrils, and sometimes the Mouth also with a vehement Concussion of the
Universal Body, and exclusion of those things that are in the way.

4. The same Expiration of Air is Depraved; 2. In a Cough; in which the sending
forth of Air, and what is Containd in the Sharp Artery, in and through the
Mouth, (if any thing be there and follow it) is not at once, but at many also
and interrupted times, with a different concussion of the Body, one time mild,
another time vehement.

5. Every Cough is either called Moist, when by its help the Humors containd in
the Sharp Artery, as Phlegm, Blood, Matter, etc. are afterward to be brought
up into the Mouth, or are expelld out through the Mouth.

6. Or Dry, when nothing is spit out, though with great and much labor, but
the Universal Body is weari'd in vain with endeavoring to Cough; whence there
is sometimes raisd a vehement Pain both of the Head, and Hypochondries, and of
other Parts, yea, sometimes a Rupture is bred by it, sometimes the Urine or
Excrements are unvoluntarily extruded.

7. 3. The same Expiration is depraved in an Hicket, in which the Region of the
Stomach is observd to be suddenly and violently driven forward, and outward,
that Motion truly Convulsive, soon ceasing, and again often repeting, and so
then the most troublesome and grievous Symptom to the Sick.

8. I judge the Midrif is affected in an Hicket in that part of its Motion,
wherewith it serves for Expiration; and in which it is perceivd (by Touching no
less than Seeing in the opend Belly of Brutes still living) to be contracted
with a force great enough toward the Region of the Stomach.

9. Wherefore I judge the Hicket to be the proper Disease of the Midrif, and in
no wise of the Stomach, seeing that besides what is already said, it may be
Voluntary, and can be stird up by Me, and others at any time as we please.

10. Yet will I not deny that the Midrif is for the most part drawn into
consent to make an Hicket by the Stomach first affected, and especially by
Sharp Vapors, or Wind, or Humors, whencesoever procedeing, and piercing what
way soever to the Membraneous Center of the Midrif, and provoking it by
pricking, or corroding, to perform that Convulsive Motion.

11. Therefore I judge the true Cause of the Hicket to be, whatsoever is apt to
compel the Midrif to a violent, but not continued, and presently interrupted,
or ceasing, and again often a repeating Contraction of it self; whether it be
found in the Stomach, (to which hurtful and sharp Medicines or Food, rather to
be called Poison, are to be referrd) or the same rise up out of the small Gut
by the Vicious Effervescency of the Humors meeting raisd in the form of an
Humor, Vapor, or Wind, and so affect the upper Orifice of the Stomach,
especially by corroding, that the Midrif encompassing it is also affected; or
the same being shut up in the Cavity of the Thorax, or Belly immediately frets
the Midrif, or is carried to it through its Vessels, and sticking in its
Substance, corrodes its sensible parts, or compells it any other way, to that
troublesome, and convulsive, solitary, and moreover continually repeating
contraction of it self.

12. If any shall observe both the external and internal evident Causes of
Sneezing, he will find it is raisd, one while by the brightness of the Sun
shining, either immediately, or from the Snow, Ice, Water, a Looking-Glass,
etc. by means of reflection; othertimes by sharp things, to wit, Onions,
Mustard, Radish, etc. or by things moved or drawn to the Nostrils, or taken in
at the Mouth; other-times also by sharp Humors falling down from the Head to
the Nostrils in a Stuffing of the Head, or Snuffle of the Nose; or from Vapors
or Rifts, likewise sharp ascending out of the Stomach or Small Gut, and
provoking the Nostrils, so that there is always felt a pulling of the Nostrils
of what kind soever: Whence all these diverse Causes do deservedly seem so far
to produce a Sneezing, in as much as they move the Nostrils, those parts
ascribed to Expiration by provoking, and pulling them to expel that trouble,
the Air together being potently expired through the Nostrils; with which
vehement Excussion of the Air, a vehement Shaking also of the Universal Body
uses to concur.

13. The Cause of a Cough is, whatsoever can pull the Sharp Artery of the
Lungs, or any way provoke and molest it.

14. And indeed the Cause of a Moist Cough is observd to be manifold; for
sometimes certain things coming from without, or taken in at the Mouth, and
being wrong carried into the Sharp Artery, do soon raise a troublesome Cough:
At other-times the Humors (and for the most part Phlegmatic of several kinds,
either Sharp, and Salt, or Sour; or Mild, and Insipid; other-whiles thin and
fluid, or thick and viscous; sometimes Blood pure, or mixed with other Humors;
and sometimes Purulent Matter) falling down from the Head, and piercing into the
same Sharp Artery, do compel the Lungs to Cough: Again, Humors likewise
Various, (Blood, Purulent Matter, and perhaps Phlegm, or a Serous Humor)
carried out of the Substance, or Vessels of the Lungs into the same Artery, do
breed a Cough.

15. As often as Blood coming out of the Lungs is sent forth with a Cough, so
often this Disease is called a Spitting of Blood, and Haemoptoic Passion.

16. A Dry Cough has for its External Causes, both cold Air, and Drink receivd
largely, and troubling the Sharp Artery: but for Internals, sometimes a very
viscous or very thin and sharp Catarrh, scarce yielding to the Air that is
vehemently expired; sometimes Vapors or Wind elevated from the small Gut, and
Ventricle, through the Gullet, and sucked into the Lungs together with the Air;
or insinuating themselves from the same Gut, through the Lacteal Veins, into
the Heart and Vessels of the Lungs; yea, their Substance, even to the Sharp
Artery, and provoking it continually to Cough without excluding it self.

17. The manifold Diseases noted in Expiration Depraved, may be Cured; 1. By
taking away, or correcting their External Cause. 2. By curing any Internal
Diseases of the Solid Parts. 3. By Amending any Harms of the Parts Containd;
and also by diminishing their Abundance, and by Correcting their vicious
Qualities; and by removing out of place, or moving out those that are peccant
in place, etc.

18. And that we may begin at the Hicket, as often as hurtful and sharp Food,
or Medicines, or rather Poison are in the Stomach, unless they can be temperd
and corrected by those that Alter, they are to be Expelld, either by a Vomit
upward the shorter way, or by a Purge downward the longer way; which is also to
be understood of any Humors found in the Stomach, or Small Gut, and causing,
the Hicket.

19. We have often before proposd Medicines that Alter and Correct the Humors,
as also any thing taken in what way soever peccant, so that it seems not
necessary to repete them here again; we only admonish you this one thing, That
Opiats do conduce before all other things in curing any Hicket; not only in as
much as they temper any sharp Humors, but moreover in as much as they blunt the
Sense of the Stomach, and perhaps also make the Animal Spirits more slow of
Motion; if they be used by times in a small quantity, and so long, till the
Hicket either ceases, or is notably diminisht.

20. Among Vomits, I here prefer Antimonials before all others, both because
they do most happily empty any Humors promiscuously, and because they are most
friendly to Man's Nature, by degrees bringing all the Humors in Man after a
peculiar manner, to a most laudable state; which power I doubt whether it be in
other things likewise, but know it is in Antimonie; whatsoever Men blinded with
their Prejudices prate to the contrary, both otherwise Learned and Unlearned.

21. But beware lest they be together taken in too great quantity, seeing
indeed every Excess is an Enemy to Nature; and it is always safer that they be
given in a less than in a greater Dose, for no harm will at any time follow the
first, though often the latter: for (notwithstanding the Opinion of many
Pretenders, as well as Unskilful Physicians) neither do other Purgers, and
especially Antimonials rightly prepared, and used in a less quantity, and
emptying no Humor upward or downward hurt any, which I having very many times
experienced do testify; but they always then are profitable, either by
amending the hurtful Humors in the Body, or by preparing them farther for the
following Purge; which I would chiefly have noted by Younger Physicians, for
whose sakes this my little Treatise is publishd, and not for the Elder, who are
verst in the Works of Art, and therefore need not my Information; much less for
the obstinate, rejecting any thing of an other Man's by Prejudice or Envy, and
no less unskilfully, than wickedly carping at them.

22. When therefore after Narcoties are first conveniently used, a Vomit has
been taken, and little or nothing is cast out upward or downward; and the
Hicket still urges, and signs of the Humors remaining in the Stomach, or next
Gut, raising this Evil do remain, then you may safely give the Sick a new Vomit
either the same day, and then in less quantity, or another in the next in a
somewhat greater quantity, whereby the peccant Humors will be more corrected, or
expelld upward or downward, or both ways: For so the truly Rational and
Dogmatic Cure of the Hicket will be most safely, and no wise unpleasantly, and
soon enough absolvd: chiefly leaning on Experience, and hence Sound Reason, not
Weak or Commentitious, and so false.

23. If the Vicious Humors be voided by the Vomit taken, and the Sick be
weari'd by vomiting, an Aromatical Mixture may conduce, as being most
convenient to dissipate the molesting Vapors sticking about the Stomach,
together with Opiats added in a small quantity, and the most apt to assuage the
stirrd up too potent Effervescency of Choler, and and the Juice of the Pancreas
by Vomiting, and to procure Sleep mildly, and to stay the Hicket more. For
Example;

. Mint-Water ii. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae, or Simple Treacle-Water ss.
Confection of Alkermes i. Laudanum 2 Grains. Syrup of Mint i. M.

Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture, till he find his Body
disposed to Sleep; which that he may the sooner take, let him lie down
commodiously.

24. To this Mixture may be added Sp. of Nitre six or eight drops, as often as
Wind also molests, which often happens.

25. If the Sick do less incline to Vomit, and be not troubled with Loathing,
it is better that the Humors peccant be Empti'd downward, and that according to
their Variety, sometimes with Cholagogues, other-times with Phlegmagogues, or
Hydragogues only; or at other-times with several of these mixed together as the
Matter requires, as is set down before.

26. And because all Obstinat Diseases have their rising from over-Viscous
Humors, at least acknowledge them to be conjoind to their Cause, therefore in an
Obstinat Hicket, the Medicines that both cut and educe viscous Humors are not to
be neglected. To which end our Magisterial Pills, described before in Chap. 14.
Sect. 50. as also the Decoction proposed in Chap. 2. Sect. 35. may conduce. But
there is no need, that such should be daily used, unless they educe little; for
where they cause many Dejections, it is safer, that they be taken only in the
third or fourth day, and only such as cut and correct the Humors any way
peccant, and discuss Vapors and Wind, or otherwise such as are Corroborating,
often mentiond, should be used in the days between.

27. When the Hicket is the Symptom of any other grievous Diseases, an Acute
Fever, Inflammation, etc. it is wont to remit of its own accord when they are
cured; although then nothing hinders that Opiats being added, and moreover
taken with Sudorifics, or any kind of altering Medicines, and appropriated to
correct the Primary Disease, or the vicious Humor, may be used together: By
which if a mild Sweat should be promoted, and the other Symptoms together-with
the Hicket be diminisht, we may hope well of restoring the Sick; but if not,
then ill.

28. Sneezing, which takes its rising from External Causes, is soon wont to
cease when those are taken away, or shund: But that which acknowledges
Internal Causes, both sliding down from the Brain, and rising up from the
nether parts, may be Cured, both by Correcting the Sowrly-Salt Humors in the
Stuffing of the Head, and Viscous Phlegmatic Humors for the most part joind
with them, both by Oily and Spiritous Aromatics; and by Educing them, partly by
Stool, by Hydragogues and Phlegmagogues; partly through the Nostrils or Mouth
by mild Sneezers or Masticatories, and by Correcting the Humors that raise a
vicious Effervescency in the Stomach, and chiefly in the small Gut, and driving
sharp Vapors upward to the Nostrils, by the forementiond Spiritous and Oily
Medicines, not neglecting or omitting Opiats; and by Educing the same down ward
rather than upward if they abound, by Medicines often proposed. Where Sudorifics
use to avail very much, which not only thrust out, but together amend the
Vicious Humors.

29. A Cough may be diversely Cured according to the diversity of its Cause. For
when any thing is let in from without and carried into the Sharp Artery of the
Lungs, and is either put forth again by Coughing only, or being mitigated with
a little Beer Drunk upon it, the Cough soon ceases, or at least is by little
and little allaid.

30. The Phlegmatic Humors falling down from the Head into the forenam'd
Artery, require for their Correction, if Sour, Crab's-eyes, Coral, Pearl, etc.
If Salt, Gum Dragon and Arabic, the Roots of Marsh-Malows, and Sugar thereof,
Licorice-Root, and its thickened Juice; the Pills of Hounds-Tongue, or of Styrax
prescribed in Chap. 20. Sect. 36. or the Troches in Sect. 37.

31. Phlegmatic Humors in no wise Sharp but Insipid, if they be both Thin and
Watery, need the same Pills and Troches to Correct and Thicken them.

32. If they be Thick and Viscous, they require both Sowrish-Sweet things, and
Aromatics, simple Oximel, and that of Squils, adding the Syrup of Hysop, of the
two, and five opening Roots, and suchlike to Attenuate and Cut them, whether
they be swallowd slowly after the manner of a Loch, or they be used by
Spoonfuls, diluted with Aromatic Waters.

33. The same manifold Phlegmatic Humors in the Blood, at least in the Head,
when abounding, are to be Diminisht by Hydragogues and Phlegmagogues, and
sometimes Diuretics and Sudorifics: yea, sometimes we must have recourse to
Salivation it self, which may be stirrd up diverse ways.

34. Blood carried down from the Head into the Lungs, and raising a Cough, is
to be stopped in its Efflux, by Opening a Vein, if a Plethora concur, or a
notable Heat of Blood, or a Suppression of its wonted Emptying: Although its
overgreat Heat may also be allai'd with things Sour, and especially a little
Tart. For Example, take this following Decoction;

. Plantane-Leaves M. ii. Sempervive the Greater, Wood-Sorrel-Leaves, of each M
i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to xx. of what is Straind, Sir. of Jujubs
iii. Salt Nitre purified i. or Lapis Prunellae ss. or Sp. of Nitre 20 drops. M.
for a Decoction.

Let the Sick take often a mean Draught of this to allay any overgreat heat of
Blood, and hence any bursting forth of Blood that may follow.

35. The same Blood is to be stopped in its Flux by Conglutinating the opend
Vessels by the Mixture prescribed in Chap. 9. Sect. 20. (or one like it) often
mentiond before.

36. The Corruption of Blood into Purulent Matter, ^s to be prevented all
manner of ways, and especially by the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise-Oil, or any
other not ungrateful; as by the help of this, the turning of the Blood into
Purulent Matter, and the farther ^arming of the Ulcerated Part is not only
hindered, but moreover the total Cure hereof is promoted, especially if
according to the vehemence of the Disease, or various largeness of the Ulcer,
one or two drops of it be used thri^e, four times, or oftener in a day, in a
Spoonful of any Pectoral Decoction, or Mixture, or at least Sugard Beer.

37. The same Blood carried whencesoever into the Sharp Artery of the Lungs,
lest it clotter there, and hence corrupt, is to be kept Dissolvd by convenient
Medicines, or is to be Dissolvd again and Voided. To which purpose Crab's-eyes,
together with Diaphoretic Antimony, are to be preferred before many others, being
dissolvd in a little distild Vinegar and taken, some grateful things being
added, seeing that they do the main Work here. For Example, take the following
Form by Spoonfuls;

. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each i. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae ii. Distilld
Vinegar ss. Crab's-eyes ss. Diaphoretic Antimony i. Sir. of Maidenhair i. M.

38. But in such Mixtures as have Crab's-eyes dissolvd in Vinegar, beware lest
Syrups made of Mucilages be added to them, such as are that of Marsh-Malows,
Jujubs, Violets, and suchlike; because presently, or soon after, they thence
become thick like Mucilages and unfit for use; which will not easily be, if the
Syrups used be prepared of Aromatics, and especially fresh enough, seeing many
become more viscous in length of time.

39. When by the proper Disease of the Lungs, Blood pure, or corrupted into
Matter, is voided by Coughing, there is greater danger, wherefore we must
hasten the more to its Cure, lest the opportunity here, if any where urgent, be
lost by delay; for the singular Substance of the Lungs is easily infected and
corrupted, but difficultly restored and repaird.

40. Therefore must we not cease from the use of Medicines that cure the efflux
(and corruption) of Blood burst out of the Vessels of the Lungs, till the evil
be wholly taken away: Yea, I advise, that a sparing use of mild Medicines should
be continued for some time after the Disease is cured to sense, whereby the
part once affected may be strengthened against the access of a new evil, and
therefore easily again affected.

41. As in other Cases always, so here you must diligently attend to the
Medicines that most conduce to every particular Body, whereby they may be
preferred before the rest, and as long as they profit, continue in the use
thereof: And as soon as ever they are observd to profit less, substitute others
in their room; and so the Health of the Sick is to be promoted every way.

42. A Dry Cough arising from cold Air or Drink, may be Cured, by often
stopping Expiration, whereby the Heat in the Lungs and Jaws being encreasd, the
harm arising and molesting by external cold, may be corrected.

43. Let me therefore here admonish you in general, that the Breath held as
long as may be, and so also the Cough being hindered by force, will not a little
conduce to allay and mitigate any Cough, and especially a Dry one; by which
means I have often observd, both in my self and others, that a Cough otherwise
troublesome enough, has been wholly taken away or diminisht; as in like manner
I have often noted the Hicket also so Cured.

44. When very Viscous Humors are the Cause of a Dry Cough, they are wont to be
amended and corrected by those that potently Cut, being continually swallowd in
a small quantity; for which use the Bechic White Troches, Alicampane-Root
pouderd and reduced with Sugar into Tablets, or Pieces cut, etc. may serve, if
they be held in the Mouth, and being dissolved with the Spittle, are
continually carried down together with it into the Sharp Artery.

45. Catarrhs that are Salt and Sharp, breeding a Dry Cough, may be corrected
and temperd by the Pills of Hounds-Tongue, or Styrax, etc. so often mentiond by
Me, not neglecting Hydragogue Purges.

46. Vapors or Wind rising up to the Lungs from the Small Gut through the
Lacteal Veins, raising a Dry Cough, require for their Cure Medicines; 1. That
Temper or Educe Humors which are always Phlegmatic and Choleric, and sometimes
also Acid. 2. Such as Discuss Vapors and Wind, or assuage them as well in their
rising as after it: The most whereof are often before proposed, and among
others in Chap. 9. Sect. 29. my Carminative Spirit, of great power in curing
this Disease happily.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nourishment of the Lungs Depraved.
1. HItherto I have thought with others that own the Circular Motion of Blood,
that the Blood is not only alterd by the Air Inspired, but moreover that it is
driven forward out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs to be
nourisht by it: Whence as the Lungs alone receive this Blood, so I thought they
alone were nourisht by it, until last year an Artery arising from the
Descending Trunc of the Great Artery, was discoverd by the Observation of the
most diligent Anatomist, and famous Embalmer of Bodies, Dr. Frederic ^uysch, a
Physician at the Hague, containing in a public Discourse, An Explanation of the
Valvul's in the Lymphatic and Lacteal Vessels, and some rare Anatomic
Observations; and, because it accompanies the widenings of the Windpipe, called
by him Bronchialis; and, as it carries the Blood elaborated and perfected in
the Left Ventricle of the Heart to the Lungs, it is assigned by him for their
Nourishment.

2. But although, when I came to Print this Chapter, it happend opportunely
that there was a Body of a Youth who perished with Cold, to be Cut in the public
Hospital; and I sought diligently the Artery in it aforesaid by the mentiond
Treatise, but without success; yet would I not therefore herein mistrust so
famous a Man, but rather lament, that a few days after I was hindered against
all right by some through preposterous spite less addicted to the Common Good,
and often hurful, whereby I could not Dissect the Body of a Youth dead of
Difficult Breathing, and search out the second time the forenam'd Artery, to
demonstrate i^t in public for the sake of many Students earnestly desiring to
know this thing by ocular Inspiction; especially seeing that the same Dr.
Ruyseb had in one word shown me the way to observe it more certainly, and had
also told to others that the same thing had happend more than once which had
happend to me.

3. Whether therefore the Lungs receive their nourishing Blood by this
Bronchial Artery, or together by that of the Lungs, as often as by reason of the
Effervescency of the Blood Ascending and Descending, vitiated in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, the Blood rising from both is vicious, the Nourishment
of the Lungs will be depraved, and that sooner, more easily, and potently than
any other part of the Body, if they be nourisht in part, at least by the Blood
coming out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, being less temperd than the
other effus'd out of the left Bed of the Heart, and more or less temperd in
them by the Air Inspired.

4. The Nourishment of the Lungs is Depraved; 1. When it is Diminisht or
Abolisht, and they pine more or less. 2. When it is Ill-nourisht, and the Lungs
get a Substance and Consistency harder, or more compact than is naturally, or
on the contrary softer, or more flaccid, or also unequal, etc. For 3. I scarce
think, and that very seldom, that the Nourishment of the Lungs may be Encreasd,
if we speak properly, as long as their Substance is laudable.

5. The Lungs Pine more or less, sometimes in both sides, sometimes in either,
and in this or that Lobe, by the fault of either It self, or the Blood, or
Matter.

6. By the fault of the Blood, when it is Purulent, especially in a Pleurisy,
tending to an Aposteme, and communicating its Matter to the Lungs, either
immediately, or by means of the Blood; whence Leanness, not only of the Lungs,
but of the Universal Body is wont to follow.

7. Leanness may hap by fault of the Lungs, when by an External or Internal
Cause, they become unfit to assimilate to themselves the Blood duly flowing in;
which I have often observd happens Internally by an Vleer, Externally by a
Suppuration; in both places by Matter Corrupting, not only the Blood of what
sort soever carried to them, but also the very Substance of Them, so that they
cannot longer be nourisht by any Blood.

8. In the Year 1662. we found in the Academic H^spital, the Right Lung
wrinkled, wan and Lank, and in my judgment Consumed, in a Watery Suppuration of
the right side, consisting of Matter and Serous Liquor Whitish, collected
together: which evil I thought was to be ascribed to the Purulent Water about
it.

9. In Tisical People for certain the Lungs are not only corrupted, and
therefore also moreover pine, but besides the Universal Body consumes, because
of Blood in like manner corrupted by Matter adjoind, and by ^egrees so
corrupting all the Parts, that they become ^nfit to perfect natural Nourishment.

10. The Nourishment of the Lungs is Depraved ^y either or both kinds of Blood
vicious, at least having Vicious Humors mixed with it; whence seldom the Lungs
only, but also the other parts of the Body ^re together affected and
ill-nourisht.

11. To these Causes depending sometimes on Cho^er, sometimes on the Juice of
the Pancreas, sometimes on Spittle, sometimes on the Liquor rising from this
Ternarie, sometimes on Chyle, sometimes on Lympha any way vitiated, sometimes on
Serous Liquor not se^arated in the Kidneys, but remaining in the Blood contrary
to Nature; and if there be more things which may and are wont to vitiat the
Blood, is ascribd the rising of Tubercl's often observd here and there in the
Lungs, and the change of their soft and spongie Substance into a Fleshy,
Tumorous, and harder, and more solid many ways than is wont, or otherwise
declining from their Natural Consistency.

12. The Nourishment of the Lungs is to be believd Encreasd, when they keep
their natural consistency and manner of substance, and yet grow out too much,
and do so fill the Cavity of the Breast, that thereby Inspiration is rather
hindered than made difficult: An Example whereof I have several times had in
Dissection after Death.

13. I judge the Cause of this encreasd Nourishment of the Lungs to be partly
Their best Constitution; partly the Use of Food most apt to nourish the Lungs,
and perhaps the Lungs taken out of younger Living Creatures.

14. The Signs of all these kinds of depraved Nourishment of the Lungs may be
sought out of other Functions together Depraved; and, 1. The Sign of it more or
less Deficient, must be inquired after from Respiration, variously depraved
together with some kind at least of Leanness of the rest of the Body coming
upon it, and especially after a Suppuration, or Ulcer bred in the Lungs, and so
a Tisic.

15. II. The Ill Nourishment of the Lungs may partly be known by Respiration
Depraved, partly by any kind of a Cachexie of the rest of the Body, whose
diversity will manifest one only Humor, or together with others peccant.

16. III. Respiration hindered without an evident Cause, there being a laudable
Constitution of the rest of the Body, will signify the Nourishment of the
Lungs Encreasd.

17. By such Conjectures I think several Kinds hitherto noted by few, of
Depraved Nourishment of the Lungs, may be distinguished and manifest from one
another.

18. The Nourishment of the Lungs Deficient because of Purulent Blood, or
Matter it self in a Pleurisy, or other Inflammations degenerating into an
Aposteme, carried to them any way, may be Cured, partly by conveniently Curing
the foresaid Diseases, partly by freeing the Blood from Matter, partly by
taking out of the Lungs the entered harm by Matter.

19. We will propose the Doctrine and Cure of a Pleurisy, and other
Inflammations in Chap. 40.

20. Any Antimonial Medicines will free the Blood from Matter perhaps before all
others, whether they be Diaphoretic, or Purgers, and Vomiters; which I have
often observd, even in a Tisic, and an inveterat great Ulcer of the Lungs, have
brought away a good quantity of Matter by Stool and Urine, so that then for
many days no Matter was cast forth by a Cough. And that there had been a great
Ulcer in the Lungs, and moreover manifold the Dissection I made of the Body
after Death did manifest.

21. The Harm ascribed to Matter may be taken out of the Lungs, whether it be a
deep Ulcer, or only a superficiary Exulceration, both by Vulnerary Decoctions
so called, and also by any Balsam of Sulphur, and especially that of Anise-Oil
more grateful.

22. Let this, or one like it, be a form of an accomodated Vulnerary Decoction
for the Lungs in this Case; which,

. The Root of Licorish sliced i. of Aristolochie ss. The Leaves of Speedwel,
Seabious, Saracens-Comfrey, Ladies-Mantle, Winter-Green, of each Man. i.
Raisins of the Sun stoned iv. Boil them in Barley-Water in xxx. of what is
Straind, dissolve Sir. of Hyssop, of Oak of Jerusalem, of each i. M.

Let the Sick drink i. or ii. of this Decoction often in a day; to which one Drop
of the mentiond Balsam of Sulphur may be added, or used apart in another
grateful Liquor, twice or thrice daily.

23. I still account the Balsam prepared in like manner of the truly
Sulphurous and Infameable Flowers of Antimony to be the more excellent, whose
great Virtues I have often experienced.

24. The Harm of the Lungs that follows a Suppuration, may be Cured, either by
carrying Matter out of the Cavity of the Breast by a Paracenthesis made in the
Breast, or by emptying it out by Stool or Vomit, which I remember was some years
since done by a Surgeon and Empiric living in the Country, by a singular
Decoction; by the help whereof, though the Sick being grievously affected in
his Breast, and by degrees pining was esteemed incurable by several Physicians,
and famous Chirurgions, yet was he cured most happily in a few weeks, and
hitherto has livd sound; Let none rashly carp or laugh at that (which is
commonly done by many conceited) the reason whereof they know not.

25. The Ill Nourishment of the Lungs may be Cured diverse ways, according to
the diversity of the Humors then together peccant and producing that
Depravation, always adding those called Pectorals, and friendly to the Lungs:
We have often before handled every Depravation of the Humors.

26. I doubt how little Knobs arising in the Lungs, and not easily known,
unless by conjecture very uncertain, ought or may be Cured, unless perhaps the
more fixed Antimonial Medicines can do it, being endued with an universal force
of purifying Man's Body from all Harm and Impurity.

27. If any would diminish the Encreasd Nourishment of the Lungs, he ought to
use Food somwh thicker, and less spongy, at least Sauces, or Medicines that
hinder, stop, or repress (if it be lawful to say so) the too great rarefying of
food; such as I think Pearl, Coral, Lacca, Chalk, etc. are, if they be seldom
taken in a small quantity.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Perfection of Blood in the Left Ventricle of the Heart
Depraved.
1. IT is known by the Circular Motion of Blood, that Blood is driven forward
to the parts of the Universal Body, and so to the Lungs, (of which we have
spoken in the preceding Chapter) out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart: Whence
it is not undeservedly asked, Wherein differs each Blood effus'd out of each
Ventricle of the Heart? To which I Answer, It differs in this, That, 1. the
Blood of the Left Ventricle gets a new Alteration in the Lungs by the Air
Inspired; And perhaps, 2. something may come to the same Blood, either from
Spittle, or from another Glandulous Liquor moistning the sharp Artery, and
mixing it self with the Blood together with the Air, and so far also after a
certain manner Altering and Tempering it.

2. And I plainly doubt whether moreover any thing else happen to the Blood in
the Left Ventricle of the Heart; nor hitherto does any notable Sign of it come
into my Mind whence I may conclude it.

3. Wherefore I can at present only assert this, That the Blood going through
the Artery and Vein of the Lungs, and perhaps the middle substance of the Lungs
comes out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart temperd, less hot and rarefi'd,
and so more mild than out of the Right, both by the Inspired Air or Spittle, or
any other Glandulous Liquor; and that its Perfection seems to me to consist in
this, That its manifold Particles first potently Effervescing, or Rarefi'd, and
much sundred from each other, now being mildly Temperd and Condensd, do again
close more or less slackly, and so they become more apt, as well to Nourish the
Containing Body, as to produce several Humors in the Body, and so to preserve
Life.

4. Therefore this Perfection of Blood is Depraved, chiefly, when the same
Blood is too little or too much Temperd, or also is too much Kindled, and
Rarefi'd, or otherwise Corrupted by the Air Inspired, or the Humors of the Body
communicated to it with the same: Of which see what is said in Chap. 21.

5. The Blood may be corrupted by the Inspired Air, when it is much defiled by
any Wind, or Exhalations whencesoever proceeding and mixed with it, and
communicates its harm to the Blood carried through the Lungs; whence the same
harm diverse ways infecting the whole Mass, or its greater or less part by
degrees is sometimes dispersed every way, other-times adheres to one part
chiefly, and manifests the force of its malignity in it; as we have known it in
the Pest, and other Epidemic Diseases for the most part depending on the Air
ill-affected.

6. This Perfection of Blood is also depraved by the Humors mixed with it
Ascending or Descending, either Choler, or Lympha, or the Liquor arising from
that Threefold Sway in the Guts, or also Chyle so far exceeding in an ill
quality, that it cannot again be Temperd Conveniently or Sufficiently by the
Inspird Air.

7. We related in Chap. 21. how the most Depravations of Air Inspired are to be
amended.

8. We intend to tell you how the same Air defiled and corrupted with a malign
Quality ought to be corrected, where we intend to treat of the Pest, and Malign
Fevers.

9. Lastly, By what way and means the Humors carried with the Blood to the
Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so far corrupting it, that it cannot be
enough temperd by the Inspired Air, or other Humors mixed with it in the Lungs,
ought to be restored to former integrity, is to be sought out of the Cure
proposed before of every kind of the named Humors ill affected, and still to be
proposed all over.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Motion of the Heart and Arteries, or the Pulse Depraved.
1. THe sides of the Ventricles of the Heart are by little and little
Distended, and Unfolded by the Blood driven forward into them out of the Veins,
and its Earlets, and that partly in Plenty, partly and chiefly by the
Rarefaction filling them again because of the Effervescency of it, till the
same Blood be poured out by their following Straitness into the Arteries annexed
to them; which therefore are Laid open, as a little after Bound together, and
that by a Motion sometimes manifest to Feeling and Sight, which is known among
Physicians by the name of the Pulse.

2. For by the Pulse the Physicians understand the twofold opposite, and
contrary, yea reciprocal Motions of Expansion, and Contraction in the twofold
parts mentiond according to its Sides or Tunicles: And the Motion of Dilatation
and Straitning according to the Cavity of the Ventricles of the Heart and
Arteries.

3. We think the Right Ventricle of the Heart is Displaid, both by the Plenty
of the Blood driven in, and by the Largeness of it soon Rarefying by the
Effervescency; and the Left Ventricle by the Plenty of the over-hot and as yet
boiling Blood, howsoever more or less temperd in the Lungs by the Air Inspired:
and Both Ventricles are Straightened by the musculous Substance of the Heart,
contorted wonderfully like a writhd Shell contracted by the Animal Spirits
filling its Fibers, after the manner of the other Muscles.

4. We also judge the Arteries are Displaid by the Blood Expelld by the
Contraction of the Heart into Them; and the same are again Straightened by the
Animal Spirits filling their annular Fibers, and Narrowing their Cavity.

5. The Pulse is felt by Physicians, not so much in the Heart it self, as in
the Arteries, and especially in both Wrists, where they are more manifest to
the Sense of Touching: Although the Pulse of the Arteries may be observd also
about the Temples, and moreover at the Neck; as the Motion of the Heart, by
laying the hand on its Region, chiefly when its Palpitation urges, that cannot
be enough distinctly known by the Pulsation of the Arteries, or when a little
or no Pulse is felt in the Wrist.

6. The Primary Differences of the Pulse felt in the Wrist may be reduced to
three chief Heads, the Strength, Greatness and Frequency of the Pulse. For the
Swiftness ascribed to the Pulse, may indeed be conceivd by the Mind, but not
touched and felt with the Fingers: And Hardness is but seldom found in the
Pulse, and always in a Praeternatural State; when as those aforementiond are
observd both in a Natural and Non natural Pulse.

7. A Pulse is called Strong, when the Artery smites forcibly the Fingers of
him that Touches; but Weak, when it happens only gently and lightly.

8. The Pulse is said to be Great, when the Artery is unfolded much, and with a
large space; but Little, when little and in a narrow space.

9. The Pulse is called Frequent, when the expansion and smiting of the Artery
is observd in the same space of Time ofter, then otherwise, or in others; and
Rare, when it is less often, then is wont, or ought to be.

10. The Pulse is called Moderat, or Mean, which is the middle between the
extrem's of the three foresaid Differences.

11. A Strong, or Potent, and Valid Pulse is causd by the Animal Spirits
plenteously carried to the Musculous Substance of the Heart strongly
contracting it; whence it is never preternatural upon its own account, yet
sometimes upon the account of the Cause provoking.

12. A Weak Pulse often follows a Universal Defect of the Animal Spirits in the
Universal Body, at least partly in the Heart it self; sometimes a Sluggishness
and Drowsiness, or Unmovableness of the Universal Body.

13. A Universal Defect of the Animal Spirits is, both because of Defect of the
Blood, by a notable Effusion and Haemorrhagie of it, sometimes by prolonged
Hunger: and because of the Effervescency and Rarefaction of Blood hindered in a
Syncope, Hypochondriac Suffocation, etc. whence a Weak Pulse always concurs
with one Little: And because of the Spirits exhausted with Cares, Hunger,
Watchings, or too much Motion or Agitation of the Body: and because of the ill
affected Brain being averse to the separation and preparation of the Spirits.

14. The Animal Spirits will be Deficient in the Heart peculiarly, if the Nervs
tending to it be wounded; ^^r I seare^ think that they alone, the others being
well, can become unfit to let the Spirits pass through by any moisture.

15. The Animal Motion of those that walk in Sleep, testifies that Sluggishness
and Drowsiness of the Animal Spirits is not always to be found in Sleep, or
Drowsiness it self, and the Pulse it self in a grievous Sleepiness often very
Strong: Whence it is manifest that Narcotics, as such, do not so affect the
Animal Spirits perhaps, or all the Nerves equally, as the Organs of the
external Senses, or the Nerves tending to them.

16. But Sluggishness and Drowsiness is always found in the Animal Motion by
Frost, and any vehement cold of Air, Water, and other things, although we may
doubt, whether the Animal Spirits Themselves, or rather the Maseles be then
indeed and by themselves affected by cold; seeing (unless its Cause be extrem^)
that Drowsiness of the Parts according to Motion, may be prevented or also
overcomd by a veh^ment agitation of the Body, which could not be, if Drowsiness
had sei^d on the Spirits; which b^ing, mo^^ble and subject to the Government of
the ^^ad, the Museles may the easier be freed from Drowsiness by their more
plenteous afflux to them (...) is w^nt.

17. A Great Pulse follows an ample and full Rare^^^ (...) the S^^tness of the
Arteries concur^^^^.

18. A (...) Pulse happens, both by a small Rar^^^ (...) and by the Hardness of
the Artery, (...) cannot be much displaid.

(...) ^^s for its Cause either the (...), so that it cannot be enough receivd
by the Greatness of the Pulse only; or the Hardness of the Artery in a mean
Rarefaction of Bl^nd; wh^^ (...) Gre^^ Pulse is conjoind there to O^^ Fr^que^^
h^re On^ Little; or any thing else often pulling the Heart (...) Contract it self.

20. Lastly, A ^^^re Pulse haps by a small and slow Rarefaction o^ Blood.

21. The ^^^nty of Animal Spirits follows a due Use of Fo^d abounding with a
Volatile Spirit, and their Fermentation in the Stom^ch, and Separation in the
Gats, and Effervescency in the Heart, and especially, beside the laudable
Productions of all the other Humors, the Separation of the most Spiritous Part
complete in the Brain and Cerebellum: As Their Defect, beside those we mentiond
in Sect. 13, 14. all contrary ^o these fore- mentiond; as is manifest by
treating of the named Functions Depr^v'd.

22. The Blood Rarefies much, when it is laudable, and a potent Fire is stird
up in the Heart, when the ^ffervescency is; which yet, when it is too Great,
^^e Blood Rarefies more than enough, and thereupon ^^l, as is wont to be in
Burning Fevers.

23. The Blood Rarefies less, or Little, when it is ^^ess fit to rarefie, and
more fluid, or viscous then is usu^^l; or a more Sparing Fire is stird up in
the Heart, and not enough to rarefie the Blood suffi^i^ntly.

24. The Natural Hardness of the Arteries is to be scrib'd to the Thickness of
their Coats; as the Prae^ernatural is commonly wont to be ascribed to the
In^ammation of the Membrans.

25. The Blood Rarefies very much and suddenly, when both it is more fit to
rarefie, and a sharper Fire (...) kindled in it and the Heart.

26. The Heart is Often or continually pulld to C^^^ract it Self, both by and
Sharp thing carried together with the Blood to it, be it a Sour, or a Lixivia^
Salt, or mixed of both, as is Salt Brine; and by any Vaporous or Windy Thing
piercing into the Ventricles of (...) Heart, and a little, but not too much
unfolding its Sides, and so indeed, that they may again be contracted; and by
any Thing without the Heart, t^ wit, containd in its Pericardium that corrodes
and p^i^ks it. So we found a Salt and Sharp Humor thr^^ years ago in the
Pericardium, by which as well the^ Memorane of the Pericardium, as of the
Heart, was corroded and fretted.

27. A Small, and Slow Rarefaction of Blood, procedes either from Its exceeding
Viscousness, or from the Fire more sparingly breaking forth in the conflux
(...) both Bloods, or from Both concurring together. For it can scarce ever be,
that Choler or Lympha should be very sharp, the Universal Blood being for
sometime too Viscous; unless in regard of Diet, and esp^cially of Food, sometimes
( holer more Sharp, sometimes Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas m^^^ Sour;
sometimes Spittle, and Phlegm be bred m^^ Vis^^us: which easily haps, when Men
use Food (...) many so^ts, apt to breed one while one, another ti^^ another ill
Humor; and moreover use now hot, an^ cold Air; and besides are immoderat in the
Moti^ of their B^dy and Mind, etc.

28. How the menti^nd kinds of a depraved Pul^^ ought to be Helped, is not
difficult to conclude (...) what is proposed here and there.

29. So the other Differences, and Causes of (...) Depraved* to wi^ V^tequal,
Intermitting, etc. Pu^^^* may without difficulty be searched out from what (...)
been said.

30. Otherwise, God willing, in the Second Editi^^ of ^^is ^^rk, w^ ^^tend more
accuratly to examine, and explain all these, and enrich them with a notable
Addition; And now let us hasten to the Diseases consectary, or accompanying the
Pulse Depraved several ways.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Fevers in General.
1. IF we observe the manner of Pract^tioners, and their Signs, (which wholly
ought to be in searching out the Nature of hidden or controverted Diseases)
from which They and Others are wont to conclude of the presence of a Fever, it
will easily be manifest that They argue a Fever from the Only over-Frequent
Pulse not natural: But when the certain kind of the Fever is to be determind,
and distinguished from others, Then who but a mere stranger in Practice knows
not? that they do attend to more Signs at once.

2. But least we repete here unprofitably, (those things which we have already
published in our Two Disputes of Fevers, and may annex them to this or another
Book) we will s^ek out the various Kinds and Differences of manifold Fevers
from several Causes of the Pulse over-Frequent, otherwise then naturally,
effecting diversely as sought from daily practice, so again directed to the same.

3. Therefore the Cause of the Pulse beside nature ^oo Frequent; to wit; having
the conjoind, or soon ^pproaching trouble of the Body, or notable Pain, and so
the Weakening of some Function required ^o the happiness of Natural Life; is
either, I. A permanent and over-Rarefaction of the Blood, made by an
over-potent Fire bursting out from the Effervescency of both Bloods.

4. Or, II. Any thing that is Sharp, sometimes Sour, sometimes Lixivial Salt,
sometimes Briny Salt driven forward through the Veins together with the Blood to
the Heart, and Internally gnawing the Substance of the Heart.

5. Or, III. Any Vapor like Windy thing, in like manner carried to the Heart,
or stird up by the Effervescency of the same in the Heart, and increasing the
Opening of the Ventricles of the Heart.

6. Or, IV. Any Sharp or Hard thing, being either in the P^ricar li^^n, or
elsewhere, and externally co^^^^ing or pricking the Heart.

7. You may further Observe, That the Causes of the Pulse more-Frequent beside
Nature, does sometimes affect the Heart by Intervals only, and those sometimes
^^d^^^^ and certain, sometimes inordinat and uncertain: Whence depends the most
notable Distinction and Di^^si^n of Fevers into Continual and Intermittin^.

8. A Fever is called Continual, which remains from the first moment of its
Invasion, to the last Moment of its Duration, and its whole Cessation.

9. A C^ntinual Fever, when more mild, continues only on^ day, and is called
Diaria, and Ephemera; as that which is called Diaria of more days, or a
Syno^^^us not putrid, when it also being more mild, is continued a few three or
four days.

10. An Intermitting Fever, is that which returns after Intervals, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter in diverse Fits.

11. Whence according to the diverse Space of every Access or Fit the same gets
also diverse Names. For if a new Fit return daily, answering the precedent in
proportion, it is called a Quotidian; But if it only hap every other day, it is
called a Tertian; If the Fits return after two days of the intermission, it is
called a Quartan, and so forward. Although Quintans, Sextans, etc. are seldom
observd, yet are they observd sometimes.

12. Beside this double primary Kind of Fevers, there is yet one mixed or
compounded of both and indeed Continual, yet having some Fits, and again
Remissions, and that sometimes every day, sometimes the third, sometimes the
fourth, whence it is deservedly named, either a Quotidian-Continual, or
Tertitan-Continual, or Quartan-Continual Fever.

13. There are moreover Observd Fevers many ways compounded of more
Intermitting Fevers. Such are, I. Double, or Triple-Quotidians, as often as two,
or three Fits are produced in the same day, successivly answering in a
differing proportion.

14. Such are, II. Double, or Triple Tertians consisting of two or three
Tertians, whether in a Double Tertian two Fits the same day, or one each other
day return; or in a Triple Tertian two in one day, one in the other day, or
sometimes Three in one day, in the other day no Fit troubles.

15. A Double Tertian returning in diverse days, is distinguished from a
Quotidian, both upon the account of the time of its coming, and by reason of
its continuance, and by reason of the Accompanying Symptoms. For when because
of all these the First Fit answers to the Third, and this to the Fi^^^, and the
Second to the Fourth, and this to the Sixt^, and so on, we conclude there is a
Double Tertian; and a Single Quotidian, when the First Fit answers to the
Second, this to the Third, and so on.

16. A Double Tertian is also argued, when a Single Tertian preceded, returning
every other day; which if it afterward return daily, it is wholly to be estem'd
a Double Tertian, but not a Single Quotidian.

17. I know there are not wanting Great Physicians, who deny all Quotidian
Fevers, and only admit of Double Tertians, or Triple Quartans, and indeed, at
least as much as I can judge, more by Prejudice, than certain Experience, or
Reason compelling: Which if any consult with an attent Mind, I see not by what
right Quotidian Fevers should be excluded from the number of the Rest; as it
will be more evident, where we shall propose our Thoughts of the Causes of
Intermitting Fevers.

18. Such, III. Compounded of Intermitting Fevers are Doubled, or Triple
Quartans. For it haps sometimes* that the Sick is free from a Fever only one
day, and has new Fits the two following; and then there is no doubt of a Double
Tertian.

19. But there also happens, that a new Fit daily returns* yet so, that the
First answers to the Fourth, and ^ns to the Seventh; the Second to the Fifth,
and this to the Eighth: Lastly, The Third to the Sixth, and this ^o the Nieth,
and so forward; or that of a Single Q^^rtan one Double be bred, and at length
of one D^uble a Triple one; whence in like manner it is easily distinguished
from a Single Q^otidian, or Double Tertian: A Confirmation whereof is sometimes
had from its Cure; if, to wit, one Fit be first taken away, and then the Fits
still return both days following, one day of intermission being interposed; or
if two Fits be taken away, one only remaining and returning any fourth day.
That I may now ^onocal other Symptoms more proper to Quartan Fevers, and but
seldom observable in Tertians or Q^artans, and that usually then, when they
incline to the nature and likeness of Quartans.

20. Beside these Intermitting Fevers that are orderly, and return for the most
part at a certain time, unless some Error be committed in Diet, or some Medicin
be used, there are even others observed frequently enough returning and
afflicting, sometimes at this, sometimes at that time, and even uncertainly;
which therefore who might not fitly name them Inordinat and Wandering?

21. But although the most Fevers are wont to invade the Sick with a greater or
less Sense of Cold, Heat sometimes lighter, other-times more grievous succeding
it; yet are there not wanting, such as only Cold, or only Heat, or neither
accompanies, manifest to the Sense, as well of the Sick, as of Physicians, or
Bystanders: Let none think, as is commonly said, That the essence of every
Fever, Consists in Heat encreasd, beside Nature in the Heart, hence dispersed
through the Universal Body.

22. None who has weighd accuratly with an attentive Mind both the Fabric and
Ways, or Vessels of the Containing Body, and the natural Motion of the Containd
Body, that is, of the Blood, and other Humors, will deny that the Cause of
Continual Fevers is required Continual, that is, continually carried to the
Heart: As on the contrary, the Cause of Intermitting Fevers is not continually,
but only by Intervals carried thither, and therefore apt to be hindered in its
motion to the Heart.

23. Seeing Cold and Heat are deservedly numbered as the chief and more frequent
Symptoms among the most of manifold Fevers, we must diligently enquire into the
most probable Causes of both, and hence into the Causes of the Continual Heat
after the first Cold overcomd; or both of Cold and Heat returning by Intervals;
or of Heat stird up only in a diverse and determinate time: For those things
being lookd into and determind* it will not perhaps be very difficult to
explain the Fevers, though most diverse, and to extricate the Mind desirous of
Truth, from almost infinite difficulties to be moved by any.

24. That therefore, omitting the Opinions of others, (for I think it behoovs
every Man to prove his own) I may in a few words relate, That that seems true
even to me, I judge, (I.) That the Cause f^ every Continual Fever is Choler, or
Lympha, (under which I comprehend the Juice of the Pancreas, and so Spittle it
Self, in as much as they are carried to the Heart) or Both vicious, and raising
such an Effervescency in the Right Ventricle of the Heart. whence the Pulse is
continually produced more freauent.

25. But I deduce Cold observable about the first b^ginning (if a Continual
Fever depend on Choler alone primarily vitiated) from the same vicious Choler,
together with the Juice of the Pancreas rai^ing an Effervescency vicious in the
small Gut, and that such, as somewhat sour Vapors are carried up by the said
Juice, and being anon driven every way, breed a light Cold every where, which
yet a little after gives place to Heat bred by the same Choler carried to the
Heart.

26. But if a Continual Fever depend on Lympha alone, primarily vitiated,
seeing it follows both the Conglobated Glandul's, and also in part the
Conglomerated Glandul's, and so the Pancreas it selt ill-affected, what wonder
if the Juice of this being made somewhat more Sour, breed a vicious
Efferveseency with Choler in the small Gut, and together send form somewhat sour
Vapors, which being dispersed through the Universal Body, every where stir up a
Sense of Cold diverse according to its greater or less Harm?

27. But if a Continual Fever depend both on Choler, and on Lympha together
vitiated, Cold troubling the Sick about its beginning, is produced from the
mentiond Causes conjoind.

28. After the preceding Cold sometimes more grievous, sometimes lighter Heat is
wont to follow in the most of Continual Fevers, and much greater, and more
troublesome from Choler alone primarily peccant, whence therefore Burning Fevers
do arise; but much less, and more mild, and sometimes None from Lympha alone
primarily peccant, chiefly when much Phlegm together abounds in the Sick, to
which Chill Fevers are to be ascribed: Lastly, Heat being mean, from both
together vitiated, and separating it self again after a certain manner.

29. When the Lympha is vitiated, and the Glandul's that are in the Brain are
together much affected; First, A Stoppage of the Head, that is, a Burthensom
Pain in the Head, (if we follow the proper signification of Words) is wont to
be raisd, and a little after both sometimes Coryza, when the Liquor falling down
from the Brain distills to the Nostrils; and sometimes an Hoarsness or Cough,
when it distills to the Jaws, or Lungs, known by the name of a Catarrh; whence
the Fevers then accompanying are wont to be named Catarrhal Fevers.

30. II. I judge the Cause of all Intermitting Fevers to be the Juice of the
Pancreas in some part of it, standing still in one ^r more lateral Passages of
the Pancreas obstructed, and made sharper by its stay there, and piercing
through Phlegm more, or less viscous, the Cause of the noted Obstruction, a way
being prepared by force by that sour Acrimony, and effus'd into the small Gut,
and there raising a vicious Esservescency with Choler and Phlegm, and indeed
producing different Cold in the beginning of the Fit, sometimes more grievous,
sometimes lighter, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, till at length (when no
more of it retaind against Nature, and so vitiated flows out) the same is
overcom'd again (which is usually) by Choler, partly before comprest, and, as
it were, suppressed, now again being returned to it self, partly sliding down
continually; whence the Mixture rising from both and Phlegm, and being carried
to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, is the Cause of the Heat following,
sometimes greater, sometimes less, sometimes none, as Choler and Phlegm are
variously affected to the Juice of the Pancreas always at least then in part
vitiated.

31. III. I judge the Cause of Fevers compounded of Continual and Intermitting
Fevers, and not quite Intermitting but Remitting only, and again stird up both
Causes of each, newly mentiond, together concurring.

32. IV. I judge the Cause of Continual and Mild Fevers in the mean time stird
up about Two Hours after any Food taken in (commonly called Hectic Fevers) to
be chiefly Spittle vicious, and giving occasion for vicious Chyle because of
more Glandul's together affected; by which Chyle so carried to the Heart, the
Esservescency being depraved, the Pulse is still stird up more frequent then
before.

33. In like manner as I judge all Cold in any Fevers to be derived partly and
chiefly from the Juice of the Panereas, as s^wr, and perhaps sometimes also from
Lympha, in like manner being more sour; partly from Phlegm either Insipid or
Acid: So I think all Heat is to be attributed to Choler upon the account, both
of its Lixivial Salt and Oil; for Oil is apt to take the force of Fire and keep
it; on the contrary, a Sour Liquor is apt to extinguish it, and again to
condense the Oil that was rarefi'd by the Fire; but a Lixivial Salt especially
joind with an Oil, as often as it causes an Esservescency with a Sour Liquor,
produces a notable Heat. And so, when all are moderat and keep their requisite
proportion* and due manner, the vital Fire is preservd in the Universal Blood
by that friendly fight; but it is encreasd, as often as Choler being very Salt
and Oily has Dominion; on the contrary it is diminisht as often as the power of
the Sour Liquor is greater; Lastly, The same is extinguished, where the extreme
excess is in either, or both of those somewhat Contrary.

34. A Fever may in general be Cured; Either, I. By Condensing the Blood too
much rarefi'd, and by allaying the over Esservescency of the Blood.

35. Or, II. By Tempering any Sharp, or Sour, or Lixivial Salt thing found in
the Humors and carrid to the Heart.

36. Or, III. By Discussing every Vaporous Windy thing, or by preventing its
rising.

37. Or, IV. By taking away every Sharp thing, pulling the Heart on the
outside.

38. Among the Symptoms of Fevers, that are more frequent and primary, Cold, is
Corrected by Medicines that temper the Sour Humor, and amend Insipid Phlegm; and
Heat, by Medicines that mitigate the Lixivial Salt, and condense the Oil.

39. An Obstruction of the Passages of the Pancreas, may be Cured by loosering,
at least by removing viscous Phlegm out of its preternatural place, and by
carrying it out by Vomit, Stool, Vrin, or Sweat.

40. And by what Means and Remedies all these may be performed, will not be
difficult from what is abovesaid, and will yet be more evident from the
peculiar Cure of the several kinds of Fevers to be proposed hereafter.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of a Fever of One Day.
1. THat we may not seem rather to confound Students busied in the reading of
Classic Authors, than help, we will treat in order the Kinds of Several Fevers,
as they are commonly distinguished and proposed.

2. Therefore let us begin at the Diarian Fever, which is either of one day,
and scarce continues the space of 24 hours, called Ephemera; or continues two,
three, or four days, called by certain Diaria of More days, and a single, pure,
or not putrid Synochus.

3. A Diaria is wont sometimes to begin with a light shivering, testifying a
little Cold accompanying or preceding; sometimes without it, and chiefly when
the Universal Body by degrees is so far heated by some Non-natural Thing, that
at length a little Fever is stird up, wherein Heat in the Heart and Blood does
not so much begin to be encreasd, as to degenerate out of a more encreasd
Non-natural Heat, into a Preternatural Heat, which besides may deprave other
Functions, and produce a Pulse more Frequent then is Natural, and although its
Cause b^ taken away or moderated, yet remaining longer than is wont with
greater or less trouble of him that is Sick.

4. Heat in a Diarian Fever, following a Shivering, or stird up without it any
way, is wont neither to intermit, nor to be made more intense by any new Fits,
but uses to persist continual to the end, and remain in an Ephemera, as also a
Synochal Homotonus or Aemastic, so called, usually in the same degree; as
gradually to decrese in a Paraemastic, and in an Epaemastic perpetually to
increase, till at length it again c^ase by degrees.

5. The same Heat is gentle, mild, and vaporous in an Ephemera, the Skin
remaining soft and moist: In a Synochus somewhat greater, yet not sharper when
the Blood, and other Humors are temperat; but sharper, when the Blood is more
sharp by Choler or Lympha, a little sharper than is natural, declining a little
to the nature and manner of those called Putrid.

6. The Causes of all Diarian Fevers, are the Six Non-natural Things, so
called, vitiously used, and therefore soon manifest.

7. The observable Symptoms in Diarian Fevers, beside the over-frequent Pulse
are diverse according to the diversity of the noted Causes, either Alone or
Adjoind.

8. For when a Diarian Fever is raised, by the alone Heat of Air, to be
ascribed either to the Sun, or Fire, or Bath, no Shivering is observed, but
Heat alone, and that by degrees more and more encreasd in the Body, till at
length being made Preternatural, testifies the presence of a Fever, not only by
the Pulse greater and more frequent then is wont, but also by the Pain and
Pulsation of the Head, and such like Symptoms anon to be recited.

9. If Cold of Air, or any other thing come upon the Body hot, what way soever,
whence a Diarian Fever is raisd, a light Shivering will precede the greater
Heat soon after following; and then in the beginning indeed the Pulse will be
little, but anon greater, and conjoind to both more frequent, other Symptoms
also happening.

10. So when a Diarian Fever is raisd by strong, that is, very Spiritous, and
especially Aromatic Drink taken in too much quantity, a Shivering will scarce
ever precede the Heat continually encreasd, and at length made Preternatural
and Feverish, and not only manifest by a greater and more frequent Pulse, but
by a Heat moreover troubl^som, and by other Symptoms.

11. When a Diarian Fever, is bred by an over-agitation, weariness, and more
vehement Motion, the Pulse is observd, not only more frequent, but moreover
weak, beside a universal and troublesome weariness of the whole Body.

12. But when a Diarian Fever is caused by the Passions or Motions of the Mind,
it owns Anger for its Cause, and then the Pulse is not only more frequent and
greater, but moreover unequal and troubled; as, when it is bred by a sudden
Sorrow* it is Little, Weak, and Unequal, and about the beginning of its
approach Rare, and a little after more Frequent; in both Cases with a more
sharp Heat, and a light dryness of the Skin.

13. When a Diarian Fever arises from Watchings prolongd, and Cares, a
Frequent, Little and Weak Pulse is wont to be a present Companion, with a dryer
Heat of Body, and Pain of the Head, carrying before it the Sense, sometimes of
Weight, other-times of being Void, or of Emptiness.

14. All the Symptoms of Diarian Fevers, use not a little to vary, according to
the various Constitution of the mentiond Causes, and of the Body both
Continent, and especially Containd, that is, of manifold Humors.

15. But the most Frequent Symptoms in the Diaan Fevers are, a light Shivering
preceding, Heat somewhat more grievous following. Thirst sometimes greater,
sometimes less. Sometimes a manifest Bitterness of the Mouth, sometimes none.
Unquietness and Weariness of the Universal Body, and especially the Lims more
or less troublesome. A grievous Headache, with a notable Pulsation. Watchings
prolongd, or an over deep Sleep. A more stird Respiration. An overfrequent, and
together sometimes greater and strong enough Pulse, sometimes Less and Weak;
seldom Unequal. The Veins turgid. The Skin for the most part foft and moist,
seldom harder and dryer. The Face red and tumid. Urine in the Ephemera scarce
changed from its natural state; in the Diaria of more days more of a reddish
color. Sweat breaking forth, sometimes sooner, sometimes later, not ill smeld,
nor troublesome to the Sick, seldom none.

16. A Diarian Fever is not dangerous of its own nature, whence it is
terminated sometimes of its own accord with Sweat or Moistness for the most
part; other-times it is overcom'd by an easy Art: But the danger to be feared,
is either because of the vicious Constitution of the Body, especially Containd,
affected, by reason whereof it may degenerate into others, both called Putrid,
and the Hectic, or because of a new Error committed in some part of Diet, or in
Medicines whilst it continues, because of which it may in like manner be changed
into the named kinds of other Fevers, or other more grievous Diseases.

17. The Cure of Diarian Fevers is not difficult, seeing that the most go away
of their own accord by a Sweat: But when the Physician is called for a Cure, as
at other times always, so also here the Cure is to be Vari'd according to the
variety of the Causes; the various Constitution of the Body, as well
Containing, as especially Containd; and the Symptoms most urging.

18. When therefore the alone heat of Air has produced it; the same is to be
changed with more temperat, at least to be temperd with cold Water or Vinegar
pourd on the Floor, with Watery and Sour Plants, Lettice, Sorrel, Vine-Leaves,
etc. dispersed through the Chamber of the Sick: And for him that is Feverish
together Thirsting, let the following Julap, or one like it, be taken by
intervals.

Carduus-Water vi. Sorrel-Water ii. Sir. of Red Poppies i. Sp. of Nitre vi.
drops. M.

Let the Sick be moderatly coverd to promote a Sweat mildly, and together to
remove the Fever.

19. If Cold of Air, or any other thing come upon the heated Body, and by
reason of this, a lighter perhaps, or more grievous Obstruction in the Vessels
any where, and the Standing still of what is Containd, and hence other more
grievous Evils be feared to follow, you may profitably mix a Scruple of the
Volatile Salt prepared of Hartshorn, of Salt Ammoniac, or of any suchlike with
the foresaid Julap, and use it at several times.

20. If a Diarian Fever be raisd by Strong Drink too plenteously used, the Cure
may be Instituted by Drink somewhat Sour* the Julap newly prescribed, or the
following Tincture of Roses, which

Barley-Water xxx. Rose Water ^i. Flowers of dried Red-Roses i. Oil of Sulphur
made (...) Campanam, what suffices for a grateful aci^^^y.

Infuse them in a Glass Vessel closed, and in a warm place t^ ^^tra^t the
Tincture of a pleasing Red Color; to what is Streind, add Sir. of Jujubs iii.
M.

By the moderat use of this most grateful Tincture, the Heat bred against
Nature in the Blood and Universal Body, may by degrees be allayd, and the Fever
joind with it be removd soon, safely, and pleasingly.

21. If a Diarian Fever be raisd by too much Motion and Weariness of the Body,
the Animal Spirits consumed more than enough, are to be repaired with Spiritous
Drink, yet so, that the Heat conjoind to the Body be not encreasd, but rather
together diminisht. To this end I mention the following Mixture to be used by
spoonfuls by short intervals.

Water of Line-Tree-Flowers, of Betony, of Fenel, of each ii. Sp. of Wine
reciifi'd, or Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus i. ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd i. Julap of
Roses (...) i. M.

22. When the Diarian Fever is raisd by over-vehement Anger, beside those
things which make the Mind cheerful, I commend the following Mixture, which may
correct Choler together moved and made oversharp, and may allay the Feverish
Heat depending on it, if moreover it be taken by spoonfuls.

. The Water of Plantane, Lettice, Sorrel, of each i. Cinamm-Water ss. Sp. of
Salt dulcifi'd ss. Sir. of Diacodium i. M.

23. If the Commotion of Mind remain vehement, it will be profitable to add gr.
ii. ^r iii. of Laudanum to the aforesaid Mixture, whereby the Body may the
sooner be reduced to Sleep, and the Mind to Tranquillity.

24. When on the contrary, a Diarian Fever arises from a sudden and grievous
Sorrow, for its Cure together with wholesome counsel apt to comfort and raise
the Mind, I commend this following Mixture, which is wont to amend the Tart
Juice bred or encreasd in all grievous Sorrow, and together renew the then
Vitiated and Feverish Effervescency of Blood in the Heart.

. Pennyroyal, Fenel-Water, of each ii. Our Carminative Sp. or Matthiolus his
Aqua Vitae ss. Laudanum 2 Gr. Sp. or Volatile Salt of Salt Ammoniac i. Sir. of
Fenel i. M.

Give a Spoonful of it often, till Sleep glently come, at least the Sick be
better, and less molested about the Midrif, where unspeakable anxieties are
wont always to urge in a grievous Sorrow.

25. When a Diarian Fever arises from prolongd Watchings for its Cure, Sleep is
to be mildly promoted, both by removing the Causes of Watchings, and by
disposing the Body to Sleep by this Emulsion, or one like it.

. Cleansd Barley boiid till it crack i. ss. the Seeds of White Poppies ss. With
the Decoction of the same Barley, Make it an Emulsion to xv. adding Sir. of
White Popies i. Fenel, or Rose Water i. ss. M.

Let him that is Feverish often drink a Draught of this Emulsion till he get
Sleep. Which if it come not so, ii. or iii. Gr. of Laudanum may safely be added
to the same Emulsion, and then Sleep may be produced more easily and potently;
which coming they must abstain from farther use of the Emulsion, unless the
same being interrupted, necessity of farther using it return.

26. When a Diarian Fever is raisd by Cares enroding the Mind* and beside
Watchings, making commonly all the Humars Sharper, I commend the Mixtme which I
gave in Sorrow of Mind, producing a Diarian Fever, for Young Beginners in
curing this Fever also.

27. We admonisht, not without cause, in Sect. 17. that its Cure is to be
vari'd according to the variety of the Humors occurring in any Sick of a
Diarian Fever.

28. When therefore a Plethora of Blood is observd in such an one Feverish, it
will be advisedly done to let out so much of it by a Vein opend, as can be
taken out without harm or swouning. For although Blood let even to Swouning,
does not always ill saccede; yet because sometimes and often enough its great
Evacuation made suddenly, has brought many Evils to several Sick People, I
always prefer its repeted less diminution, as the matter and need requires,
sometimes instituted in the same day: least when we would soon cure, we cure not
safely enough; seeing it is soon enough, if well enough, and safely enough:
Which Observation I only commend to Younger Physicians.

29. It matters little whether the Vein opend be in the Arm, or Hand, or in the
Foot, or in any other place; unless perhaps one place be preserd by the Sick:
Or in Women one part is to be chosen before another, because of the Monthly
Cou^ses either at hand, or hindered; and One Vein may be opend saf^lyer or more
easily than another: All which I would have accuratly observd every where by
Physicians and Surgeons.

30. When Choler is plenteous in the Body, let it be diminisht safely by a mild
Cholagogue, and especially in the form of a Loosening Decoction or Ju^^p,
adding together those things that may temper the Feverish Heat; For Example;

. The Root of Succory i. the Root and Herb of Dandeleon M. ii. the Leaves of
Sorrel M. i. Tamarinds i. ss. B^il them in Barley-Water, adding to xx. of what
is Straind, Sir. of Succory with Rhubarb ii. ss. M.

Or,. Barley-Water xii. Fenel or Cinamon-Water ss. Sir. of Succory with Rhubarb
ii. Sp. of Vitriol, what suffices for a grateful Acidity. M.

Let the Sick take often a Draught of this prescribed Decoction or Julap, till
the Body be made more soluble; and then cease from farther using it, unless it
become over-costive; for then some of either of them may be taken again.

31. When Choler is not so Much, as it is Sharp, Altering Medicines, and
especially Sour Things are to be taken in Drink, and chiesly those that are
wont also to promote Sweat, Distild Vinegar, either single, or compounded
together with others added to it before distillation, whither I refer the
Alexipharmio Water of Amsterdam, and the Preservative Water much more grateful;
for Anno. 1655. to escape the Plague, we together with Dr. Franciscus vander
Schagen, and Dr. Paul Barbette, famous Physicians, took care that beside other
things prepared by common Counsil at Amsterdam, it should be made for the sake
and good of the Sick) whose Form therefore I think fit to add here.

An Excellent Preservative Water.

. Angelica, Zedoary-Root, of each i. Butter-Bur-Root ii. The Leaves of
Garden-Rue iv. Of Balm, of Scabious, Marigold-Flowers, of each ii. Unripe
Walnuts cut lb ii. New Pome-Citrons cut lb i. Beat them all together, then pour
on lb xii. of the best Wine-Vinegar, distild by it self to three fourth parts
in Sand in a Glass Cucurbit.

Digest them all Night, in the Morning distill them with a slow Fire of Ashes
almost dry, and that without burning.

This Vinegar, of great strength and most grateful, is to be kept for Use.

32. It may be mixed with ordinary Drink, Beer, a Decoction, Broth, etc. to a
grateful acidity for any that is Sick, often used in a small quantity to take
away Thirst, and to promote a mild Sweat.

33. When there is a rational fear, or some more manifest signs appear, that
Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas is over-Sowr in the Body for preceding
Causes, a sharp Cold of Air sufferd, many Sour things long used, a continued
Sorrow of Mind, and suchlike, it may be commodious to use the Volatile Salts of
Hartshorn, Salt Ammoniac, or others more benign, ( that both temper Sowrness,
and mildly dispose the Body to Sweat) together with Food in Wine, or any other
ordinary Drink.

34. When a Diarian Fever siezes on a Man, in whom Phlegm is found peccant,
either in plenty, or viscousness, or saltness, then should endeavor be made,
that when it is overmuch it be diminisht, being viscous it be cut, being salt
it should be temperd, and so many Evils feared that otherwise would follow, may
be shund; and that by Medicines often proposed and mentiond before.

35. Medicines that are more mild, and more temperd, are to be used among
Delicate People, and such as have a more tender Constitution of Body: Among
Stronger People, stronger Medicines.

36. A more mild Thirst, and only following Heat may be removed, especially by
watery and somewhat sour things; as the same when more grievous, and owning the
Acrimony of Choler encreasd, or such a like cause will need more sour things;
of which see Sect. 18, 20, 22, and 31.

37. When Bitterness of the Mouth urges, they will avail that mildly carry out
Choler by Stool, of which we spoke in Sect. 30.

38. Those things that Cure Unquietness, or Weariness of Body, are proposed in
Sect. 21.

39. They will take away the Head-Ake, and its Pulsation, and Watches, which
are had in Sect. 22. and 25. To which may be added, among External Things,
Epithems, or the following Liniment.

. Betony-Water ii. Rose Water i. Marigold-Vinegar vi. Opium of Thebes ss. M.
for an Epitheme.

Which being warm, with a Cloth dipped in it, cover both all the Forehead, and
especially the Region of the Temples; and as often as the Clothes are found dry,
presently moisten them in like manner with the same, till Pain be lessend and
Sleep follow.

40. Prepare a Liniment of these, or suchlike;

. Ointment of Poplars ii. Opium of Thebes, dissolvd in Oil of Roses i. M. for a
Liniment.

Wherewith anoint each Region of the Temples, and spread it on a brown Paper,
and apply it thither.

41. Those things that are containd in Sect. 21. and especially 24. will
diminish deep Sleep, if you omit Laudanum.

42. When more Symptoms concur, it will not be very hard, from what is
aforesaid, to frame or join such helps as may conduce to the same.

CHAP. XXIX Of Synochal, commonly called Containing Fevers.
1. THe Fevers that some call Putrid, to distinguish Diarian and Synochal
Fevers not putrid, so called by them, of which we have treated in the former
Chapter; the most distinguish into Continual and Intermitting Fevers; as again
them into Containing, or Synechals, and Continuals, in special so called, or
Synechals.

2. It matters little that Synochos is an unknown word to the Ancient Greeks
and Hippocrates, and Continual and Containing is among the Latins used for the
same; because, where diverse Things occur, or are feigned, which are destitute
of distinct names, we may, yea it becoms us moreover to distinguish from one
another the terms of their Origination and Signification, for a more distinct
Doctrin's sake, and use every one enough explaind before in a diverse Sense.

3. Therefore they call those Synochous, or Containing Fevers, which continue
without any Fit to their last and complete ceasing; but Synechis, or
Continuals, have the general name of Fevers; which although they always persist
to the end, yet do they daily, or every third or fourth day undergo some Fit:
I will examine them in this, these in Chap. 31. as Intermitting Fevers in the
next following.

4. I said the Cause of Containing Fevers in Chap. 27. Sect. 24. was in my
judgment sometimes Choler, sometimes Lympha, and they that flow together with
Lympha, sometimes both together ill affected, raising such an Effervescency in
the Right Ventricle of the Heart, whence continually the Pulse is bred more
frequent against Nature.

5. Who therefore could not unfitly distinguish these Containing or Synochal
Fevers, upon the account of their diverse Cause, into Choleric and Lymphatic
Fevers.

6. And because under the general name of Lympha we do not only comprehend that
Lympha, which goes from the Conglobated Glandules, and also from other Parts to
the Heart; but moreover the Juice of the Pancreas, and Spittle it self,
proceeding from the Conglomerated Glandules, and so the Liquor that is to arise
from the Threefold Sway of the Guts, all mixed together with Lympha with the
Descending Blood; Lymphatic Fevers may be subdivided into Glandular,
Pancreatic, and Salivary Lymphatic Fevers.

7. All these Fevers may differ something according to the diverse Constitution
of other Humors together being in the Body.

8. I judge that Burning Fevers are chiefly produced by Choler; and Fevers
coupled with acute Pains, and Prickings of the Head and Lims from the
Glandulous Lympha; as from the Juice of the Pancreas any joind with gripes and
prickings of the Belly; lastly, from the Spittle, those which are observd
troublesome with anxieties and distensions of the Stomach, and the parts near
it. But as often as several Humors of those mentiond are together vitiated, so
often the Symptoms of more are wont to concur together, as moreover the same
occur more glentle then is wont, by the mutual tempering of the Humors peccant.

9. Choler at that time is wont to be peccant, either with a Lixivial Salt
Acrimony only, or moreover with an Oily Infameableness. Whence there indeed the
encreasd Heat is observd sharper, here together greatest. The Pulse there other
things considerd is more frequent, here together greater. The Vrin there
thicker, here beside more colored. Thirst is there very troublesome, here
insatiable. The Tongue is there dry, here together cloven or black.

10. The Lympha of all, or at least the most Conglobated Glandul's being more
sharp and sour, and raising a Feverish Effervescency in the Right Ventricle of
the Heart, breeds an Heat more corroding then great, and every where troublesome
with Gripings.

11. The same Lympha becoming more sharp, and salt Brine, or together Acid, in
the Glandul's of the Head especially, beside a stoppage, or burthensom pain of
the Head, and hence the Coryza, or Hoarsness, or a Cough afterward following,
is wont to produce the Catarrhal Fever so called, acompani'd with Heat, not so
vehement and intense as gnawing and sharp.

12. In every Lymphatic Fever, a light shivering often troublesome is present and
urges. The Pulse is frequent more then great. The Vrin is voided died and red
for the most part, but soon after troubled, growing yellow, or white, and seems
to let fall much manifold-settling, according to the various constitutions of
the Humors; a grievous and pricking weariness uses to possess the Lims.

13. The Juice of the Pancreas being all of it diversely vitiated and made
over-sharp, and breeding a Containing Fever, manifests it self both with
Anxieties about the Midrif, and Gripes of the Belly, and Prickings, or bloody
Purgings, or sharp Pain coupled, as also by the Pulse frequent chiefly, and
inclining to littleness and weakness; and afterward unequal, with the Appetite
sometimes dejected, sometimes increased; with Thirst more rarely urging; with
Vrin commonly crude and watery.

14. The Spittle breeding a Containing Fever, is wont to be peccant with
encreasd Viscousness; whence it is perceivd more mild and soft, the Appetite
being commonly dejected, and a burthensom Pain following the taking in of Food,
sometimes a Distension and puffing up of the Stomach and Guts happening; and
soon after Wheazing, or Difficult Respiration, and sleepiness; together with
the frequencie of the Pulse encreasd, one or two hours after Food taken in,
again by degrees remitting; and therefore this Salivary Fever has great
affinity with that called Hectic, if it be not a lighter Kind of it, or at
least always coupled with the Hectic.

15. They will less wonder or contemn these new Distinctions and Names of
Containing Fevers, who being free from all prejudice, accuratly attend to all
the observable Symptoms and Depravations of the Humors peccant in several
Feverish People, and neglect not the new Anatomical Inventions of this Age; as
when compared with Chemical Changes, afford a wonderful Light to the intricate
Doctrine of Fevers, to be extricated easier and more happily.

16. We have taught you before from what kind of Non-natural Things the
aforesaid depravations of Choler, Lympha, the Juice of the Pancreas and Spittle
do arise, so that it seems needless to stay longer here about them, seeing they
may and ought to be required thence.

17. But any Studious of Truth may ask, How Heat troublesome, though diverse in
these Synochal Fevers, is bred from so diverse Causes?

18. That to my ability I may endeavor to satisfy this just Question, I judge,
I. That Feverish Heat is bred properly, and by it self, of Choler both
over-sharp and fat, in as much as it raising an Effervescency both in the small
Gut with the Juice of the Pancreas, and in the Right Ventricle of the Heart
with Lympha, whence soever flowing dr^ws forth of it self, not only more
particles of Fire, wherewith it abounds, but again receivs their greatest part
then breaking forth every where with its Oily Parts, and indeed anon m^x^, more
exactly with the Blood in the Heart, whence the same rarefies more then is
wont, and in like mann^r every where communicates a greater Heat, with a
greater and more frequent Pulse.

19. II. I judge that feverish Heat is accidentally bred by the over-sowr Lympha
of the Conglobated Glandul's, in as much as it raising an Effervescency in the
Right Ventricle of the Heart, with Choler mixed with the Blood Ascending,
assaults it sharper then usual, and so changes or corrupts it, that is, frees
or deprives it of its viscousness, that the fiery Particles break forth then
more plenteously, from which a sharper and more fretting Heat is raisd by its
mixing with a sour Liquor, and it not a little varying in certain
Circumstances, according to the diverse Constitution of the other parts of the
Blood with a Pulse more frequent indeed, but seldom together greater, but often
rather Less.

20. III. I likewise think that Feverish Heat is accidentally bred by the Juice
of the Pancreas wholly over-sowr, in as much as Choler is not only too much
alterd and broken by it in the small Gut, but the Mixture arising from the
confusion of Both, and of the Salivary Phlegm being more sour then is wont,
when it com's with Lympha to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, rises anon more
potently against the rest of Choler ascending together with the Blood, and
after its natural Viscousness is diminisht, stirs up a sharp Effervescency with
it hurtful to the Body, whence likewise not so great, as sharp Heat breaks
forth, and that according to the diverse difference of the whole Mass of Blood
in some, the present Pulse being always over-frequent, and as to greatness
Little or Mean, seldom great, unless Choler together be very Sharp.

21. For, IV. as often as Choler is found sharp and oily enough in the Body,
either Natural or Non-natural, (that is, by reason of the use of a Non-natural
Thing, as Summer Air, or Strong Drink, etc. continued a while) and yet not
depraving any Function, and the Acidity of Lympha, or of the Juice of the
Pancreas, or of Both both be suddenly and so far encreasd by a Non-natural
Thing, as the over-cold Air, or sour Drink, to wit, Rhenish-Wine, etc. that
thereby a Synochal Fever be bred, no wonder if Heat, not only sharper, but
together greater, be then stird up by over-sharp, and together over-fat Choler
concurring, and a most frequent Pulse be joind with one greater, but not the
greatest.

22. But, V. when Spittle is peccant with such a Viscousness, whence not only
the Fermentation of Food is less commodious, but moreover usually two hours
after they are taken in, the Pulse being now frequent, becoms still for some
space more frequent, with Heat, seldom indeed manifest or troublesome to the
Sick, yet sometimes notable to Bystanders and Physicians, beside the encreasd
redness of the Cheeks; I judge that that Change haps, both as to the Pulse
over-frequent, both continually, and yet more after Food taken in, and as to
any kind of Heat then together observable, in as much as Spittle tending to the
small Gut, the Stomach being empty, does so vitiate the Effervescency of
Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, that a Liquor proceeding from these
three, is not only dulled, but moreover Vapors somewhat flatulent arise from it,
and indeed more plenteous and more volatile, when the most fluid Part of Food
slides down to the Guts, usually two hours after it is taken in. Which Vapors
being carried to the Heart, both provoke it to a more frequent Contraction of
it self, and being carried every way together with the Blood, breed an Heat not
so great indeed, or very sharp, or grievous and troublesome to the Sick, yet
coupled with dryness of the Skin enough manifest, had for a sign of Heat
encreasd; and with redness of the Cheeks, according to their notable often
encreasd plenty and volatility; whilst in the mean time a more frequent Pulse
indeed, and little and weak enough is observd; the Leanness of the whole Body
concurring and daily encreasd, by reason of the Blood made daily over-viscous
and unfit to nourish the Body.

23. And now we have reduced all Synochal Fevers upon the account of their
Causes, that are wont to be notably peccant in Man's Body to the four primary
Differences, we think fit to consider, and here weigh in a few words also some
of their Differences taken from the more grievous Symptoms eft accompanying
them, after the Example of Famous Practitioners, and chiefly Great Platerus:
not mentioning farther a Catarrhal Fever, of which we spoke in Sect. 11.

24. And the first place will we give to a Burning Fever, among the Greeks
(...), so called, from its exceeding heat and burning most urging: Which
exceeding Heat, because it is observd, not only in Continuals, Synechals, that
have a Fit returning every other day, but also in Containing, Synochal Fevers,
we deservedly mention here a Burning Fever. To which no wonder if a dry Thirst,
which you can scarce quench, be a present Companion.

25. Some give the second place to a Fever called Leipyrias, in which all the
time of the Disease the External Parts are cold, while the Internal Parts burn.

26. These Fevers challenge the third place, that chiefly are troublesome with
Heat, and an obscure redness of the Jaws, whence the Tongue also is not only
Dry, by tinged with a blackish red Color. This Disease, by reason of the said
Color, is called Breune, as well among the Dutch, as Germans, and is often
Epidemical.

27. The Fourth place we give to Raving Fevers, so called, because of a
grievous Raving, (such as is often observd in many Fevers) sometimes inclining to
raging, which happens to the Sick in a few days space, and does not a little
trouble the Bystanders; chiefly when such Fevers are Epidemical, and at length
kill the Sick, Convulsions coming upon them. Constant Watchings use to
accompany them, and a great Pain in the Head is wont to precede a Raving.

28. Wasting Fevers, so called, may take the Fifth Place, in which the Body is
wont in a short time to be consumed and grow lean.

29. In the Sixth Place we will mention Malign Fevers, suddenly dejecting the
Vital Strength, without manifest Causes and Reasons, and unexpectedly killing
the Sick; which for the most part are also wont to be epidemical. They also
have the other Symptoms more mild usually then is wont, beside a weaker Pulse.
But of these we intend particularly to treat in Chap. 33.

30. I. Choler both primarily, and only peccant, not only in a Salt Acrimony,
but moreover in a very inflameable Oiliness, is the Cause of a Burning Synochal
Fever: Wherefore the greatest Pulse is wont to concur, beside one
over-frequent, and in the beginning at least strong enough, together with
troublesome Watchings, and an obstinate Thirst.

31. II. Because I do not remember that I ever observd the Leipyrian Fever,
therefore I the more hesitate in assigning its true Cause; especially seeing
those things do not satisfy, which others bring rather from their Prejudices,
I my self have once lately observd such a Fever.
then from those things that ought to be observd in the Sick, and so be
proposed.

32. Yet if ever, of which I much doubt a Leipyrian Fever be Synochal, and I
may conjecture something of its Cause, I think that it then consists of a Double
Fever, Choleric and Pancreatical, and so indeed that suchlike Vapors may be
continually raisd in the small Gut by the Juice of the Pancreas, universally
over-sowr, which may be confused only with the Mass of Blood, and breed a Sense
of Cold in the habit of the Body, whilst a burning Heat is stird up in the
Internal Parts by a Fever, due to Choler more oily then sharp.

33. III. The Cause of a Fever having an obscure red Color of the Tongue and
Jaws accompanying, seems to be Choler both over-sharp and fat, chiefly hurtful
to Spittle, and the Glandulous Liquor of the Jaws, and more closely adhering to
them, where it is expired in the form of a Vapor, together with the Air;
wherefore beside the troublesome heat of the Universal Body, the Lips also
sometimes are cloven and exulcerated, yea laden with filthy Scabs.

34. But wherein that peculiar Constitution of vitiated Choler consists, by
which it is more adverse to the Mouth, and Humors carried thither, then to
others; hitherto I cannot determine, unless it come by the Oiliness of Choler.

35. IV. The Cause of Raving Fevers, so to be called, from a notable and
grievous Raving accompanying, at least for some days, is Choler peccant, both
in a Salt Acrimony more, and an encreasd Oiliness less, that so diminishes the
viscousness of the Juice of the Pancreas, which therefore causing a vicious
Effervescency with it being made sharper, makes an Humor not much unlike black
Choler, from which together with Watchings, the Head-Ake, hence Raving, at
length a Convulsion, and lastly, Death it self is produced.

36. V. The Cause of a speedily Wasting Fever is Choler, quickly bringing such
a Constitution to the Blood, by which the same becoms unfit what way soever to
nourish the Body, and yet needing more plenty of Food, because of the Feverish
Consumption of several parts.

37. But wherein that Unfitness of the Blood to nourish consists, whether it be
bred of one sort only, or manifold in several Men, those things that hitherto
are communicated to me, or observd by me, are not sufficient, whence I may give
the solution of this Doubt.

38. And now having offered the most Differences of Synochals, both according to
their various Causes, and the more noted and grievous Symptoms accompanying
them, the next thing is, that at length we subjoin to their Causes, a Method of
Curing every one of them, agreeing both with Reason and Experience, and
therefore Dogmatical.

39. I. Therefore a Synochal Choleric Fever may be Cured; 1. By Correcting the
Salt Sharpness of Choler, chiefly by more temperd Acids, the dulcifi'd Spirit
of Salt, etc. 2. By Amending the Inflameable Oiliness of Choler, by somewhat
harsh Acids, Sempervive the greater, Plantane, etc. 3. By ^^iminishing Choler,
if it be observd never so little to abound, (which is usual) by Cholagogues,
but more mild and a little sour, or joind with Acids, the Creme or Crystals of
Tartar, Salt of Tartar Vitriolated, etc. and that soon in the beginning, or
after that by the help of Altering Medicines, Choler being over-intirely joind
with the Blood, begins to be again separated from the same, and made fit to be
totally voided: which is chiefly to be expected from Acids often mentioned, but
more mild, or artificially temperd.

40. Among Compound Medicines for correcting the salt sharpness of Choler, the
following Decoction often to be used in a day in a small quantity and warm may
conduce.

. The Root and Leaves of Sorrel M. ii. The Leaves of Strawberries, Violets, of
each M. i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to xx. of what is straind; Sir. of
the Juice of Citrons iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ss. M.

41. To Amend the Oily Inflameableness of Choler, the following Decoction may
be prescribed in like manner to be used.

. Plantane Root i. The Leaves of Sempervive the greater, Purlan, of each M. i.
Boil them in pure Water, adding to xx. of what is Streind; Sir. of Purslan iii.
Oil of Sulphur prepared Per Campanam, what suffices for a grateful Acidity. M.

42. To separate Choler again from the Blood, being over-intirely mixed with it,
the following Decoction may conduce, being used after the same manner as the
former.

. The Root of Dandeleon, with its Leaves M. ii. The Herb of Fumitory M. i. Boil
them in pure Water, adding to xx. of what is Straind simple Sir. of Succory
iii. Salt of Tartar Vitriolated i. M.

43. Lastly, To diminish or empty out Choler Loosned from the Blood by the
preceding Decoction, or a Medicin like to it, and disposed to be voided out
gradually and mildly together with the rest abounding, or turgid in its Bag,
the following Decoction to be taken twice or thrice a day warm to iii. or iv.
may serve, beside others, both single and compounded, often noted before.

. Succory-Root ii. Endive-Leavs M. ii. Damask-Rose-flowers M. i. Creme of
Tartar, or Crude Tartar ii. Boil them in a glazed Earthen Vessel in pure Water;
adding to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of Succorie with Rhubarb iii. M.

44. Yet because of the Cure of Fevers arising from Choler any way peccant, it
suffices not to direct their Cure to Choler it self, Their Cause, whereby a
Fever will neither be encreasd nor fed; but farther we should attend to all the
Symptoms accompanying these Choleric Fevers, and to all Changes therefore
happening to both Bodies, as well the Containing as Containd, more things are
to be used for their entire and perfect Cure.

45. Wherefore by reason of an Exceeding Heat stird up, and of the Pulse encreasd
in Greatness, following a greater Rarefaction of Blood by the Fire encreasd in
the Heart, least the Vessels at length being by degrees more and more distended
should burst, or be opend any other way, or over-Vital Fire be suffocated
because of the hindered motion of Blood in the Heart, or elsewhere by its
over-rarefaction filling its Vessels, a Place is to be prepared for it by
letting a sufficient quantity of Blood out at a Vein opend in the Arm, Hand,
Foot, or elsewhere.

46. And by this letting out Blood, because it appears by daily experience that
the heat of Blood is not a little diminisht, thus far also an opening a Vein is
to be ^^^^^nd; whether that troublesome Heat be temperd (...) of sharp and fat
Vapors more plenteously ^^us'd together with the Blood, or it happen by any
other Cause that may diversely be feignd, according to any Bodies prejudice.

47. Thirst then very importunate, may be allayd by degrees by the Decoction
prescribed in Sect. 40, 41. or the Tincture of Roses described in Sect. 20. of
the preceding Chapter, or the following Julap, or any like it, often taking a
little of it, which I prefer before much Drink drunk at once, because every
sudden change is deservedly judged by Hippocrates hurtful to Nature, and
therefore dangerous.

. Barley-Water xx. Sir. of Purslan ii. of the Juice of Citrons i. Spirit of
Salt dulcifi'd ss. M.

48. The thick Juice extracted out of certain Seeds by the help of any Water,
and the Mucilage, such as we draw out of the Seeds of Quinces, Flea-wort, etc.
with Rose Water, or any other that is convenient, will assuage the troublesomly
Dry, or also ^^ven Tongue. Some of this should be kept for a sp^^^ in the
Mouth, and again spit out; which should (...) be repeted.

49. The same may be obtaind, if the Leaves of Sempervive the Greater have their
out Rind p^^ld off, and put into pure or Rose Water, hence often laid upon the
Tongue, and be ever and anon renu'd.

50. Pure Water will do the same, if a little of it be kept in the Mouth, and
again spit out after gargling and often repeted. Instead also of pure Water, a
Decoction of Turnips, or a mild Emulsion, such as follows, may be used.

, Cleansd Barley boiled till it crack ii. With its Decoction make an Emulsion
of xv. adding Julap of Roses, or simple Sir. of Violets i. M.

51. To this end also the Yolk of an Egg beaten and mixed with iii, iv, or v. of
Rose Water, or any other grateful to the Sick, and a little Sugar may in like
manner be used, a spoonful of it at a time being taken into the Mouth, and
afterward either swallowd, or again spit out.

52. II. A Glandular Synochal Lymphatic Fever may be Cured; if 1. soon in the
beginning, whilst Shivering yet continues, the following Mixture be taken by
spoonfuls in short intervals.

. Parsley-Water i. ss. Fenel, simple Treacle-Water, of each vi. Sir. of Fenel
i. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd i. M.

For by the help of this, the Shivering will not only be diminisht, but
moreover the sour sharpness of Lympha temperd, and the Heat that would
afterward follow, will at least in part be prevented.

53. If 2. During Heat, such Medicines be given, which will overcome the Fire
that is more Corroding then Burning, and be compounded of temperd Acids, not
neglecting Volatile Salts. The following Mixture therefore often taken by Spoonfuls
may conduce.

. Water of Parsley, Fumitorie, of each i. ss. of Fenel i. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd
i. Volatile Salt of Amber ss. Laudanum 2 Gr. Sir. of the five Roots i. M.

54. When Thirst also urges, the following Decoction may be prepared, and as
the matter requires given, abstaining from overmuch drinking.

. The Roots of Vipers Grass, of Smallage, of each i. Crude Barley ii. Boil them
in pure Water, adding to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of white, of red Poppies,
of each i. ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ss. M.

55. If 3. Lympha abounding in the Body, and in a manner at least temperd by
the mentiond, or suchlike Medicines be Diminisht and Empti'd out by mild
Hydragogues. To which end the following Decoction may conduce.

. The Root Parsley, Fenel, Eringo, Danewort, of each i. the Leaves of Seabind
Weed ss. Boil them in pure Water, adding to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of
Diacnicum iii. M.

Take iii or iv of this Decoction twice or thrice a day, till a commodious
Evacuation of the Serous Humors follow.

56. They who prefer a Conserve, may often take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this
following, which

. Conserve of Damask-Roses i. ss. Electuary of the Juice of Roses i. Powder of
Jabap Root ii. of Creme of Tartar i. with a little of the solutive Sir. of
Roses, M. for a Conserve.

Our Hydragogue Electuary described before in Chap. 7. Sect. 55. may also
avail, being very mild and grateful.

57. If 4. a Lymphatic Fever siezes on a Phlethoric Body, and especially in the
Summer Constancy of Air, I would not dissuade a mean Blooding, especially of
those that are accustomd to it; seeing they bear it better and more
commodiously.

58. But if 5. a Lymphatic Fever come upon one Choleric, then by reason of
Choler, not only drawn into consent, but making an Heat greater then is wont,
both Altering and Purging Medicines may be used judiciously to be composed of
these proposed before, and in Sect. 40, etc. For Example, take this following
Decoction, satisfying both Indications, if used in a mean quantity, till a
moderat Purging follow.

. Succorie, Fenel-Root, of each i. Fumitorie, Burrage-Leavs, of each M. i. Boil
them in Barley-Water, adding to xx. of what is straind Sir. of Succorie with
Rhubarb, of Diacnicum, of each i. ss. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd ss. M.

59. If by reason of Choler vitiated by Lympha great Heat follow, by reason
also of it Bleeding may avail, as we showed you before in Sect. 45, 46.

60. If Lastly 6. the Lymphatic Fever be Catarrhal, then because the Glandul's
that are in the Head are affected before all the other Conglobated Glandul's,
Medicines are to be prepared so, that the Part most affected be chiefly minded.
To which end the Restoring of the Glandul's of the Head may be tried by Fuming,
but among Vniversals, both Altering and Emptying Medicines may be used, which
are actually observd, most appropriated and useful to the Head; yea, Evacuation
peculiar to the Head should in time be had.

61. You may therefore Fume with Amber, Mastich, and suchlike; which should
not only be receivd, as often as can conveniently be, in at the Nostrils and
Mouth, the Head being coverd, but all the Head-Cloaths should be fumed with the
same, and soon after put on, lest the power of the Fuming be lost by delay.

62. Let this following be an Example of a Universal Altering and Evacuating
Decoction to be used as the form.

. The Root of Pionie. Vipers-Grass, of each i. of Smallage ss. the Leaves of
Betonie, Violets, P^i^^^^se, of each M. i. Gummie Turbith ss. Mechoacan-Roat
ii. Crude Tartar i. ss. Mountain Siler-seeds ii. Boil them in pure Water,
adding to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of Diacnicum ii. M.

63. The Particular Evacuations of the Head are obtaind by Errhins and
Masticatories. The new Leaves of Betonie or Majoran being rubd between your
Fingers and put into the Nostrils, may afford a benign Errhina; and the Sp. of
Salt Ammoniac applied to the Nostrils in a little Bottle with a long Neck, will
much conduce, because it both loosens the Viscous Humor that obstructs the
Glandul's, and tempers the saltish-sowr humor thence bred.

64. Mastich alone, or the root of Pellitory of Spain chewd, draws down Phlegm
and Serous Liquor into the Mouth out of the Head, to be spit out.

65. III. A Pancreatical Synochal Fever may be Cured; If 1. more mild Medicines
be used, that Temper the Acid Humor, as are all Lixivial Salts, but chiefly
those Volatile and Oily. For which reason Opium avails exceedingly here, and
every Opiat, and Aromatic Medicin: Of which we have prescribed several
Compounded Medicines all over in this Work. Yet with an overplus take this
following Mixture, to be used by Spoonfuls so long as Cold urges.

. Parsley, Grass, Fenel-Water, of each i. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, or simple
Treacle-Water x. Laudanum iii. Grains. Syrup of the five Roots, i. M.

66. If 2. Heat now urging, by Reason of Choler vitiated and drawn to consent
Medicines be given, fit to temper both the Acid and salt Acrimonie together, and
therefore prepared of two sharp things but broken. To which end the following
Decoction may avail, drunk often to some ounces.

. Smallage, Succorie-Roots of each i. Agrimony-Leavs, Fenel, Fumitory-tops, of
each M. i. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of
Byzantium iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd i. or Sp. of Nitre xii drops. M. for a
Decoction.

67. If any like a Mixture better, you may prescribe the following to be taken
by Spoonfuls.

. Carduus, Fenel-Water, of each i. ss. simple Treacle-Water ss. Spirit of Salt
dulcifi'd i. Laudanum iii. Gr. Sir. of Fumitory i. M.

68. If 3. this Fever be troublesome by permanent Anxieties about the Midrif, by
reason of over-viscous Phlegm together concurring, and resolvd into Flatulent
Vapors, Oily Volatile Salts, and distild Oils, added in a small quantity to the
preceding Mixtures may conduce. For Example;

. Fumitory, Mint-Water, of each i. ss. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae ss. Sp. of
Nitre viii drops. Laudanum ii Gr. distild Oil of Mace iii drops. Sir. of Mint
i. M.

69. If 4. Gripes of the Belly chiefly urge, because of the Humor of the
Pancreas not only more Sour, but together more Tart, oily Volatile Salts will
chiefly conduce, or made Oily distild Oils being added, and put to the Mixtures
to be taken by Spoonfuls. For Example take this following Form.

. Mint, Fenel, Parsley, Scurvygrass-Water, of each i. Sp. of Nitre x drops.
Laudanum iii Gr. The Author approved not of that Sp. distild on Quicklime, but
only on Salt of Tartar.
Sp. of Salt Ammoniac i. Oil of Anise vi drops. Sir. of Fenel i. ss. M.

70. If 5. this Fever be grievous with Bloody Purgings, or at least joind with
sharp Pain, beside the newly mentiond Mixtures, the Clyster prepared of Cows
Milk, Turpentine and the Yolk of an Egg, such as that in Chap. 13. Sect. 51.
may chiefly conduce, being often injected during the Disease.

71. IV. A Salivary or Phlegmatic Synochal Fever may be Cured; If 1. the
Viscousness of Spittle, and hence of Phlegm be Corrected and Amended by
Medicines, either Aromatical, that is, having an Oily Volatile Salt, or temperd
sour things, or both mixed together, and that according to the various
Constitution of the other Humors Choler, and the Juice of the Pencreas: Of
which sort many are here and there, and also in this Chapter proposed, together
with convenient Forms to practice with successfully. See Chap. 14. Sect. 45,
etc.

72. If 2. Flatulent Vapors bred by it, raising both in the Stomach and Guts,
first a Distension and Inflation; afterward an Irritation in the Heart, an
over-Frequent Pulse, a Wheazing in the Lungs; at length sleepiness in the Brain
be Discussd, and their new rising Hindered. To this end Medicines mentiond in
Chap. 14. Sect. 56, etc. may conduce.

73. If 3. the Appetite be dejected, it should be Restored by the dulcifi'd
Unless it be dulcifid, it is too corrosive.
Sp. of Salt, Elixir Proprietatis, and such like temperd Acids mixed with
ordinary Drink, or with other Liquors and Mixtures to be used by Spoonfuls,
primarily convenient for the Distemper; and if besides Depraved more or less,
it should be Corrected.

74. The Cure of Synochal Fevers, named from grievous and very urgent Symptoms,
ought to be the same which we proposed, unless that then, as always in other
Cases, there ought to be an exact and careful account had of those most
grievous Symptoms.

75. For all the Professors of Physic are deceivd, and do no less injure their
Students then Patients, who think, at least teach, that any Diseases may be
cured by Art, when their grievous, and therefore urging Symptoms are neglected;
all which they would have cease of their own accord, when the primary Diseases
are Cured; seeing that we daily observe with great loss of Mortals by their
stubborn obstinacy, and negligence of these smattering and prating small
Physicians, the Sick are as often sooner taken away by their grievous Symptoms,
then the Diseases cured alone are removd by their Medicines.

76. Add that Medicines convenient to remove or diminish any Symptoms amend, and
together correct the depravations of Humors, or solid Parts, on which those
Symptoms immediately depend. The Diseases therefore are together removed, whilst
the Symptoms are removed: Neither do we doubt with some famous Physicians, to
refer the Depravations of Humors to the number of Diseases; because the Parts
containd are not less required to the Compleatness of the whole Body and
Functions, then the Parts Containing.

77. I. Therefore to a Dogmatical Cure of Burning Synochal Fevers, Blood is
forthwith to be Let out plenteously and frequently enough, whereby that Great
Heat may be diminisht or removed: which is so much the more to be done, if a
Plethora, that is, abundance of Blood be present.

78. Blood being Let, as much as the Patients strength can commodiously bear;
while Choler is yet turgid, and there is hope of carrying it down to the Guts
and anon with success of carrying it out, a mild Cholagogue, such as is the
Decoction noted in Sect. 43. may be safely given, and that an hour after the
opend Vein is tied; by which if in a short while, that is, in two hours space
they go not to Stool, more thereof ought to be taken till it purge; which
succeding Altering Medicines, and such as allay Heat and Thirst, are often to be
used; of which we have spoken in Sect. 47. and elsewhere.

79. Neither does it suffice to let Blood, or purge Choler once, but those
Evacuations are often to be iterated, not neglecting Altering Medicines, till by
the diminisht feverish heat it appears, that the Cause of this Fever is
Diminisht, or removed, or overcom'd.

80. II. If I have rightly conjectured, when I suspected a Leipyrian to consist
of a Choleric and Pancreatical Fever, it may be Cured, by using Medicines which
correct the exceeding sowrness of the Juice of the Pancreas, and abounding
oiliness of Choler, and concentrate any sour thing, and imbibe, and contemper
any Oily Liquor.

81. They that do both these, are Pearl, Coral, Crabs-Eys, and all kinds of
Shells, chiefly those calcined, Chalk, etc. if they be often taken in a small
quantity.

82. Besides Medicines may be used that sometimes temper Cold more, sometimes
Heat, as this or that does more molest the Sick: Such as are often before
mentiond, more being to be prescribed in the next following Chapter.

83. III. A Fever having the Tongue and Jaws colored blackish red, and a dry
Heat accompanying may be Cured, if beside Universal Remedies convenient to that
Fever enough burning, and such as are to be sought from what is already said,
those be in special used which are observd to conduce to the Heat, Dryness, and
vitiated Color of the parts of the Mouth.

84. Gargarisms are chiefly mentioned, prepared with Water, or the Decoction of
Plantane, Lettice, Nightshade, Purslan, Privet, Strawberry-Leavs, Prunel, or
Brunel, (which name they say was given it from that Disease, because it is
believd to be proper for it before all others) Hony-suckle, etc. the sour and
tart Juices of Blackberies, Barberies, Sorrel, Citron, etc. being sometimes
added.

85. Here also is commended, among Chemical things, Nitre prepared with
Sulphur, and therefore called Salt Prunella.

86. Let this following be the Form of the best Gargarism.

. Prunel, Willow, Strawberry-Leavs, of each M. i. whole Barley 1 Pugil. make a
Decoction in pure Water, dissolving in xii. of what is straind; Diamoron i.
Lapis Prunellae ss. M. to be a Gargarism; with which warm let the Sick often wash
and gargarize his Mouth.

87. In this Disease also, for the most part an Opening of the Ranine Veins
under the Tongue, conduces, and that as often as they are observd to be tumid,
and manifest to us the Quinsie at hand, or molesting. For it is no new thing
that the Quinsie should be coupled to this Fever.

88. Pouderd Chalk made with Creme to the consistency of a Liniment will
assuage, dry and remove those filthy Scabs of the Lips being applied to them;
as also the white Ointment Camphorated in like manner used.

89. IV. A Fever attended with a grievous and furious Raging, may be Cured; by
giving, beside what is before mentiond, those things especially, which will not
only promote Sleep, but powerfully and mildly temper a sharp choleric Humor,
and so assuage its over-sharp Effervescency with an Acid.

90. To this end Opium will conduce beyond any commonly known Medicine, and any
Opiat thence prepared: Yet do I judge any fixed Mineral Sulphur, of Vitriol or
Antimony more excellent.

91. Opiats may be used both Internally and Externally: many Forms whereof we
have given before, and in special in Chap. 28. Sect. 22, 25, 30, and 40. whence
they may be sought.

92. V. A speedily wasting Fever, may be Cured; by using and mixing with the
other Medicines, those that powerfully, though mildly correct Choler too sharp
together, and fat: To which end I commend dulcifi'd Spirit of Salt before many
others, and others such^ike first temperd by the Spirit of Wine, to be mixed
with other Altering Medicines prescribed here and there in this Chapter.

93. But always attend to the other Symptoms, more or less differing in every
Patient, and therefore requiring some difference of Medicines in a right Method
of Curing: wherein the prudence and judgment of a Physician diligently examind,
sometimes wonderfully appears; seeing that the excellent Precepts of others
formed by long use of things do indeed direct, but not contribute Judgment to a
Younger Physician.

94. We intend shortly to give you the Cure of Malign Fevers in the following
33 Chapter.

CHAP. XXX. Of Intermitting Fevers.
1. INtermitting Fevers are such as molest the Sick with diverse Fits, which of
their own accord do wholly depart, and then come again anew.

2. For as often as the Sick are troubled with a Fever, returning either in
certain or uncertain Intervals, no Error being committed in the Non-natural
Things, by Internal Causes; so often it is said to Intermit, that is, not
continually afflict, but return by Fits, and again wholly cease.

3. As often on the contrary as a Fever is stird up, not by Internal, but
External Causes, and chiefly by one or more Errors committed in the Non-natural
Things, so often it is called only a Fever; till it may probably be thought to
prove either Continual, and that of One day, with or without Fits, by Symptoms
accompanying it; or else after some certain days its kind may certainly be
determind.

4. For they ascribe too much to themselves, that do vainly boast to obtain a
fame of quick Judgment amongst ignorant People, (though often taken in Mistakes)
that they can certainly, determine even in the very first Invasion, and at the
beginning of the Invasion of any Fever, whether it will be but of One day, or
with or without Fits; and indeed whether it will be a Quotidian, Tertian, or
Quartan-Fever. Which Thrasonic boasts we willingly yield to them, who feed
themselves and others with sinoak and delight in Wind.

5. The different Kinds of Intermitting Fevers, are taken; 1. From the diverse
Interval, sometimes shorter, sometimes longer, which happens between the Fits. 2.
From the grievous differing Symptoms which use to accompany them.

6. I. By reason of the diverse Intervals, Intermitting Fevers are divided into
Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, Quintans, etc. in so much as they return either
every day, or in the Third, Fourth, or Fifth Day, etc. which we have often told
you we observed in Chap. 27. Sect. 13, etc. to be sometimes Single, other-times
Manifold, Double, Threefold, or Compounded of Diverse, adding the Signs that
distinguish them from one another.

7. II. By reason of the grievous Symptoms, as we have already said in Chap.
29. Sect. 23, etc. of Synochals, Intermitting Fevers get diverse Names. For, I.
they are sometimes observed Chill, not only with Cold chiefly, but with Cold
only, troublesome; so that sometimes, and most frequently a gentle Heat, sometimes
and more seldom none at all does follow.

8. Such Fevers, even always Cold, we have had in our Academic Hospital, so
manifest, that not only at the beginning, and augmentation, but even in the
vigor and declination, yea, at the end of the Fit, that is, always both to
their Own, and the Bystanders, and also the Physicians perceivance, the Sick
were troublesomly all-over cold, never warm, much less hot in any part. And
these grievous Chill Fevers are perhaps always Quotidians.

9. But the more troublesome Intermitting Fevers do so often come with Gold
preceding, as with Heat following, that they have taken their Name from it; not
only in the most of the Regions of Germany, and others of the North, but most
of the common People think they have the Fever only so long as they endure
sharp Cold, judging themselves freed from the Fever so soon as Heat often not at
all, or but a little troublesome or grievous begins. And then such most commonly
are Quartans, sometimes Tertians.

10. II. Often Intermitting Fevers are Burning, and chiefly Tertians, in which a
short and light only, or almost no Cold is noted, or a gentle Shivering Fit to
precede Heat, and extreme Burning, and that often remains long, and is always
troublesome after the Fit is ended: So that sometimes a new Fit returns before,
that the great Heat of the former does wholly remit.

11. But it is not necessary, that therefore the Fever should be thought to have
remained together with the Heat remaining, because the Pulse remits of its
former swiftness; but the encreasd Heat of the Body does not return to its
former temper: Whence sometimes also a Continual Fever by degrees follows such
an Intermitting Fever, and becoms a Continual Tertian.

12. But although sometimes Intermitting Fevers trouble the Sick with Cold only,
or Heat, yet, for the most part, they are molested with both, and Heat uses to
succeed Cold; and then sometimes Cold, sometimes Heat does most oppress them, or
continue longer, rarely afflicting them equally. For they are utterly deceived,
who by their false Prejudices, and against daily Experience, do falsely teach
their Pupils, that the preceding Cold is overcomd by twofold, threefold, or
fourfold Heat succeding, either upon the account of its Continuance or
Vehemence.

13. For, briefly to describe the History and Manner of the Invasion and Change
of the most of Intermitting Fevers, according to their twofold newly mentiond
Symptoms most frequent above others, and most noted, but withal not neglecting
the rest, there is wont to precede as a Forerunner, a Yauning and Gaping, and
sometimes a Universal Weariness of the Lims, or Unquietness, rarely Sleepiness,
and more or less to continue and molest.

14. To one or more of these troubles there succedes for the most part (at
least as far as I could observe in my Patients) Coldness in the Region of the
Loins, and truly sometimes more grievous, other-times more light; which a little
after goes in the Passage of the Backbone, as well upward as downward, to all
the Remote Parts of the Body, and which not only manifests it self in the
Fingers and Toes, but in the Nose, Ears, Chin, Tongue, yea and moreover in the
Whole Skin, afflicting and molesting the inward as well as the outward parts.

15. It is rare that no Cold at all is perceived in the Region of the Loins, or
not but late. Which sometimes (...) have observed troublesome only, to the Sick,
in the middle of the Belly, where the small Guts are wrap^ed round.

16. But even sometimes in the Inner Parts of the Head, and have observd an
exceeding grievous Cold, and that now in the back part of the Head, now in ^he
forepart of the Head, other-times in the Crown.

17. A Shivering uses to accompany a lesser coldness, ^ut Stifness a greater.

18. During Cold, the Pains are Corroding, Beat^ng, Piercing, with Gripes of
the Belly, and other ^ertain troublesome Symptoms, from which anon we ^ntend to
name same kinds of Intermitting Fevers.

19. Upon the beginning of Cold, you may observe, that as the Pulse grows more
frequent, it is both Less and Weaker, and while it still troubles, it is so
Little, that often it can no longer be Felt.

20. Where the Cold begins to remit, most commonly Anxieties about the Midrif,
are wont to be the beginnings of Heat even just following.

21. Yea even with Heat, Thirst by degrees is kindled and encreasd; for seldom
during Cold does it trouble; but sometimes notwithstanding.

22. Farther, with Heat the Pulse, continually more frequent, is by degrees
made Greater, and for the most part also Stronger. For if it be then Little or
Weak, the Fever is judged Malign, or a great want of Strength, and so the
danger is encreasd.

23. When the Heat is augmented, commonly there attends Drowth of the Tongue,
more vehement, and sometimes Difficult; Heat of the Head, and Pain, Pulsation of
the Temples, Watchings, and sometimes Raving.

24. Last of all by degrees while the Heat remits, Sweat is usually wont to
spring out more or less, or at least a sufficient voiding of Vrin. And then the
Sick is free again for a time from all, or at least the most Symptoms by a
various Sleep, one while more quiet, other whiles very unquiet and grievous,
with Dreams or Wakings usually concurring; till a new Feverish Fit coming on,
either the same, or fewer, or more do afflict him more or less; which at
length, either of their own accord, or by Art, are wholly or at least in part
taken away, or take him away.

25. And so are many tormented with Intermitting Fevers, whilst Cold precedes,
and Heat succedes: although sometimes, (that we may go forward unto the rest of
their Accompanying Symptoms). III. They are observd Epialae so called, mixed
Fevers, in which every where Cold and Heat together vehemently oppress.

26. IV. They are called Thirsty Fevers from Thirst importunate and past
quenching; which are not only observed usually in burning Heat, but even whilst
Cold troubles; so that though the Sick do drink continually, yet nevertheless
they do thirst. Nor have the Sick only this great trouble, although they much
indulge themselves to too much Drink, but even Physicians also in curing this
froward Thirst.

27. V. Let us call them Hungry Fevers, to which ravenous and unsatiable Hunger
is joind; so that unless Meat be given, even whilst the Fit continues, the
Sick takes Faintings, and other troublesome Symptoms. For although the Appetite
of most is Lessend or Abolisht sometimes wholly; nevertheless others have, not
only a moderat but greedy Hunger together with the Fit.

28. VI. Heart-aking Intermitting Fevers do molest, often with an unspeakable
and intolerable Pain accompanying, about the upper Orifice of the Ventricle,
and with this Symptom chiefly are they grievous, and sometimes Pestilential,
whether attended with Vomiting or no.

29. VII. Moreover Fevers seem to be named Griping or Colical, from the painful
Gripes of the Belly, or which are wonderfully troublesome with Distensions,
coming or departing as the Intermitting Fever comes or goes.

30. VIII. Swouning Fevers get their name from Swouning Fits invading the Sick,
together with the Fever, very grievous and dangerous, and therefore in no wise
to be passd over with silence.

31. IX. Intermitting Fevers are observd from their accompanying Hypochondiacal
Suffocation, commonly called Hysterical, with a Feverish Fit grievously
afflicting, (chiefly Women) are to be named Strangling Fevers, seeing indeed
sometimes they choke and kill the Sick, although they be not also very grievous,
as to other Symptoms.

32. X. Let us now join Difficultly breathing Fevers to the abovesaid, so namd
from the difficulty and wheasing of breath, which wonderfully and miserably vex
the Sick, with or without Palpitation of the Heart. These I have often observed
to begin with distention of the Abdomen, and Anxiety of the Midrif, the Pulse
being Little, Weak, and Swift, Cold and Pain also troubling the Region of the
Loins. Which if Wind break out either upward or downward then the Fit was
lighter, if not, more tedious: For after the Distension and Anxiety had lasted
an hour or more, both decreased gradually, and also a difficult Breathing and
great Wheasing was stird up, and indeed so great, that the Body could not
endure even the least stirring or motion of it self, the Pulse gradually
growing Greater rather then Stronger, and continually Swifter, together with
the Veins all over sore sweld, which were so small, that they could scarce be
seen when the Fit was not. This Difficult Breathing sometimes molests more
grievously, other times more lightly, again a longer or shorter space; whence
sometimes fit Medicines for the Hypochondriac Strangulation have been used with
success. And at length the Fit ended more with a Moistness then with a Sweat,
till a new one came on, seldom a Quotidian, often a Tertian.

33. XI. Asthmatic Fevers, so called, from short-windedness accompanying,
sometimes grievous, sometimes not are usual. In which likewise the Distention and
Anxiety of the Abdomen usually precedes; and when they remit, then follows
Difficulty of Breath, truly Asthmatic, which together with the Fit continuing
long enough, and sometimes for one, or two days, decreases, and at length
ceases; sometimes it continues after the Fit is gone. I have seen an Asthmatical
Fever of this sort returning for a time in the fourteenth day, and afflicting
the Sick sore enough for more days every time, unless it were lessened both as
to its pain and continuance, with fit Medicius.

34. XII. A Cough is not only wont to accompany these above described
Asthmatical Fevers, but at other times when there is no Asthma at all, from
which Cough then sorely troubling the Sick, above other Symptoms, I thought
they might very fitly be named Coughing or Bechical Fevers. For so soon as the
Fit increases, a Cough begins to molest, for the most part Dry, seldom and that
by chance is it Moist; to wit, as often as a various Humor moved, either of its
own accord, or by a Fever, or by a dry Cough slides down to the Lungs.

35. XIII. Amongst Intermitting Fevers also are observd Catarrhal Fevers, from
a Catarrh descending not only upon the Lungs, but even also to other Parts,
moving and ceasing with the Feverish Fit. For a new Humor does not disperse it
self after the Feverish Fit, but that which has already dispersed it self, does
not return or forsake the part grieved, although the Feverish Fit cease.

36. XIV. Sometimes Practitioners reduce Gouty Fevers to the Catarrhal, because
they think the Gouty Fevers arise from the other. And because I judge that a
different Humor which breeds the Gout is carried to the Jaws through the
Arteries together with the Blood, I altogether think the Arthritics are to be
distinguished from the Catarrhals: As often as I had opportunity to observe very
exactly the Rise and Progress of the Gout by my Patients faithful narration,
even so often I have minded that it has risen together with a Continual or
Intermitting Fever: Whence the Gout was not a little augmented by the return of
the new Fits of the Intermitting Fever, till it was either changed into a
Continual Fever, or ceased of its own accord, or was Cured by Art, the Pains of
the Joints persevering nevertheless.

37. XV. As Continual, so Intermitting Fevers are often attended with Mad and
Raving Fevers, called by the Dutch Rasende Koortsen, from their Raving, seldom
indeed during Cold, but often when Heat does follow the Headache, and Pulsing of
the Temples, and then ceasing by degrees with the Fit again, and that after
Sleep, either pleasant or troublesome with wakings.

38. XVI. The Emetic, or Vomiting Intermitting Fevers are so called from the
Vomiting that sometimes continually, other-times by intervals are very
troublesome, either when the Cold begins, or in its continuance, or in the
appearance or increase of Heat: so much the more grievous, that the Sick are
not thereby eased, but more grieved. Whence that Vomiting is deservedly judged
Symptomatical, and not Critical.

39. XVII. So Intermitting Fevers also are observ^d from a great and frequent
Purging, and sometimes also with Gripes much troubling and weakening the Sick at
diverse times of their Continuance, therefore to be called Emptying or Cleansing
Fevers.

40. XVIII. The Fits of most Intermitting Fevers use not only to end with a
Sweat good for the Sick, and therefore then to be esteemed Critical; but often for
the most part of the Fit a great Sweat, hurtful to the Sick, and therefore
Symptomatical, most commonly hot, seldom cold Breaths out of the whole Body, or
a particular part, as the Head, Breast, Abdomen, or Lims, which makes the
Sweating Fevers: Such also are Continual Fevers observd to be, that are known
by the Name of The English Sweat.

41. XIX. But Intermitting Fevers are also observd with almost a continual
Urining, and that Symptomatical, weakening the Sick, not Critical and easing
them; which therefore may fitly be called Vretic Fevers.

42. XX. Lastly that I may put an end to these partly new names, Intermitting
Fevers are observd to be accompanied with a grievous and troublesome Spitting,
and therefore to be named Spitting Fevers.

43. Without doubt there are yet many more Kinds and Differences of
Intermitting Fevers to be named from their grievous and molesting Symptoms; but
let it suffice to have mentiond the most notable ones, which I being much
hurried could call to Mind.

44. If any ask me the Causes of Intermitting Fevers differing so many ways
among themselves; I answer, That one cause makes an Intermitting Fever, as
Intermitting, and another makes it of this or that Kind, in as much as it
returns in this or that day, or is accompanied with these or other grievous
Symptoms.

45. If any where, certainly in assigning the true Cause of all and every
Intermitting Fever, the great difference of Doctors of Physic is observd,
lastly mine also perhaps varies not a little from the Opinion of the rest; I
now intend more deeply to enquire, more accuratly to examine, and explain more
exquisitly then ever I did before, all this hard and intricat business chiefly
upon their account who never heard or are like to hear me publicly, or ever
have hall or may have conference with me about this Matter: Which I will do as
much as I may for my Concerns, and Distractions daily increasing, rather then
decreasing, and therefore perpetually withdrawing my Mind from an attentive
Meditation, wholly requisite here, my private Auditory tarrying for the same,
and the Printer daily urging.

46. There is therefore required to produce an Intermitting Fever; that is,
which returning sometimes in certain, other-times uncertain, now in shorter,
othertimes in longer Intervals, and indeed after a total Cessation, and that
also sometimes longer, othertimes shorter by new Fits longer and shorter
likewise both on the account of Cold and Heat, which seeing it is not in the
Blood, otherwise it would be a Continual Fever, is mixed with it and carried to
the Right Ventricle of the Heart; and truly 1. From such a part of the Body,
which should communicate it self by its Vessels with the Heart, either
immediately or mediatly. For here we suppose as our Foundation the Circular
Motion of Blood, both proved abundantly by others, and Us also elsewhere.

47. 2. From such a part, and by such Vessels, in which it may, by an External
Cause, consisting almost in the Non-natural Things, so be infected and
afflicted, that it may be suddenly stopped in some part in its Motion, and that
for some time, and hindered now longer, other-whiles shorter, lest it should
constantly come to the Heart.

48. 3. It should be such a thing, as either for its stopping alone, and
standing still in its Place or Vessels of its own accord, or for any other
Internal Cause concurring to be named, or demonstrated should acquire such a
vitiation, from which (where after that an open passage to the Heart is
restored to it by what way soever) either alone, or joind to others also to be
determind all the Symptoms, though never so diverse and observable in the
manifold Kinds of Intermitting Fevers described may commodiously be deduced and
confirmd by a rational and certain Cure. For We command all Hearty and Worthy
Students of Physic, the Queen of Arts, once and always to bid farewell to the
Commentations and vain Fictions, contrary to the Practice of Physic.

49. 4. It should be such an Impediment, which for a time may bind up such an
Humor stopped before, and after it has got an Outlet, by what cause soever, at
last it should return to its former Nature, and therefore should likewise stop
the like Humor to the former so long in the same place, till the same, as the
former, poured out by away prepared after what manner soever, should produce a
new Fit; and that should be so long continued by course, til at length (unless
the sick perish first) either of its own accord, or by chance, or by art the
noted Impediment should be corrected, or taken away, and the Intermitting Fever
be Cured by the same.

50. If therefore we should attentively consider that all the Humors of the Body
of Man (for we leave the economy of Brutes to Ferriers to be weighed and
explaind) are prepared in their proper Places, or be kept there, and after that
be carried through their Vessels to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, we shall
observe that beside the Blood returning to the Heart by the Veins from all the
Containing Parts; 1. Choler mixes as well immediately by its Passage through the
Liver with the Blood Ascending; as mediatly with the Blood Descending through
its Passage to the Gut, in the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and the Lymphatic
Passage of the Breast. 2. The Lympha mixes it self immediately with the Blood
Descending by its Lymphatic Vessels, and their Trunk. 3. The Juice of the
Pancreas is only mediatly mixed with the same Blood Descending through its
proper Passage, the Guts, the Lacteal Veins, and Passage of the Breast. 4.
Lastly, The Spittle in like manner mediatly only mixes with the Blood
Descending, through its Passages, the Mouth, Throat, Ventricle, Guts, Lacteal
Veins, and Passage of the Breast, and together with it is drawn forward to the
Right Ventricle of the Heart.

51. Beside which four Humors, seeing hitherto none are known to be carried to
the Right Ventricle of the Heart, of necessity we must judge the Cause of
Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, to be deduced from One or More of them;
since all may see, that the Blood when ill-affected, causes a Continual, and
not an Intermitting Fever, because of its perpetual Motion to the Heart.

52. If the Blood stand still any where, presently there arises an
Inflammation: which if communicated to the rest of the Blood, in like manner
produces not an Intermitting, but Continual Fever. To which sometimes is coupled
an Intermitting Fever, and especially a Tertian, and then from both for a
Continual Tertian to arise is no new thing nor wonder, for reasons manifest
enough by what is said beneath.

53. The Blood therefore herein being laid aside, I. None will judge that
Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, can be deduced from Choler, who has
diligently considerd, that it cannot be so infected and afflicted in its
Passages suddenly by any External Cause, so as to be stopped either wholly or in
part in its motion for a time, and again either of its own accord, or for any
other demonstrable Internal Cause should find a way, by which it may produce
the Symptoms above noted, by what way soever it is brought to the Heart, and
that either alone, or joind with others.

54. I do not deny that Choler is turned into smaller or bigger Stones, and also
into a Stony Crust in its Passages through the Liver: But as neither coms
suddenly, so neither is it observd that either of them were dissolved by any
Internal, but only External Cause, nor yet so, that any thing like to
Intermitting Fevers can thence be deduced.

55. In like manner sometimes Choler is judgd not to be carried down to the
Small Gut from what cause soever, when the Excrements are obscurly white and
thicker then usual. But an Intermitting Fever is not always observd to
accompany the Jaundies, although often it does; which therefore cannot be taken
thence for an impediment of Choler.

56. II. Neither from the Lympha can Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, be
derived. For, besides that the most Symptoms accompanying them for the most
part, and observable chiefly in the Abdomen, cannot be expected even in a
Dream, from the Lympha; besides, if Intermitting Fevers did depend of, and were
produced by the Lympha, then either all, or but part of the Lympha were faulty,
as though it were hindered and farthered again reciprocally in its Motion to the
Heart. If all? where and what kind of Impediment could that be? whether or no
in all the Conglobated Glandula's, Muscles and Bowels? or in all the Lymphatic
Vessels, or their Trunk about their insertion into the Jugular or Axillar left
Vein? But if only a part thereof, then which and where? Whether that which goes
only to the Heart from all or some only of the Conglobated Glandules? Or
whether it be hindered in all the Glandules? But these Glandules are rarely
found to swell or be hard, and that only when the Head is stuffed, or in
Catarrhal Fevers (of which we spoke in the former Chapter) scarce ever, though
the Intermitting Fever be very troublesome, the Causes whereof we search: so
that, by how much the more diligently any searches the Rise and Motion of the
Lympha, as also its Supply and Vessels, so much the less will he incline to
ascribe the Cause of Intermitting Fevers as such to the Lympha.

57. III. Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting, in no wise seem to be deduced
from Spittle. For (that we transfer not hither more Arguments from what is now
said of Lympha) although sometimes, for that is not perpetual, a little before
the Feverish Fit, or together with its Beginning, the Spittle is observd to
flow more plentifully or slowly unto the Mouth, notwithstanding the same
Spittle is not noted to be such, that the molesting Symptoms of every
Intermitting Fever, I say not all, but even the most frequent, may folidly be
ascribed to it. The Spittle is not always, I say, carried, which if so, should
wholly be carried in the time of Intermission, more slowly to the Mouth, and
more plenteously while the Fit begins or molests; and sometimes the contrary,
sometimes neither happens. But the Vitiations which are found in the Spittle, do
nothing less then testify the primary, but rather the secondary Vitiation of
Spittle, as it will more evidently appear from what is to be said hereafter.

58. IV. Any Man may easily think that Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting,
are to be deduced from the Juice of the Pancreas, who shall observe with an
attentive Mind, all and every of the Requisites, noted in Sect. 46, etc. to
produce them, to concur here and only here.

59. For 1. This Juice is carried from the very Pancreas, in such a Part, which
by its Vessels and proper Passages (as it is said in Sect. 50.) mediatly
communicates with the Right Ventricle of the Heart.

60. 2. The same Juice is carried by such Vessels, to wit, the Lateral or Side
Passages, in one or more whereof, it may be so infected and afflicted by an
External Cause, that it may suddenly be stopped in some part, in its motion, and
hindered for a certain time, least it should continually go to the Heart.

61. And that falls out, as often as Phlegm, which uses to be much gatherd and
accumulated in the Small Gut, is dissolvd either by Heat of Air, or a vehement
Motion of Body, or Watchings prolongd, or Care of Mind, or Anger continued, or
Meats, Sauces, or sharp Medicines, or else by any other Cause; and then being
mixed with the Blood, is carried together with it all over to all parts of the
Body, and being joind more or less every where with all the Humors, is carried
with the same in their Vessels; Whence as in other places, so in the Lateral
Passages of the Pancreas, I mean the strait ones, the same Phlegm thickens,
stops the same Passages, and hinders that the Juice standing still there,
cannot go into the Middle and Greater Passage and so forward, for some sudden
External Cause, which is apt to Coagulate Phlegm, (as Air frozen or blown with
chill Winds, or with any Blast causing cold, Rain or any Water touching the
Body, and afflicting it with its coldness, Drink of any cold Liquor, especially
when taken in a large quantity; A sudden and especially unexpected Terror, and
great Grief of Mind, etc.)

62. And perhaps this happens easier, and ofter in the Pancreas, then in all
the Parts of the Body, because Phlegm is easier and more plentifully joind and
transported to the Acid Matter of the Juice of the Pancreas, exceeding all the
other Humors in Acidity; and again it separates easily, when Coagulated by any
Cause; whereby the Separation between that Acid, though not very sharp, Juice,
and Phlegm, though Clammy, being only confused, in no wise wholly mixed, is
promoted.

63" Nor have we only Concluded that the Obstruction of the Pancreas in the
Lateral Passages, may be in probability by the now mentiond Causes in part
contrary to it, and mutually receiving one another, but we have evidently
cleard, by ocular inspection more then once, that it is actually done in our
Dissections of Bodies.

64. For sometimes among our Dissections, even publicly, several being then
present in our Academic Hospital of the Sick, besides other grievous Diseases,
we had the Bodies of those that died of Intermitting Fevers, and indeed often
manifold, and of long continuance; we forced in a liquid Volatile Salt colored
blew into the Passage of the Pancreas, where it opens into the small Gut, by a
Syringe fit for this matter. Which Salt, because it pierced only into some, and
not into all the Glandules at first, (though the next day it opend all) whilst
it entered into both those that were near and remote, and indeed some near, as
well as remote were not colored, and died them of its color, there must needs
be some obstacle, which hindered the infused Liquor, from passing through all
the Lateral Passages of the Pancreas, into the adjoining Glandules, which all
the Spectators beheld, and without doubt could not but acknowledge the same.

65. And that that hindrance was an Obstruction by a thick and viscous Humor
stuffing up the Lateral Passages; I therefore affirm, because (beside which,
none, not the least sign of Compression, or of any other kind of Straitness, to
which this can be ascribed did present it self) all the Antecedent Causes, as
often as they come to be known, and the Symptoms wonted to accompany Intermitting
Fevers, and so also the most rational and certain Manner of curing them, are
found to agree, and exactly to square with an Obstruction.

66. 3. Such is the Juice of the Pancreas, as that it may of its own accord get
such a vitiation by its delay and standing still alone in its Lateral Passages;
as that then all the Symptoms of Intermitting Fevers, though never so
different, may commodiously and without difficulty be reduced to it, partly
alone, and partly joind to others, hereafter to be determind and confirmd by a
rational and certain Cure.

67. For the Juice of the Pancreas is naturally sowrish; which is cleard by
several Arguments proposed by Me in My second Disquisition of Fevers, Sect. 32,
etc. and also by Experience, in the happy success of that Ingenious Dr.
Regnerus de Graaf, tried often here and elsewhere in Dogs, and also once at
Anj^u. in a Man unhappily oppressed and killed with a Beam falling on him, and in
a peculiar Exercise here exposed to public examination, at the end of the year
1664. I being Praeses.

68. This Juice because it is sowrish, therefore is such also, which by its
delay and standing still, is vitiated of its own accord in any of its Passages,
and indeed so, that first of all it becoms more Acid then usual; and hence
dissolvs the Phlegm obstructing its Passages either wholly, and then carrying
it out, or at least pieces and passes through; and at length both Alone, and
joind with other Humors afterward to be explaind, is not only like to produce,
but indeed produces ill the Symptoms that happen in all Intermitting Fevers.

69. For daily Experience testifies, that any Acids, become always of their own
accord more Acid. So Vinegar the older, so much the sour. The Reason whereof I
take to be this; to wit, that the Acrimony of Acids is then encreasd, because
the Volatile Spirits that temper that Acidity, do at least in part vanish away,
whence no wonder, if any Acid Liquor being kept, grows sensibly more Acid. By
the same means the making of Vinegar may be promoted, though unknown to many,
in a common place warmd with Fire, or exposed to the Sun on an House top; for
by these means a way is prepared for the more easy and speedy efflux of the
Volatile Spirits.

70. And as any Acid Liquors not within our Bodies, do of their own accord and
more increase in Acidity; so within the same, the Symptoms both in Melancholic
Diseases so called, and which here is more requisite, those that are observable
in the beginnings of Intermitting Fevers, and as they often rise without the
wrong use of any Acids, so are they to be referd to an Acid Liquor, these, I
say, do prove that the Juice of the Pancreas by being stopped does grow more
Acid, which therefore we intend strait way to search more accuratly.

71. The Jaice of the Pancreas grows Acid with standing still in its Passages,
because the Volatile Spirit which is naturally conjoind to it, and so tempers
it, departs then gradually more and more.

72. This Juice of the Pancreas, by standing still as aforesaid, becoming more
Sharp and Acid, begins to use its force, and to Cut the Phlegm that stops its
Passages; which if it prevail with so much toughness and thickness, that it
cannot be wholly cleansd, loosed, and thence removed, it pierces it then, and
opens a way for it self by force to pass through.

73. We intend to deduce the rise of all the observable Symptoms in
Intermitting Fevers, from the too much Acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas,
and other Humors joind to it, after we have premised in a word the fourth
Requisite, Sect. 49. also here to concur, to wit, that the Phlegm that
obstructs the Lateral Passages of the Pancreas, which not only compels the
Juice for a time to stand still there, but moreover when it has yielded it an
Outlet, causd by its Acrimony, does presently again come together, grow in
one, and so repairs and renues the Obstruction that was in part opend, and
hence stops likewise that Juice so long in the same place, till being let out
also as the former, in an open way, it produces a new Fit; and that so long
continued, till the Fever and Obstruction be wholly cur d any way or the Sick
himself destroyed.

74. That the nature of Viscous Phlegm is such, that though it be pierced
through, yet runs together and unites again, is sufficiently evinced by the
li^^ change of all viscous things, and also the eradica^^ng and choking
Medicines of Intermitting F^vers (...) whether they be of an inciding or cutting
na^^^^, and Diuretics, or Sudorifics, or whether V^^^^^^ or Purgers. For all
these seem to my appr^ to cure Intermitting Fevers, in as much as they ^^^cide,
loosen, cleanse, and carry down to the G^ts, a^^ sometimes totally educe out of
the Body, though i^ a diverse way the Viscous Phlegm that stuck in the Passages
of the Pancreas. Which any that seriously weighs and examins the special, and
commonly called Specific Medicines for happy curing of Intermitting Fevers will
easily acknowledge.

75. As often as Intermitting Fevers are not ended suddenly and by Medicines used
by art or chance, or by the Non-natural Things not naturally used, and exceeding
custom, but vanish away slowly and almost insensibly, so often, if any observe
all, which befall the Sick, he will find that the reason of this Solution is
wholly to be ascribed to the same Non-natural things and sometimes to Medicines,
but very moderat ones, and therefore such as do slowly and less observably
produce this worthy Effect.

76. Having now fully proved the rise of Intermitting Fevers, as Intermitting
from the Juice of the Pancreas Obstructed and Standing still in its Lateral
Passages, the next thing in course is, that we deduce all the Symptoms in
Fevers, though never so different if notable, both from the same, and also from
other Humors joined with it, and so prove and confirm our Opinion of Fevers and
their Rise, at least in part, as we hope, already proved.

77. The Juice therefore of the Pancreas, being made more sour then naturally
it is, by its abovenam'd Obstruction, and poured out into the Cavity of the
small Gut after it has pierced through the obstructing Phlegm, forthwith rises
up against Choler meeting it, and so raises an Effervescency with it sharper
then usual, and indeed varying according to the variery of Phlegm also
adjoining.

78. For so long as that Acid Juice by the help of Phlegm over-powers Choler,
it produces Coldness, ^^^f^^^nt very much in many Circumstances.

79. For 1. most frequently there is vehement Cold i^ (...) R^^i^^ of the
Loins, where there is a conflux of the three forementioned Humors in the Small
G^t^ when the aforesaid Juice is more Acid, and (...) is not very viscous, by
which, piercing the T^nicle of the Guts, it afflicts them with Coldness.

80. 2. In the same Region of the Loins there is little or no Coldness felt,
when the Phlegm of Spittle is very Viscous, and hinders the piercing of the
Juice of the Pancreas to the Tunicle of the Gut, whence Coldness molests, one
while in the middle of the Belly, to wit, about the end of the small Gut,
another while in the extreme parts of the Body only.

81. 3. Coldness seems chiefly to molest in the Inner Parts of the Head, when
it abounds with a Phlegmatic Humor, to which the Acid Juice, or its Vapors
joining, manifest themselves there, more then elsewhere, and so torment the
Sick whilst a Destillation of Rheum does assault and attend.

82. 4. By these same Vapors if more gentle, and also by the mixture of Phlegm
of the Guts becoming more flatulent and going to the Lungs there are raisd in
the beginning of most of the Fits Yawnings, as also Gapings, Unquietness, and
weariness of the Lims, by the same dispersd through the Habit of the Body.

83. 5. At other times these over-sharp Vapors, being less mixed with Phlegm,
but different in degrees of Acrimony, do produce sometimes a Shivering, sometimes
a Stifness.

84. 6. These same Vapors, when they are more Acrimonious, do breed Gnawing,
Pricking, and so Griping Pains of the Belly: as when they have much Phlegm mixed
with them, they then breed more weighty and beating Pains.

85. 7. These same Vapors being both flatulent and acrimonious, cause the Pulse
in the beginning to be more frequent because of their Irritating the Heart when
they come thither: which by Degrees grows Lesser when Cold increas^s by reason
of the increasd Acidity in these Vapors that arise, the Blood being more
coagulated, and so less fit for its rarefaction: Whence no wonder if beside all
this the Pulse be made Weaker together with the whole Animal Motion; which
therefore can scarce or not at all be observd, whilst Coldness does molest.

86. But where all the Juice of the Pancreas becoming sharper by the
Obstruction is effus'd into the Small Gut, and Choler getting dominion again
becoms sharper, either by it self, or is made sharper by reason of the vicious
Effervescency made with the aforesaid Juice, the Vapors which are then raisd
for the most part more Choleric, 1. do usually cause an Anxiety about the
Midrif, and sometimes a Queasiness, and Vomiting, or besides, a Looseness, of
which we intend to speak more largely hereafter.

87. 2. These same Vapors being very Choleric, and partly rising up to the
Ventricle, and hence up to the Jaws, partly passing through to the Heart and
Lungs do provoke Thirst.

88. 3. Likewise when Choler has gaind dominion in the Heart, the Blood by
degrees rarefies more, and the Pulse becoms greater and stronger; although the
former frequency remains, which is increasd by an irritation of the Acrimony of
Choler, and the rarefaction of Blood at the Heart.

89. Though chiefly the Heat and Burning in the Heart, and thence in the whole
Body is encreasd by Choler successivly overruling.

90. And no Wonder if then 5. a dryness of the Tongue do accompany such a Heat,
seeing Vapors effus'd out of the Blood and carried into the Lungs through the
sharp Artery do dry the same.

91. Neither is it a wonder if 6. Breathing be more difficult and encreasd
seeing the Blood is much rarefi'd.

92. As also, if 7. Heat, Pain, and Pulsation of the Head chiefly, do vex the
Sick, seeing no part of the Body has so many Arteries, and receivs so much
Blood as the Head; in which Region of the Temples the same Pulsation is felt
more troublesome then elsewhere, because of the remarkable winding clefts of the
Brain, through which great Arteries are carried.

93. Neither Wonder, if 8. Watchings, and sometimes a Raving do so frequently
molest; for then of necessity the Animal Spirits are vitiated and moved
troublesomly, and hindered of natural Rest, or at least Tranquillity, wherefore
the empty Mind of the Sick is disturbd, and often distracted.

94. And after the preternatural heat and fury of Choler made sharper by the
Juice of the Pancreas also sharpened after the same manner by its Obstruction,
begins to remit, and the Humors are disposed to serenity, and former
tranquillity of the whole Body, which during the troublesome Fit were more
confused one with another, do now sensibly separate and loosen from one another
again, yea some of them also are voided by Vrin or Sweat together with Drink
taken pretty liberally.

95. And as Watchings molest while the Fit continues, so when it declines, a
pleasant Sleep uses to overtake the wearied, and recreat them again.

96. Which if the Humors of the Body more closely united, separate from one
another only in part, the Sleep is observd less quiet, and grievous with Dreams
or Watching; which testifies the Diseases rather to increase, then decrease.

97. But, that we may prosecute in order all the kinds of Fevers mentiond, I.
Chill Fevers arise from the Juice of the Pancreas over-Acid, and joind to
Phlegm plentiful and tough enough, meanwhile Choler being very slow.

98. II. Burning Fevers arise from Choler then Sharp, and Oily, and Plentiful,
the Juice of the Pancreas being less sharp, and Phlegm but little, and less
tough.

99. III. The Fevers called Epialae, I judge to be twofold Intermitting Fevers,
but both caused by the Juice of the Pancreas too sharp, and Choler also sharp,
and so indeed, that continually the Coldness of the one concur's with the Heat
of the other, and the new Fit of the first and Coldness return, when the Heat
of the latter begins to be augmented, and molest the Sick.

100. IV. I ascribe Thirsty Fevers to the over-sharp Salt in Choler; which if
much Oiliness also accompany, Thirst is troublesome chiefly in Heat, but if it
be more gentle, then even while Cold molests; and its hurtful quality is more
manifested at the meeting and vicious Effervescency of the Juice of the
Pancreas forcing out after its feverish obstruction.

101. V. I derive Hungry Fevers from the Juice of the Pancreas obtaining a more
grateful Acidity, but p^tent by its obstruction, when it ascends to the
Ventricle breeds both that cruel Hunger, and sometimes Fainting and other
Symptoms except Meat be given.

202. VI. The Juice of the Pancreas breeds Heartaking Fevers by getting a
Corroding quality, chiefly when Choler is also sharp, and their concourse make
a potent Effervescency; whence exceeding sharp Vapors rising to the upper
Orifice of the Ventricle do sharply bite and gnaw it.

203. VII. Griping Fevers arise from the same Juice of the Pancreas both too
sharp and too tart by its obstruction, and putting forth its Acrimony, one
while into the Small, other times into the Thick Guts; With which if Viscous
Phlegm and Choler, at least moderatly Sharp, do concur, they raise Wind, which
distend the Belly together with the Guts, and beget the Colic pain an
importunate Companion of this Fever.

104. VIII. Swouning Fevers have their rise also from the Juice of the
Pancreas, but more Volatile then Sharp in Acidity by its obstruction, Choler
being little and slow then, whence the same breaks forward without delay
through the Lacteal Veins piercing toward the Heart, not only all over, and
raising a cold Sweat, but forthwith does so coagulate the Blood also, that for
a season it cannot be rarefi'd sensibly, nor yet the Pulse observd, till Choler
get some strength when this hurtful Juice begins to cease, and the Sick seems
then to return from the Dead to Life.

105. IX. I attribute Strangling Fevers to Sour Vapors of the Juice of the
Pancreas growing more sour by its obstruction, stird up in its Effervescency
with Choler, and not only rising to the Ventricle and Throat, but also to the
Thoracic Passage, by the Lacteal Veins, to the Heart and Lungs, and causing
sometimes a Sense of Suffocation in the Gullet, and a true Suffocation in the
Lungs.

106. X. I also ascribe Difficulty-Breathing Fevers to Vapors after the same
manner, but less Sour, of the Juice of the Pancreas less Sour, joined to
Viscous Phlegm in the Small Gut, and so more Flatulent; from which all the
Symptoms reckoned Sect. 32. may be easily and only deduced, and commodiously
enough explained.

107. XI. Asthmatic Fevers have their rise in my Judgment from Viscous Phlegm
found in the Small Gut, which being dissolvd by the Juice of the Pancreas raise
a Feverish Fit, and being carried with it, together to the Heart and Lungs, and
sticking there, causes a Breathing with Snorting; whilst many or few Belches
come forth by the same, and make a more grievous, or lighter, longer or shorter
Fit.

108. XII. Coughing Fevers are caused by Vapors, most commonly, seldom Wind,
and not so Viscous as Sharp, partly to be ascribed to the Juice of the
Pancreas, partly to Phlegm in the Guts, but sharper and more biting, so often
as they come to the Lungs, and provoke and compel Them to cough continually.

109. XIII. Catarrhal Fevers arise from Humors in the Head gradually gatherd,
and dissolvd by the Cause of an Intermitting Fever carried thither, and moved
every way according to its Distillation and Defluxion.

110. XIV. Gouty Fevers are to be found in the Juice of the Pancreas so
corrupted, that it chiefly assaults with it Choler, with which it does
vitiously effervesce, and raise the most grievous Pain; or less Sharp, rising
against Viscous Phlegm, and not sharp Choler is much dulld of the same, and
hinders the Motion of the part with a Phlegmatic Tumor, rather then an Acute
Pain. Where it is to be noted, that often, daily, or every other day the
Feverish Fits which return, do not afflict the Sick with a notable or
troublesome Coldness, or Heat, but rather with a light Pain of the Head, and
moreover a Thirst, the Pulse also being too Frequent and too little at first,
and then somewhat Greater: whereby a New Fit is observed; the Gouty Pains also
being imbitterd after some hours, and so, that although they remit again in
part, either slower or quicker, yet do they not wholly intermit; but though the
Feverish Fit be ended, yet notwithstanding the grievous or more light Pains of
the Joints still continue, till at length they depart either of their own
accord or by art.

111. XV. The Symptoms that attend Distrastracting Fevers, do prove the new
Feverish Fit to arise from Choler, chiefly sharp enough of it self, and sharper
by meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas.

112. XVI. All may see that Vomiting Fevers arise from the same Choler very
Volatile, and sometimes also sharp meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas, and so
much stird up by its consequent Vicious Effervescency and rising up to the
Ventricle; which the excretion of Choler sometimes Yellow, othertimes greenish
does confirm.

113. XVII. Fevers with a Looseness are wholly to be assigned to Choler also,
but less Volatile, and more sharp, and still made sharper by meeting with the
Juice of the Pancreas, which by gnawing the Guts having dissolvd the Phlegm
thereof do provoke them to thrust forward what is containd in them.

114. XVIII. I take Sweating Fevers to arise from the Juice of the Pancreas
more Volatile, then sharp, and therefore rather dissolving then coagulating the
Mass of Blood.

115. XIX. I am persuaded that Vrining Fevers arise from the same Cause but
less Volatile, seeing that not only the Matter of Sweat is the same with that of
Urin, but where Sweat is hindered by external Coldness, there Urin is voided
more plentifully.

116. XX. I deduce Spitting Fevers from the same Juice of the Pancreas, being
so vitiated by its Obstruction, that when it produces a Feverish Fit, it is
carried more plentifully to the Salivary Glandul's, and so affords the Spittle
more plenteous and fluid matter.

117. From what has been said, I suppose that the Causes of many other
Intermitting Fevers with most grievous Pain of the Head, and Teeth, and other
parts, or any other notable Symptom may easily be unfolded by those which are
Ingenious, wherefore before we come to the Cure of all and every of the Fevers
proposed and explaind, let us mention their diversity in returning, according
to the Intervals of their Fits now shorter, other-times longer in Quotidians,
Tertians, Quartans, Quintans, and others, as also the Reason and Causes of
their difference, which I take to be most true, and intend to apply them
explaind to my Opinion.

118. And although I do not wholly follow the diverse manner of these Sorts
commonly ascribed to diverse, yet do I not think that these diverse Humors are
here to be neglected, seeing that, as shall appear by what is to be said, if
they cause not that diversity immediately, they much contribute, to do it
mediatly.

119. As therefore the new Fit of every Intermitting Fever is stird up according
as we have taught, so often as the Juice of the Pancreas becoming sharper by its
Obstruction, bores through the Phlegm that obstructs its Lateral Passages and
passes to the small Gut, and hence having raised an Effervescency vitiated
howsoever with Choler, and other Symptoms in the same place, and adjacent parts
carried through the Lacteal Veins, and Thoracic Passage, and the hollow upper
Vein into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so forward: so the same new
Fit, is raisd sooner, or later, as Phlegm obstructing the Lateral Passage of
the Pancreas is pierced, and bored through by the forementiond Juice.

120. And this piercing and penetrating of Phlegm Obstructing, is sooner or
later, both upon the account of the Phlegm it self obstructing the Passage, and
also of the Juice of the Pancreas piercing through it.

121. For by how much the more viscous and plenteous Phlegm is, by so much the
more difficulty and so slowly will it be pierced through: and on the contrary,
the lesser and less Glutinous it is, the easier and so the sooner will it be
pierced through.

122. Again, the more Acid this Juice of the Pancreas is of it self, the sooner
will it acquire by its obstruction a greater and sufficient Acrimony to
penetrate the Phlegm obstructing easier and sooner: and on the contrary, the
more obtuse or sour and little this Juice is, so much the slowlier can it
acquire a sufficient Acrimony to cut through the Phlegm.

123. Therefore by how much the less and less glutinous Phlegm obstructing is,
and the Juice of the Pancreas be more Acid and Plentiful, so much the sooner
will a new Fit of an Intermitting Fever arise, and so a Quotidian, that is, one
returning in the space of about 24 hours.

124. Again how much the more viscous and plentiful Phlegm obstructing is, and
the Juice of the Pancreas more obtuse or tart and little, so much the slower
will the new Fit of the Intermitting Fever be a coming, and so a Quartan or
Quintan, etc.

125. But as often as 1. Phlegm obstructing, and Juice of the Pancreas are in a
medium, or 2. The Juice of the Pancreas is of it self too acid or plentiful,
and Phlegm obstructing too viscous or plentiful; or 3. the Juice of the
Pancreas is less and less Acid, and Phlegm lesser and less Glutinous, so often
new Fits of the Fevers will return almost every other day, and then they will
be Tertians, much differing in their Symptoms beyond what other Intermitting
Fevers do; and indeed because of the newly mentiond possible threefold respect
of Phlegm obstructing, and the Juice of the Pancreas piercing through it.

126. And here you may note, that Intermitting Fevers do but seldom return in
the exact Interval of natural days of 24 hours; but return quicker or slower
for the most part; wherefore then they are said to anticipate the appointed and
expected Time for some hours, which is disliked; or to come later, which is
commended, although it matters not whether the Fits anticipate or come later,
if so be that their continuance, and the grievousness of Symptoms daily
accompanying be diminishd; to which a Physician should chiefly give heed when
he prognosticates by Art, and would foretell a change certainly to come.

127. From what has already been said, the Causes of Intermitting Fevers, both
manifold, and compounded of diverse, may without much difficulty be found out
and assignd, to wit, the Obstruction both various, and in diverse Lateral
passages of the Pancreas.

128. But there still remains a difficulty not to be despised, which is more
requisite in explaining the multiplication of any simple Intermitting Fevers, to
wit, Quartan or Tertian, that is, its change into a double or triple, which I
judge to be so often as new Phlegm is dissolvd in the Body, and especially in the
Small Gut, by an Error committed in Diet, or Medicines, Poisons rather not
rightly used, and hence driven forward together with the Blood every whither,
therefore also to the Pancreas; which being again coagulated in one, or more of
its passages formerly not afflicted, by what cause soever, breed an Obstruction
different from the former, more or less, which breeds a Fever more or less
grievous then the former. And if daily Experience do not evince, certainly it
abundantly confirms this to be so.

129. And seeing I cannot observe any more notable difficulty about the Causes
of Intermitting Fevers, which I judge could make any scrupling to the Ingenious
and Judicious; who attentively consider what is abovesaid, and chiefly to
those who do accurately observe natural things, I betake my self directly to
handle their Cure.

130. As we have considerd Intermitting Fevers, in searching and assigning
their Causes, both as they are Intermitting, and as they are accompanied with
various Symptoms, and as they return in diverse Intervals, so now we will keep
our Method in their Dogmatical Cure proposed, and will attend to the same,
seeing that the Cure according to Art will be easier and more succesful, when
they are accurately and rightly observd.

131. Because therefore the Juice of the Pancreas is the apparent and determind
Cause of Intermitting Fevers as Intermitting, when it is made more acid and
sharp, by reason of the Obstruction of its Lateral Passages caused by Phlegm
coagulated in them, and hence carried down into the Small Gut after the Phlegm
Obstructing is opend, and there raising an Effervescency vitiously with Choler
and Phlegm of the Guts meeting, after that creeps with them in what form soever
to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and therein by stirring up the Heart
causes a more frequent Pulse, not only by its Acrimony or Flatulency, but
moreover alters and troubles diverse ways the Vital Effervescency, and
Sanguification it self, and produces all other Symptoms above noted, and
explaind in diverse places, the Cure whereof will be performd, if I. Phlegm
obstructing more, or less glutinous and coagulated be cut, and dissolvd, and
thence removed, because peccant in place, and carried down at least to the
small Gut, or wholly carried out of the Body. II. If the Acidity and Acrimony
increased of the Juice of the Pancreas be Temperd and Corrected. III. If its
vicious Effervescency with Choler in the Small Gut be hindered or amended.

131. I. Phlegm obstructing will be Cut most commodiously with Aromatics and
any Volatile Salt, but especially so used, that the whole Body grow warm, either
with Motion, or a Fire, or Bath, or Clothes also; whereby the force of the
Medicin being dispersed all over, may come also to the Pancreas it self, and its
Lateral Passages, and so to the place Grievd and Fuel of the Disease: which
chiefly conduce to Melancholic and Phlegmatic People.

133. For Example sake take of this Mixture one Spoonful several times in a
day, and two, or three hours before the Fit coms take three Spoonfuls; also
increasing the heat of the Body mildly, as is abovesaid, even to the breathing
of a gentle Sweat: for so it will perform more, and sometimes happily cure the
Fever.

. Parsley-water ii. Fenel-Water i. Treacle-Water, or Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus
i. ss. Volatile Salt of Amber i. Sir. of Carduus i. M.

134. If the Constitution of the Sick be either Naturally or Preternaturally
Choleric, let him take sour things that loosen and cut; For Example,

. Fumitory-Water iii. Salt Ammoniac, or Salt of Tartar Vitriolated i.
Diaphoretic Antimony ss. Sir. of Fenel i. M.

135. When Choleric and Phlegmatic Humors do abound together in the Sick, these
Mixtures may be prepared of the two above-mentiond differing ones. For Example;

. Carduus and Succory-Water, of each i. ss. Simple Treacle-Water, Distilled
Vinegar, of each vi. Crab's-eyes pouderd ss. Sir. of the five Roots i. M.

136. If the Phlegm Obstructing be not very glutinous, the Obstruction is often
loosend wholly, by one Sweat, and its Cause carried down into the Small Gut,
and the Fever Cured.

137. You may administer a Vomit three or four hours before the return of the
Fi^ if there be little Phlegm, and much Choler in the Body* by the h^lp whereof
not only Choler abounding, ^ut also Phlegm obstructing is expell^ to the Small
Gut, and thence to the Ventricle, and at length by the Gullet and Mouth, and so
the Fever is said to be choked, because it is removed. To which end I have
often used with happy success a Sapa Vomitoria made by my Self of Glass of
Antimony, and other Medicines made of Antimony in this case proper before all
others.

138. Such things also as Purge, perform the same, if they have such as both
cut and purge Phlegm mixed with them. For Example;

. Fetid Pills ss. Troches of Alhandal, Mercury dulcifi'd, of each Gr. 5. Oil of
Amber 2 drops. M. Make them into five Pills Gilded, and tak^ them four or five
hours before the Fit com^s, which will purge mildly.

139. II. The Encreasd Acidity and Acrimony of the Juice of the Pancreas, is
best Temperd with Volatile Salts, and all Aromatics not neglecting Opiats. To
this end therefore the Mixture prescribed in Sect. 133. may be used, and it will
be more effectual, if you add to it Laudanum three Grains, and Oil of Cloves
two Drops.

140. III. The Vicious Effervescency of the Juice of the Pancreas and Choler
may be Hindered, at least Amended with the newly commended Mixture, and chiefly
because of Opium wonderfully lenifying and tempering both kinds of Sharpness by
its Oiliness.

141. And by these few forms any young Practitioner may easily invent other
Prescriptions in some things to be vari'd as the Distemper requires; especially
if he attend to all the Rules, and Examples of Forms which he may find here.

142. And now we have premised the Rational Cure of Intermitting Fevers, as
Intermitting, confirmd by long Experience, let us see what the Symptoms so
notable by their great diversity, and often so troublesome to the Sick, do
indicate and require for their Cure.

143. Against Coldness, and the other Symptoms that usually accompany it, the
Mixture prescribed in Sect. 133. is convenient here, if you add what we commend
Sect. 139. seeing I have not observd hitherto that any thing does so temper
Coldness, as Oil of Cloves; and while the Sick is Cold, he may take three or
four times in an hour a Spoonful of the above-mentiond Mixture.

144. To temper Heat, and its Symptoms accompanying, the Mixtures every where
prescribed, as also the Decoction set down in Chap. 29. Sect. 40, etc. are
convenient; to the imitation of which, you may easily form more.

145. III. In Epial Fevers Medicines composed of the forem^ntiond differing
Prescriptions are convenient; such as is the Mixture proposed in. 135. and many
other s^ch-like in this Treatise; also any may form (...) according to the
Symptom that most molests, and change it after it is taken with different
success. For we must always attend to such things as Conduce or are
Prejudicial; and according to them, Remedies are to be alterd and renewd;
seeing in this the Judgment and Ingenuity of Physicians appears.

146. IV. To assuage and take away Thirst, I commend what I mentiond in Chap.
29. Sect. 47. And note, that during Heat you may drink more plentifully,
whereof take heed whilst Coldness molests; in which time it is safer to wash
the Mouth with clean Water, and moreover mix with Wine, and to deceive Thirst,
rather then drink much: or then you may dissolve some of Lapis Prunellae in
Drink, and often take it in a small quantity.

147. V. To Cure Hunger that threatens fainting, all things conduce that do
potently destroy and concentrate the Sour Humor, Crab's-eyes, Pearl, Coral,
Chalk, etc. only reduced into Powder, and exhibited in Mixtures otherwise
conducing, or alone in another Liquor, Wine, Beer, or Broth, to the quantity of
some Grains, till Hunger is observed to be diminisht.

148. VI. The Heart-ake so often very grievous, is chiefly Cured by Opiats; which
may be added to diverse Medicines according to the diversity of the other
Symptoms also concurring; because they mitigate and assuage both kinds of
Sharpness, whence that Pain of the Ventricle arises. But they must be taken often
and in a little quantity, until the diminishing, or curing of the Pain, being
the benefit sought for, be obtaind.

149. VII. The Mixture mentiond in Chap. 29. Sect. 69. to be taken by
Spoonfuls, is proper in G^iping and Colical Fevers. Hither reduce those things
proposed by me in Chap. 14. Sect. 45, etc. and elsewhere more at large.

150. VIII. To prevent Swounings, I commend the Mixture prescribed in Chap. 19.
Sect. 74. or one like it, often used by Spoonfuls some hours before the Fit, and
the other things there mentiond.

151. IX Hypochondriac Suffocations joind to Intermitting Fevers, are to be
diminisht and cured by Medicines mentiond by me both elsewhere, and in Chap. 19.
Sect. 71, etc.

152. X. Wheasing Anxiety coupled to the same Fevers seeing it arises from the
same Cause, but not so violent, may be Cured or Lessend with suchlike
Medicines, as well when the Fit molests as begins, and often used in a lesser
quantity.

153. XI. An Asthma accompanying an Intermitting Fever may happily be Cured
with a Vomit taken some hours before the Fit comes or the day before, after the
Phlegmatic Humor is cut, and especially by those that do easily vomit:
Otherwise it may be evacuated downward by gentle Purgation with Phlegmagogues
powerful and effectual, such as are all Mercurials, Colocynthis, Hermodactyls,
etc.

154. As for Phlegmatic Humors sometimes then also sliding down from the Head,
and filling the Sharp Artery, the same Phlegmagogues are convenient to be taken
often in a small quantity together with such as cut and correct Phlegm, and
chiefly in form of Pills; such as we have often prescribed before.

155. As for Windy Vapors so commonly producing the Asthma, either wholly, or
at least much increasing it, all things will conduce, which both amend their
matter and efficient cause, and hinder their rise, and discuss and dissipate
them when bred; concerning which see Chap. 14. in which the most are containd,
that respect hither.

156. XII. The Feverish Cough is Cured, by such things as both temper, and
discuss the over-sharp Vapors. Which Opiats do being joined to Volatile and Oily
Salts, and often used in the Fits in a little quantity, whereby they will
perform it the happier, sooner, safer, and surer. To that end I commend this
following Form.

. Mint-Water iii. Our Carminative Spirit i. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac 20 drops.
Landanum 3 gr. Sir. of Fenel i. ss. M.

157. XIII. Catarrhs stird up together with the Feverish Fit, require diverse
Medicines to cure them, as they consist of a different Matter, and afflict
diverse Parts. In general their vicious quality is to be corrected, their plenty
diminisht, and the Parts usually afflicted strengthened.

158. Moreover thick and viscous Catarrhs are to be attenuated and cut with
Aromatics before mentiond: Serous and Salt Catarrhs are to be temperd with Oily
and Opiat Things, as Pills of Hounds-Tongue, of Styrax, etc.

159. The Thick are to be evacuated with Phlegmagogues, the Serous with
Hydragogues.

160. The Parts afflicted, or that may be afflicted, are to be strengthened,
against viscous and thick Phlegm by grateful Aromatics; on the contrary Salt
Serous Matter by Glutinous Things; externally used in the form of a Plaster,
Unguent, or Liniment; and internally in the form of Pills, Tablets, or
Conserv's, etc.

161. The Cure of the Gout accompanying Intermitting Fevers will consist I. in
the Universal Amendment of the Juice of the Pancreas propos^d before. II. In
the Correction, or Emptying of Choler vicious either by it self, or
accidentally, mentiond before. III. In the Altering or Diminishing of Phlegm
peccant any way, often exhibited in this Tractate. IV. Lastly Defending the
Joints Afflicted as well against future Pain, as freeing them when Pain is
present and molests.

162. The Joints are defended against future Pain with ext^rn^l Medicines to be
vari'd according to the various Humors breeding a different Pain: Which seeing
l^ss eff^ctual ones are required, then they which should overcome Pains
molesting, they may easily be selected from those which are to be proposed in
order.

163. That therefore Gouty Persons may be freed Dogmatically, that is, as well
by Reason as Experience from Pains, present and molesting, seeing they are not
freed always with the same Medicines, no not in the same Fit, much less all that
are Gouty, we must consider it comes, in as much as the Causes of Pains are
often different, not only in diverse Sick People, but also in the same at
another time of the Fit.

164. The Causes are Different in Diverse Sick People, in as much as Choler, and
that diverse, or Phlegm, also diverse is coupled to the primary Cause of the
Gout, the Juice of the Pancreas, also much differing.

165. The Causes of Pains of the Gout are diverse in the same Sick Party but in
a diverse time of the Fit, in as much as the Juice of the Pancreas in the
beginning hurts chiefly and that by its Sour Acrimony breeds pain; and after
that Choler is coupled to it, and either overcomes, or changes its Acrimony,
breeding (...) diverse pain according to the diversity of its faultiness, and
chiefly troublesome with exceeding Heat; seeing that rather a Corroding then
Burning Pain is raised by the Juice of the Pancreas: which is accuratly to be
observd in potently correcting both kind of Pains chiefly with special
Medicines; for either Acrimony may easily and happily be mitigated, and so the
Pain asswag'd with more gentle ones, and chiefly with Oily things.

166. Hence it is, that Poultisses prepared of Mealy Things, and Cows Milk do
conduce almost to all Gouty People grieved with any Pain. For Example;

. The Meal of Marsh Mallow-Roots, Line-Seeds, Barley, of each i. Boil them in
Cows Milk to the consistency of a Pultis for a Poultise: Which let be applied
indifferent warm.

167. Where exceeding Heat concurs, and the Body abounds with sharp Choler,
instead of sweet Milk you may substitute Butter-Milk.

168. In a Phlegmatic Constitution the Meal of Beans, Flowers of Camomile,
Elder, and other things gently Cutting may commodiously be added.

169. A Poultise of the best Wheat-Bread, that is the Crumb prepared of the
Flower only of the Meal, Saffron and Cows Milk boiled, is deservedly commended
of many seeing it asswages any Pains.

170. Where Fermentations please better, I commend this following in excessive
Heat to be applied warm, and to be renewd as soon as it is dried.

. Elder and Fumitory-Water, of each iv, Marigold-Vinegar ii. Opium of Thebes
ss. M.

171. When the Pain is more Corroding, then Burning, I commend the following
Fomen ation in like manner to be used.

. Parsley-Water v. Simple Treacle-Water i. Opium of Thebes i. M. for a
Fomentation.

172. When Impotency of Motion does molest the Sick ^ore then Pain in a very
Phlegmatic Body, then things more Aromatical may commodiously be used, both in
Poultises, and in Fomentations, and in Plasters* Unguents, or Liniments, Opiats
being then usually omitted, as being less requisite or profitable. For Example;

. The Root of Flower de Luce poudred i. Mint-Leavs, Wormwood Tops,
Camomile-Flowers, of each 2 handfuls. Cumin-Seeds poudred i. ss. Beans-Meal ii.
Boil them in clean Water to the consistency of a Pou^tise, adding about the end
Simple Treacle-Water ii. M. to be a Poultise, and applied hot.

173. They whose Skin can bear fat things, to them apply Unguents and Oils,
such as are when Heat molests of Poplar, the White Camphorated, of Roses, the
Cooling of Galens and suchlike; In a Corroding Pain Aregon and Martiatum.
Sometimes it is better to mix these, and make them more temperate.

174. Not long since I experienced the stupendous power of Balsam of Sulphur
Ambred in a Goutish Pain very Corroding with great admiration, some few drops
being anointed on the part grieved, whence forthwith there was raised an hot
Effervescency in the place afflicted, yea burning, and presently ceasing again
together with the exceeding Pain removed in a mom^nt. But I question and not
without ground the like success in all, seeing all cannot bear Oily things, and
chi^fly such as are prepared by distillation, and Chol^r is sharper in many;
yet I judge they in whom Sour Juice excedes, and Phlegm abounds may more easily
bear this Balsam, and be helped with it: Mean while beware, that its use be not
too long continued, but after the pain is over, another gentler Medicin should
then be used to comfort and by degrees restore again the membranous parts.

175. To the same purpose may Unguents, or Liniments be prepared of Volatile
Salts in Hog's Grease, Butter, or other Fat.

176. Neither is Camphur undeservedly commended both in Plasters, and Unguents,
and Liniments, and Fomentations mixd with Spiritous things, seeing it
wonderfully conduces to temper any Sharpness.

177. Many also approve of their own Spittle rubd in i^ the morning to defend
the part affected against new assaults: which is to be granted to Spittle, the
most temperat humor of our Body, and therefore most fit to temper either
sharpness, and to strengthen the Parts against them both.

178. From these few Observations it will not be very difficult to select other
things necessary out of the Writings of Practitioners, and use them to cure the
Gout.

179. XV. Whatsoever do both powerfully and smoothly correct and temper the
Acrimony of Choler will Cure Distracted Fevers, such as are chiefly Oily
Things, Emulsions, and Opiats internally used; and the same applied any way
outwardly to the Head.

180. XVI. All things that fix Choler, and render it unfit to Effervesce
powerfully, will best Cure Vomiting Fevers, as are all Tart Things that thicken
and coagulate; and also Opiats that blunt it.

181. XVII. The same things joind together and often used in a small quantity
at several times will Cure Fevers attended with a Looseness. For Example;

. Conserve of Red-Roses ii. Diascord. ii. Confection of Jacinth i. Terra
Sigillata i. Dragons-Blood ss. M. to be a Conserve taken often in a day to the
quantity of a Walnut.

182. But Medicines prepared in a drier form are here to be preferred for use;
because Moist things too much dilute Choler, and the Juice of the Pancreas, and
stir up, and rather promote, then stay their Effervescency. Whence to tame a
Vomiting, or Looseness, it is better to drink sparingly, and chiefly Steeld, or
Gilded by red hot Gold: whether it be Beer, or Wine, and chiefly Red Wine; or
Cows Milk, etc.

183. XVIII. Sweating Fevers are not so easily Cured, and yield not unless to
Tart Things. Which are to be used dissolvd in a little Liquor, often in a day,
and also in a small quantity, whereby the volatility of the Juice of the
Pancreas is gradually and continually amended and corrected. For Example;

. Plantane-Water iii. Cinamon-Water, Distild Vinegar, of each ss. Sir. of
Purslan i. Red Coral pouderd i. M.

Take this Mixture by Spoonfuls; which if any would have more potent, let half
or a whole Scruple of Acacia, or the Juice of Cistis be added to it.

184. XIX. The same newly mentiond Medicines do conduce to Vrining Fevers,
seeing the Causes of both do only differ in degrees.

185. XX. Spitting Fevers can scarce be Cured otherwise, then by carrying down,
and educing the Juice of the Pancreas either by Stool, or by Urin, or to the
Superficies of the Body with Hydragogues, Diuretics, or Sudorifics taken in
time, that is, before the Fit coms, or when it begins.

186. Although I have not given the Description of Fevers with the Tooth-ake
before, yet I intend to annex here something of their Cure. Which will consist,
beside general Remedies for the Intermitting Fever, in tempering the over sour
Humor that stirs up the Tooth-ake, by Mixtures often taken by Spoonfuls before
the Fit, yea during the Fit, and by a gentle educing it when temperd in the
time of intermission.

187. To which end this following Mixture is fit;

. Betony and Fenel-Water, of each ii. Simple Treacle-Water i. ss. Laudanum 3
Gr. Oil of Cloves 4 drops. Sir. of Arabian Staechas i. M.

188. I have often applied new Treacle on Leather spread like a Plaster to the
place pained (for seldom does one Tooth only ache) to lessen the Pain repeating
with Pries.

189. Which Humor in part at least temperd with this or such a-like Mixture is
educ'd by Hydragogues in the most acceptable form to the Sick, and indeed in a
little Dose, but administered often. For so Pains are more happily taken away,
then if Purgers were once taken in too large a dose.

190. And by what has been offered, I judge every one may know, how to succor
and help Intermitting Fevers according to the more molesting Symptoms so much
differing upon their account. It remains, that we should instruct you briefly
in the Cure of Quotidians, Tertians, Quartans, etc. seeing we have ascribed
them not so much to diverse Humors, Phlegm, Choler, or the Melancholy Juice, as
to Phlegm Obstructing, and the Juice of the Pancreas so different.

191. Therefore in Curing these we must not so much attend to the Interval of
the Recourse of each, as to the diversity of Symptoms accompanying, and chiefly
of Cold and Heat: for according to these if you proceed in the Cure, as we have
taught you before, without doubt it will be happy; as on the contrary, we have
often observd it unhappy or none, if the Cure be tried by the prejudice of every
Humor then believd to be peccant no ways agreeing with the Humors then truly
peccant.

192. For although, to illustrate the Matter with an Example, Tertians chiefly
come in Summer, and indeed when the heat of the Sun molests, in Youth and
Manhood, and chiefly to Choleric People, whence in their Cure there is then had
an exact account of Choler much peccant both of it self, and by reason of the
Fever^sh Fit: Yet there are some Tertians, which in Winter, when it is Frost,
siez on Old Men or Children, in whom Phlegm abounds; in which case, if any
attend to temper or educe Choler chiefly, he will wholly err. For as in most
Tertians the effect of great Heat, Choler being then peccant, is observd, so in
many there is none or little Heat molesting the Sick observd; therefore a
prudent Physician and f^^^ from all prejudice will vary the Cure, according to
the variety hereof now being present, at other times absent.

193. What I have now said about ^^tiens will also be found true in Quotidians,
Q^^rtans, etc. by and Physician that more attends the complaints of the Sick,
and Observations of the more accurate P^actitioners, then the Fictions of
Theoretic Authors, and considers therein a great diversity both of Cold and
Heat, and of other Symptoms noted in order before; according to which I have
cured my Patients much more happily hitherto by Gods Blessing, then many other
Physicians blinded with their own or others prejudices, so that I seriously
exhort my Students to keep and follow the same Method, yea any Readers addicted
only to Truth and their Patients good.

194. I say, we must always attend to all Humors ^eccant together after what
manner soever in the Body, ^n the Dogmatic and Rational Cure of Intermitting
Fevers, seeing they are the Cause, why Phlegm Obstructing is more or less
glutinous, why the Juice of the Pancreas is more or less sharp, and also why
the Fit varies in all its Circumstances and Symptoms.

195. For as often as Choler has dominion in the Body, Phlegm is less clammy, and
the Juice of the Pancreas not so sharp: and therefore the Fever will be Cured
easilier and quicker when rightly cured.

196. But when Phlegm overrules the other Humors in the Body, the Juice of the
Pancreas, and Choler, and Phlegm it self obstructing more slower in its Cure,
though easy enough, having almost all the Symptoms lighter.

197. When a Sour Humor abounding in the Body excedes the other Humors; Choler
will be more broken and sluggish, Phlegm being sometimes more glutimous, and
chiefly when the Sour Humor inclines to tartness, and joind more completely to
the saltish part of Choler, and making the serous part Salt like Brine,
together with Phlegm over-fluid; and then the Fever is more slowly, and more
difficultly cured.

198. And after what manner we must proceed in the Dogmatical Cure of these
Fevers so many ways different among themselves, no less confirmd by large
Experience, then apparent with solid Reason, any excelling in Ingenuity, as
well as Judgment, may easily collect from what is said. For we bid all that are
destitute of such endowments of Spirit, to bid adieu to Dogmatical Physic.

199. And as Simple, so are multiplied Intermitting Fevers to be cured; unless
the Physician have more need of circumspection here for the Interval of
Intermission, or Remission, and the exact observation of fit Seasons, seeing
they are sometimes shorter, other-times more seldom; which being neglected, the
Cure it self is also commonly neglected, or perverted.

200. I said the Interval, not only of the Intermission, but also Remission is
shorter, as well in Multiplied, as Simple Intermitting Fevers; because there is
often observd no full Intermission of a Fever, but only a Remission, by reason of
the Duplication and Multiplication of new Fits: in which time those things are
chiefly to be done, which are or ought be performd with some disturbance of
both the containing and containd Body, to which Purges and Vomits chiefly
belong: which unless they be taken in a convenient time, they often hurt much,
but profit nothing; as many Sick do daily experience to their great loss. He is
therefore truly an Happy Physician, whom other men's dangers make cautious.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Synechal, or Continual Fevers so especially called.
WE have before in Chap. 27. Sect. 12. taught that there were Fevers that were
continually ^ermanent, yet having new Fits daily, or in the third, ^urth, or an
other day; which they commonly and well ^all Quotidian-Continual,
Tertian-Continual, Quar^an-Continual, etc. Fevers, seeing that they are
com^ounded of Continual and Intermitting Fevers concur^ing; although many
Physicians judge and teach otherwise, being more attent to the pleasure of their
Authors, then the Observation of the Sick: whence they name them not
compounded, but singly Continuals.

2. For the most part there is no Cold observd in any ^ew Fit, because the
continued Heat of Those without Fits is wont to break, and overcome the lesser
^owrness of the Juice of the Pancreas, the Acrimony and Oiliness of Choler
exceeding.

3. Yet sometimes either a small Shivering, or little Stiffness is perceivd in
any Fit; that is as often as the over-weak Acrimony of Choler cannot suppress
the great Acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas whencesoever arising, but it
manifests it self at least after a certain manner by cold, or a fretting of the
membranous parts, and a light concussion of the fleshy Pannicle following it.

4. For the most part Intermitting Fevers; so coupled with Continuals, are
Tertians; seldom Quotidians; much less Quartans.

5. The notable and most grievous kind of these Tertian Fevers is called
Causos, or a Burning Fever, in which a great Heat persevering to the end
vexes, and molests the Sick, though remitting a little by Intervals, and hence
again more grievously afflicting. And beside that most troublesome Heat, Thirst
is then wont vehemently to molest the Sick; as on the contrary Hunger is wont
to be abated. Dryness and Blackness of the Tongue often attends these, with
Chops and a filthy Exulceration of the Lips, horrible Scabs afterward growing
upon them. Neither is the grievous Head-Ake unusual in these Fevers, together
with a Raving vehement enough. In some the chief Symptom is a difficult Gnawing
of the Stomach very troublesome to the Sick with or without Vomiting. The Hicket
also grievous to many molests several. A Looseness overtakes others; or Bleeding
at the Nose. Also often large Sweats are sent forth together with an intensness
of the Fit, or Vrin is voided plenteously, whence the Bodies of the Sick in a
short while suffer a kind of wasting, and that Fever is particularly called
Colliquans.

6. In Quotidian Continual Fevers a Bruising Pain does often enough shake the
Loins, and Back, and Lims of the Sick. Yea sometimes with a new Fit of the Fever
they also fall into a Swouning, or Syncope, whence it is then called a Syncopal
Fever.

7. As therefore as well Synochal, as Intermitting Fevers, so those Compounded
of both have receivd a singular denomination from the grievous Symptoms
accompanying, both among the Common People, and among Physicians that practice
Physic, and in the Cure not without cause attentive.

8. The Primary Cause of these Synechal Fevers, whereby they molest the Sick
with a great and continual Heat is Choler peccant by too much Acrimony and
Inflamedness; whence it does not only perpetually raise a vicious Effervescency
in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, but also in the small Gut, and especially
the Juice of the Pancreas coming by fits being made too sharp because of its
stoppage, and producing an obscure fit.

9. The chief Cause of the troubles of those Fevers with an almost perpetual
Coolness or Shivering, is judged by me to be the Lympha, and especially all the
Juice of the Pancreas peccant with a Sour Acrimony, and then continually,
driving forward Vapors a little Sour out of the small Gut every way, especially
at the producing of a new Fit, and so stirring up a wandering sense of Cold.

10. The Cause and Reason of the other Symptoms usually accompanying these
Fevers, may be easily drawn from those things that are spoken in the preceding
Chapters, so that it is not needful to stay longer on this matter.

11. So also the way of Curing Them is not hard to be taken from what is
aforesaid, by following the Cure of Synochals in the most, and using moreover
those things in a convenient time, which will mildly loosen an Obstruction in
one, or more of the Passages of the Pancreas, and correct the Juice it self
hitherto too sharp.

12. The Opening of a Vein then chiefly conduces, when there is exceeding Heat;
and the provoking a Sweat, by mild Aromatics and Volatile Salts, when there are
signs of a Sour Humor any way troublesome; and lastly Purging by Stool or Vomit,
when Choler swells, or molests being plenteous.

CHAP. XXXII. Of an Hectic Fever.
1. AN Hectic Fever is much spoken of among Physicians, in which, an Heat a
little troublesome to the Sick is perceivd, beside an over-frequent, as also
Little and Weak, and after a certain manner Hard Pulse; which notwithstanding
is a little sharpened and encreasd, one or two hours after Meat, and again
returns a little after to its former equality, and is perceivd to be greater
about the Arteries, then the other parts of the Body: A continual and lingering
Leanness of Body following, whereby this Fever being reduced to its extremity is
called Marasmodes.

2. Seeing that always a little after the taking in of any Food, and so the
sending down of their more fluid part to the Guts this Fever is more or less
sharpened, any may believe and not without cause that a notable faultiness of
Spittle always concurr's to produce it, or that it depends on it.

3. Hectic Fevers are observd sometimes to arise immediately from the Non-natural
Things, too much exercise of Body, or continued labor; sometimes from most
vehement Anger, and especially from an immoderat Sorrow and Sadness of Mind:
sometimes from Watchings long continued; often from too much Hunger, as also
Food of little, or bad Juice, and suchlike.

4. Yea Hectic Fevers are observd to follow other Diseases, and especially
Fevers of one day proceeding from a great error in Diet, and also Continual, and
Intermitting Fevers very dangerous or vehement; and most frequently the
Inflammations of most of the Bowels, especially of the Lungs, and Apostem's,
and Ulcers following them.

5. And seeing Heat is little in an Hectic Fever, and therefore rarely
troublesome to the Sick, and the Pulse Little, and Weak, I judge that then the
Liquor of the Conglomerated Glandul's is chiefly peccant, and not only Spittle,
but the Juice of the Pancreas also, with an encreasd Viscousness, and not a
molesting Sour or Harsh Acrimony, although I have sometimes found this also
grievous; Whence who can wonder or deny that Choler is also too sluggish? and
all may see that Lympha is likewise too much blunted.

6. And therefore I judge the Cause of a troublesome Pining in an Hectic Fever to
be too much Viscousness of all the Humors, and so of the Blood, because of
which the Nourishment of the Parts is daily diminishd: and the cause of the
Sharpness happening one or two hours after Food is taken to be Spittle in like
manner too Glutinous: by reason of which the more fluid part of Food descending
sooner to the Guts, and meeting with Choler is at least in part opend into
suchlike Vapors and carried to the Heart, and there more rarefi'd, stirs up
the Pulse more frequent then is wonted, and being soon driven all over causes a
little Redness in the face, and a mild Heart in the rest of the Skin, and
elsewhere stirs up other Symptoms according to the diverse Constitution of the
other Humors and Parts.

7. The Appetite of all Food is diminishd, and at last dejected by the noted
viscous Toughness of all the Humors, to wit, without an external Cause, as too
much Meat, etc. the Loathing of them also attending; and moreover their
Fermentation, Separation of Useful Parts from Vnuseful ones, Sanguification,
Generation of the Animal Spirits, etc. is hindered and destroyed. Whence the
Toughness and Sluggishness of Choler, Spittle, the Juice of the Pancreas, and
Lympha is daily augmented, and so the Evil becom's by degrees greater, and at
length incurable.

8. When an Hectic Fever is produced by too much Motion and overlong Weariness
of the Body, then I think that not only the Animal Spirits, but also the Watery
part of Blood is too much exhausted, and therefore both Sharpness more inwardly
united being made sharper all the Humors are made too Viscous, and all the
Natural Functions as was above said, are destroyed.

9. When an Hectic Fever arises from most vehement Anger, then I affirm a
Sowrness is drawn to consent by Choler then having an exceeding Acrimony, and
the same being made in like manner sharper promotes the noted inward Union of
both being Sharp.

10. When an Hectic Fever is stird up by Sorrow and an immoderat Sadness of
Mind, then I think all the Humors become more Glutinous by the Juice of the
Pancreas too Tart.

11. When an Hectic Fever is made by prolongd Watchings, then I think the
Animal Spirits being too much consumed, the Acrimony in either Sharpness being
encreasd their Union becoms more narrow, and all the Humors are bred too
sluggish and tough.

12. When an Hectic Fever follows overlong Hunger, then I judge that the
Acrimony of both is encreasd by want of Food asswaging both kinds of Sharpness,
and furthermore a more complete Union being made the Humors become more viscous.

13. When the same Hectic Fever happens by Food containing little mild
nourishing Juice, then that coms to pass that was newly mentiond, but slowlier.

14. When an Hectic Fever arises from the defect of better Food, or because of
Pica from the neglect of Food of an evil, to wit, Glutinous, or otherwise Fat,
or Sharp Juice overlong used, then the Humors will be over-glutinous sooner,
or more slowly either of themselves, or by chance, as we have already explaind
at large.

15. When an Hectic Fever succedes Those of One Day, then its Original is to be
required according to the diverse Errors of Diet producing them, as is newly
explaind.

16. When an Hectic follows Fevers without Fits, then, when they take their
rising from vicious Choler, it is to be ascribed partly to the Acrimony of
Choler according to Sect. 9. partly to Medicines that alter it, if long and
plenteously used, and so corrupting and thickning the other Humors together.

17. When Intermitting Fevers turn to an Hectic, then the Humors breed it that
are most peccant be they more or fewer according to what has been said.

18. Lastly when an Inflammation gone into an Aposteme of the principal Bowels,
and especially of the Lungs breeds an Hectic Fever, then the whole M^ss of
Blood is infected by Matter, and gets a singular Glutinousness, which being
communicated to the other Humors spoils them with the same fault and renders
them unfit to perform the Natural Functions rightly.

19. Although in Leanness of Body all the kinds of an Hectic Fever do agree,
yet will the Cure of Every of them differ not a little according to the
diversity of Causes so diversely producing it.

20. Yet in General, because of the hurtful Toughness and Glutinousness of all
the Humors those Medicines may be used, which mildly amend and correct it, to
wit, all gentle Aromatics, and Oily Volatile Salts; as they that cut, and alter
every Viscous Thing, and reduce it into its natural state.

21. And such are to be selected, as do most conduce to and agree with the
Constitution both natural and present of Every Sick Person; which the Physician
may easily find out and know by the Medicines that help or hurt.

22. Take diligent heed in rightly governing and directing Diet, that I. the
Air be most temperat either naturally or by Art.

23. II. Let Food be of easy Fermentation, as Milk and that either Woman's, or
Asses, or Goats, or as now the custom is, Cows, taken whilst it is warm; sundry
Broths, Yolks of Eggs, Flesh of younger Creatures; Wheat Bread rightly leavend
and baked; Beer not too strong and yet fermented, Wine of good age and small
and diluted in a little Water, etc.

24. III. Let the Motions of the Mind be Moderat, especially shunning those
things from which the Hectic Fever arose.

25. IV. Let the Motion of the Body be gentle, and chiefly, when an Hectic
Fever is raisd by its excess.

26. V. Let Sleep and Watchings keep a mediocrity, seeing here all excess is
very hurtful.

27. VI. The wonted Emptyings, and especially those that are natural, and serve
the Individual, if they do not weaken the Sick, and proceed too slowly, ought
to be promoted, and all the other to be shund, as all Effusions of Blood, or in
Women the Monthly Courses, of Seed, and of Milk as sucking.

28. When an Hectic com's with or succedes Fevers Without, or With Fits, then
upon their account the Cure may be vari'd, according to the diverse harm of
diverse Humors differently peccant: all which may be seen in the former Chapters.

29. None can ever cure an Hectic following Inflammations, Apostem's, Ulcers
and Fistula's, who beside the Remedies newly mentiond does not also use
Medicines that potently cleanse, and hence consolidate Ulcers and Fistula's.
Among which the Balsam of Sulphur with Anise, or any other Aromatic Oil is not
the least effectual; as also all Medicines made of Antimony, that are more fixed,
and therefore neither promote Vomiting, or Purging. Among common things all
those are famous, which have the name of Vulnerary Plants, and are used in
Decoctions being appropriated to the Cure of Ulcers, as well as Fistula's.

30. And now having exactly observd all, in which according to the manner of
treating the diverse Causes of Hectic Fevers agree or differ, the Physician will
far more easily obtain his desired end in their Cure, whilst he has both
obedient, and patient Sick People, (which is seldom) and the Evil be not delaid
to the last.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Malign Fevers.
1. AS otherwise any Disease or Sickness, so a Fever takes the name Malign, as
often as the Strength of the Sick is suddenly and unexpectedly dejected, or far
more grievous Symptoms occur, then are wont to be observd in such a-like
Disease.

2. The Strength that is wont to be dejected in Malign Fevers are called Vital,
to be manifested and discernd by the Pulse even from its beginning too Weak, or
suddenly much Weakened, and by unexpected Death overwhelming the Sick.

3. Malign Fevers are either Epidemical raging among many in the same time,
having a common Cause, as the Air, or Food vitiated, or Private, affecting this
or that Man only, and that for a singular Cause, and then for the most part
known by the name of Poison.

4. Again they are either Contagious, infecting others, or in no wise
Contagious, not harming the Bystanders.

5. Again they are either more Acute, tending to an end in a few days, or
Longer, continuing more days.

6. In Malign Fevers there is for the most part observd a light Shivering to
precede, and Heat soon to follow it, seldom great, commonly more gentle, so
that the Sick scarce use to complain thereof. Their Vrin for the most part
differs little or nothing from healthy peoples Urin. The Pulse is indeed
Frequent, but withal Little and Weak, and always unequal, sometimes Intermitting
or Deficient. Often Drowsiness or a kind of Lethargy, seldom Watchings urge.
The Sick are often vexed with Turbulent Dreams, and unquietness of Body. They
have often Gripes in the Stomach troublesome enough, and sometimes Lothing, yea
moreover Vomiting also; and the Head-Ake, and sometimes Raving or Giddiness. A
greater Thirst often, then Heat of Body and of the Jaws. All the Members seem
sometimes weari'd with much Labor, and as it were afflicted by weariness.
Sometimes there happens Choleric, and Foerid Loosnesses. A Drooping or plenteous
flux of Blood out of the Nostrils or Womb does often concur; and the Blood that
drops or runs out of its own accord most commonly will not clotter. Spots and
little Pimples diverse both in color and greatness sometimes break forth in the
outside of the Body; and Tumors in the Glandul's. Sometimes the extreme parts
soon wax hot, and again are presently cold. Sweats either none, or very
plenteous come forth, by which unless the Sick get ease, especially when they
are promoted by Art, there is no hopes.

7. From all which Symptoms rightly considered, and compared with those which
are known by Experience both to resist Malignity, and overcome it, I judge the
Cause of Malign Fevers, if not always, yet at least is most commonly a Salt
that is both volatile and sharp, which will weaken the somewhat sour Liquor of
the Glandul's, and make it sluggish, and of little force: whence the natural
Consistency of the Blood is diminishd, and therefore its Rarefaction deceivd,
and often the separation of the Animal Spirits hindered; and hence the other
Symptoms above-mentiond are produced; according as that Sharp Volatile Salt is
drawn with the Air by Inspiration into the Lungs, and thence into the Blood
also, or is swallowd down with Food or Spittle into the Stomach, or creeps in
through the Pores of the Body or infects, weakens and spoils the Liquors of the
Glandul's first, or them together with the Blood. And hence depends the variety
of diverse Symptoms observd several ways in Malign Fevers; as also from the
other Humors found in the Body of any.

8. The Blood therefore being less consistent sustains a less rarefaction,
whence the Pulse becoms is, it only Little, but mo^^over Languishing; yea
bendes the Vital Fire kindled and sustaind in the Blood is more easily,
oppressed, and extinguished, and Death unexpected often overwhelms people unfit
for it.

9. I think the Cause of all Malign Fevers to come from without, and never to
be produced by it self in the Body from the Humors corrupted of their own
accord, for it procedes from a Fire exceeding sharp, which is not in Choler.

10. Man's Body as well Containing, as Containd is defended and preservd against
all such Malignity in a Volatile Sharp Salt by the frequent and moderat use of
Sour things, and especially a little Tart.

11. But this Volatile and Sharp Salt, the Cause of the noted Malignity, is
Corrected and Amended with the same, and also Oily things, but especially mixed
with a Sour or Tart Earth. To which appertain all Potters Clay and Sealed
Earths, Bole Armeniac, the Earth Lemnia, etc. and so every Mineral or Metallic
Sulphur (rightly prepared) of Vitriol, Antimony, etc. Hither reduce those that
are commonly known Treacle, Diascordium, etc. Yea to correct this Salt, mild,
and Oily Votatil Salts conduce, as moderating and asswaging its hurtful
Acrimony.

12. Sudorifics drive forward and expel most safely and commodiously out of the
Body the same Sharp Volatile Salt more, or less temperd, or at least to be
temperd by it. For it is known by manifold Experience that the Cure of Malign
Fevers is most happily instituted by this manner and way.

13. Simple Sudorifics are not only approved, but those compounded also,
Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, and infinite other Opiat Confections devised
of several to imitate the former, and so used. Where ^^ke this Note from me,
that they are always to be preferred, which can also temper the Acrimony of the
Volatile Salt, which will therefore be commodious to be added to the rest. For
Example;

. Old Treacle ii. Diaphoretic Antimony i. Sir. of Carduus Benedictus ii. Our
Preservative Water i. Cinnamon Water ss. Scabious-Water ii. M.

Let the Sick take a fourth or fifth part of this Mixture, and dispose his Body
to Sweat, and after half an hour let him again take one or two Spoonfuls, and
so let him go on, till a profitable Sweat follow. Mean while, if he be very
thirsty and the Tongue be dry, let him moreover drink upon it a little Broth
first temperd to a gratefulness with some sour thing, the Juice of Citrons,
Oranges, Verjuice, Vinegar, etc. whereby the breaking forth of the Sweat will
not only be promoted, but moreover the hurtful Acrimony of the peccant Salt
will be corrected.

14. This Poison is seldom to be sent out by a Vomit, nor at all, unless when
part of the hurtful Salt sticks in the Stomach, or Guts, and a Loathing also
urges: and then I prefer before all others Antimonial Vomits, but mild and
fixed, because they have an admirable Sulphur in them, whereby any sharpness is
wonderfully temperd.

15. By virtue of this Sulphur I commonly add to the other Sudorifics or
Altering Mixtures Diaphoretic Antimony, or Mineral Bezoard either single, or
variously compounded, and other Sudorifics rightly prepared of Antimony.

16. After that Malign Poison that is found in the Volatile and Sharp Salt, is
carried out of the Body by Sudorifics sufficiently and rightly used, they must
persist for some time in a moderat use of Sour things a little Harsh mixed with
Drink, whereby the former Consistencie may by degrees be restored to the Blood.
Therefore Verjuice, Pome-Granats, Quinces, Oranges, Berberies, etc. conduce here.

17. We intend to speak farther of the Nature, Harms, and Cure of the Volatile
and Sharp Salt, when we publish our Thoughts, and Observations in a peculiar
Treatise of the Pest; mean while these may give an occasion to the diligent
Searchers of the Works of Nature to search and find out more.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of an Universal Languishing, as also of Swouning and Syncope.
1. SEeing that Chyle is made of Food taken in, Blood of Chyle, of Blood both
all the other things containd in the Body, and all the Containing parts of the
Universal Body are nourisht and encreasd, with good cause respect is had to the
Blood, wherein both the Strength, and the Reasons thereof are examind, weighed,
and determind.

2. Therefore seeing the generation and first preparing of Blood of Chyle begins
in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and is finished in the Left, and the
repairing and renewing thereof more or less decaid, and here and there deprived
of several parts, and therefore flowing back to the Heart, many Evils do
necessarily befall Man even here by the intricate ill-affected Change which
happens to the Blood in the Ventricles of the Heart: which among the first
manifest themselves to every one, and especially to Physicians by the Pulse
being variously changed.

3. We derived Fevers hitherto from the Pulse being beside Nature too frequent,
as the only common, and proper, and so Prognostic Sign of all Fevers; there
being other Symptoms distinguishing every one of their kinds, and degrees from
one another: The next thing now is that we may draw and in a few words explain
other Diseases from a Little and Languishing Pulse.

4. These Diseases, which are observd various both by reason of the
accompanying Symptoms, and distinct in degrees, are signified in general by the
names of Imbecility, or Debility, in special by the name of Swouning, Eclusis,
Leipothymie, Leipopsychie, Apopsychie, Asphyxie, Syncope, and others.

5. We will not curiously inquire here into the Original of all these Words,
seeing that words are as they are used, however many vex themselves and others;
but into the Nature, Essence, and true Causes of those Diseases denoted in
those names, and in Practice giving trouble to Physicians attent on the Cure of
the Disease.

6. A Universal Languishing of all the Parts, and Functions, and Strength is
sometimes observd, either bred from the Nativity, or rising after it by degrees
and insensibly, or coming, or remaining after some Disease preceding. This they
call Infirmity, Imbecility, or Debility; which has for its Companion both a
Little Pulse less then it ought to be, and Weak and more Languishing then
should be, and oftener more Rare, and sometimes Intermitting once, or ofter by
certain or uncertain Intervals, and sometimes more and more deficient called
Miurus, according to the Passage of the Artery, and often Creeping or Wrigling.

7. Dullness of the Internal and External Senses, and Defect of the Animal
Motion of Body, known by the name of Weariness do usually concur in this
Disease when more grievous.

8. Weakness is also observd sometimes, not permanent, or continually
persevering, but orderly, or disorderly, and so repeting sometimes at certain,
othertimes uncertain Intervals, one while lightly, another while grievously
afflicting the Sick, the same returning one while sooner, another while more
slowly, unless it take away and kill the Sick.

9. If any would constitute two kinds only most different in degrees, and not
unfit to the method of Curing this Imbecility and Debility, he may point out
the lighter kind by the name of Swouning and Leipothymie; the more grievous
kind by the name of Syncope, Leipopsychie, or Asphyxie.

10. In all Swouning the Pulse is Less and Weaker, so that in its lighter kind
it can scarcely be perceivd, and not at all in its more grievous kind. The
External and Internal Senses commonly are both darkened, or also cease to act.
The Animal or Voluntary Motion also is weak, or none. And so Respiration it
self is found to be either obscure, or quite deficient.

11. For the most part a Cardialgie or Tickling in the upper Orifice of the
Ventricle, or a compression of the Heart, and Yawning uses to precede and
foretell a Swouning; and sometimes a Distension of the Belly, a Croking, or
Gripes; Dimness or Darkness are before the Eyes, with a Giddiness, and a
Tinkling in the Ears accompanying, or suddenly following them; Stretchings, and
often Convulsive Motions. For it is to be noted, seeing that Swounings do not
only differ in degrees, but also in number and vehemence of Symptoms, that it
does not seize on all always after the same manner.

12. When the Swouning is again loosd, and the Sick seem to return to
themselv's, then the Heart is wont to stir again, yea often to palpitate; and
the Pulse is not only felt by degrees greater, and stronger, but also more
frequent: and the External, together with the Internal Senses, though never so
Languishing as yet, being by degrees restored, the anxiety and compression also
of the Heart, and other Symptoms are observd to be diminisht, and at last
vanish away; unless that Weariness, and Tiring of the Universal Body depart
more slowly.

13. The most grievous, and singular kind of Swouning is the Syncope, in which
the Sick fall on a sudden as it were surprised with cold Air, a sudden and
almost unexpected Tinkling in the Ears preceding; presently there is no Pulse
nor Respiration observd; which is proper to the Syncope, and most grievous
Hypochondriac Suffocation: Mean while a cold and glutinous Sweat breaks forth;
and all the Parts of the Body wax cold and pail, yea often Vrin and the
Excrements come away; so that they are more like dead then living.

14. Seeing all these Diseases are manifested by both a Less, and more
Languishing Pulse, you may call to mind what we handled in Chap. 26. of the
various Differences of Pulses, and their Causes; whereby you may the easilier
understand, that which is chiefly to be observd here, to wit, that an Universal
Languishing, and a Swouning, and Syncope are the Symptoms of the Vital
Function, that is, next pertaining to Life.

15. Seeing therefore that in all the noted Diseases the Pulse is observd both
Less, and more Languishing then is Natural, I think that their Cause is always
Glutinousness encreasd in the Blood, and the other Humors severd from it; and
also sometimes an encreasd Acidity in the Juice of the Pancreas, Lympha and
perhaps also in Spittle it self.

16. When the Infant has got suchlike Blood, and suchlike Humors in his
Mothers Womb from overglutinous Seed of the Parents, or at least by the Mothers
Blood, then he will have an Universal Languishing bred with him often occurring
in Practice.

17. When, though the Infant be born in health, the Man contracts sooner or
later an harm like it in the Blood, and all the Humors by degrees from the
faultiness of Diet often above noted, then that Universal Languishing is called
Acquired, often obvious in Practice.

18. Lastly when too much Glutinousness in the Blood coms, or remains after any
Disease that rises not slowly, but speedily, and of late not rightly Cured by
the fault of the Physician, Patient, or Bystanders, then that Universal
Languishing may be called Symptomatical, too frequent in Practice.

19. I said after a Disease not rightly cured by the fault of a Physician,
Patient, or Bystanders; For the Physician may be deceivd and cure the Patient
amiss, especially when he is blinded and conceited with Prejudices not enough
minding those things that Help and Hurt, and had rather his Patient should die,
then he change his own Opinion, though never so erroneous and confuted, the
condition of the Sick growing daily wors and wors.

20. Here also may the Sick be in a fault, when he does not only neglect or
despise the safe Counsel of a Prudent Physician, but especially is abused to
his hurt by hurtful things.

21. Yea, also the Bystanders may err, when they are not only too indulgent of
the morose Sick, but moreover dissuade them from the best Prescriptions of
Skilful Physicians, instead of which they dare give them hurtful and forbidden
things.

22. I added that too much Glutinousness might come to, or remain in the Blood
and Humors. It Comes to the Blood, when Medicines that Thicken and Stuff the
fluid and thin Humors are too much, or too long used. It Remains in it when
Medicines that Cut and Attenuate are not given strong enough, or long enough in
Diseases arising from the Glutinousness of the Humors.

23. When Acidity is joind with Glutinousness of all the Humors encreasd from a
great error in Diet in the Liquors of any Glandul's, and especially those of
the Pancreas, then either a Swouning, or also Syncope is easily joind to the
Universal Languishing, according as both Errors are lighter, or more grievous:
although it is no new thing that a Swouning, but not Syncope is produced
without a notable Clau^^iness of Humors; which I think was scarce ever observd
without it, but rather Death the External Cause being most grievous: as indeed
more is required to produce a Syncope, then Death.

24. Because there is a less Rarefaction of Blood, and therefore a less Pulse in
an Universal Languishing, by reason of the Toughness encr^a^d of all Humors
that constitute or produce the same Blood, it becoms of necessity Weaker; for
unless the Ventricles of the Heart be much dilated, they cannot be much, nor
therefore potently straightened. Add that Blood tough and clammy is unsit to breed
plenteous and subtle Animal Spirits; for which cause also the Pulse will be
weaker then is natural.

25. The Pulse will also then be more Rare, because all the Humors are more
Mild shall I say, or more Dull, and therefore raising a weaker Efferv^s^^ncy,
and less provoking the Heart to Contract it self, either upon the account of
its Acrimony, or Eff^rv scency, and so of the Vapors arising; unless the Pulse
be more stird up in regard of any External Cause.

26. And this is the usual Generation of an Universal Languishing; but the
Production of a Swouning and Syncope, Diseases more difficult to be known, and
explaind, as it is usually describd by the Vital Spirits, which because it
satissies not me, I will endeavor to deduce it otherwise by degrees in a few
words from their manifest Causes, as more known Principles.

27. Both a Swouning, and sometimes a Syncope is observd to follow; 1. Certain
Smells inspird with the Air, either grateful or ungrateful of themselves, as of
Musk, Civet, Roses, Cinnamon, etc. the Smoke of a Candle put out, etc.

28. 2. The sight of Things or Persons ungrateful and envied breeds a Swouning
in some.

29. 3. The same is observd to be by the Taking in of these things that are any
way ungrateful.

30. 4. Prolongd Hunger is a common cause of Swouning.

31. 5. Among the Passions of the Mind Joy exc^ling has been observd to produce
a Swouning, or Syncope, and s^mtimes Death it self. It has been ^^^wn that the
same has often come to pass by a ve^^^^^ (...). A Swouning does not seem so
much (...), or Anger, as that a Man is disp^^^^ (...), who will sooner fall
into this Evil, if he (...) and s^ddenly by both the contrary P^ll^^^ ^f the
Mind; that is, if an unexpected and (...) happens about the same object to one
that (...) ^^^^ful or fearful; if Terr^r, and Fear, and therefore (...) r^^ula^^
i^^te one that is very Angry.

32. 6. (...) ^^ouning or Syncope is wont to come upon a Great Effusion of
Blood out of the Nostrils, Womb, Haemorrhoids, or other Vessels opend and
wounded by Art, or chance or mischance.

33. 7. The same happens to too great an Effusion if Seed, coming away either
of its own accord, or especially by immoderat Venery.

34. 8. The same often is after an overgreat Evacuation of the Humors by
Vomit, Stool, Urin, Sweats, etc. and especially when it com's with great Pains,
or a vehement Agitation of Body.

35. 9. The same com's to pass when either the Water of Hydropical Persons, or
Matter in those that have putrefi'd Lungs is poured out excessivly.

36. 10. The same is observd to come to pass by a Sting or Bite of certain
Poisonous Creatures,

37. 11. This same Evil accompanies the Fits of certain Intermitting Fevers,
either soon in the Beginning, or often in the Increase, or in its Vigor; seldom
when it Declines, unless perhaps by too large Sweats.

38. 12. Sometimes a Swouning comes upon certain very vehement Pains of the
Teeth, the upper Orifice of the Stomach, the Guts, Bladder, etc.

39. 13. The same Swouning oppresses some after too much Motion and extreme
Weariness of Body.

40. 14. Sometimes a Swouning is produced by a great Heat, either of the Sun, or
Fire, or Bath, or Fever.

41. 15. Nor is it seldom that a Swouning happens by Hunger, or Thirst too long
and sorely vexing.

42. 16. Yea sometimes Swouning happens to certain Women giving Suck by too
great loss of Milk, chiefly depending on the potent sucking of a strong Infant;
and sometimes by the very grievous Pain of the Clefts of the Paps, or otherwise
ill-affected.

43. From the mentioned and suchlike manifest Causes diligently considered,
and diligently compared with those, which we have before proposed we judge every
Swouning is to be derived next and immediately from the Blood it self coming
from both parts to the Heart, and all those, which are joind both according to,
and beside Nature, and are carried together with it to the Heart, and so
disturb and change its natural Effervescency th^^ R^refaction of the Blood is
not only diminisht, but the Heart it self is not enough expanded, and
contracted, and the Blood not sufficiently effus'd into the Arteries, and
therefore the Pulse is felt Less, and more Languishing, yea sometimes None.

44. For if to make a laudable Pulse be required as we think, 1. Blood
returning from every and both places to the Right Ventricle of the Heart: 2.
Choler Joind to the ascending Blood; 3. Lympha returning from every place with
the Descending Blood; 4. A singular L^qu^r arising and soon after straind
through the Lacteal Veins) from the conflux of Choler, and the Juice of the
Pancreas and Spittle in the Small Gut; and perhaps 5. Air attracted into the
Lungs by Inspiration, and n^xt in some part of it with the Blood circulating
through them, whilst the rest is again thrust one in the Expiration next
following; and so^^^in^ 6. (...) although it be not always, but (...) taken in
driven to the Heart. I say, if all t^^^ be requir^d to make a laudable Pulse,
as every on^ (...) be both present. and rightly disppo'd: but i^ (...) re^f
th^s^ be wanting wholly or in part or (...) th^re in t^^rger ^lo^ty, or come
thither endowed with a ^ra^g^ ^^^l^ity; or others go together also not
r^quir'd, and therefore necessarily hurtful, without d^^^^ there will b^ some
wrong to the Pulse beside the sp^^^ng of the ^^^ctions wont to be in the Heart.

45. And to remain in our present business, 1. the Pulse will be deficient more
or less in greatness and strength, by an Universal Defect of Blood, after a
notable Haemorrhagie or Hunger much prolonged: whence the Blood will not only
be deficient, but other Humors also in the Body, Choler, the Juice of the
Pancreas, Lympha, and the rest that are necessary to make the Vital Rarefaction
of Blood, and so the Pulse great.

46. 2. The same Pulse will be deficient in Greatness, and hence in Strength by
the defect of Choler in a great Looseness and Vomiting, and especially the
Disease Cholera; whence if Choler be carried to the Heart in a lesser quantity,
and at length perhaps none, is it a wonder, if a less, or no Effervescency be
s^ird up in It? if there be a less, or no Rarefaction of Blood? if a less, or
no Expansion, and Contraction of the Ventricles of the Heart follow, and the
Pulse be felt either Less, or None?

47. 3. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Greatness, and hence in Strength,
by the Defect of Lympha with too Great a Sweat; with which that the Lympha is
also diminish beside the Animal Spirits, Acids no less, then Spiritous Volatile
Medicines much recreating and restoring those that Sweat seem to evince. By the
defect of Lympha somewhat Sour the Mean Consistency of Blood, and its
Effervescency will be deficient, whence it will neither enough rarefie in the
Heart, nor will its Explication, and Complication be great enough; whence the
Pulse will also be observd of necessity Less then is Naturally.

48. 4. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Greatness, and hence in Strength,
by the Defect of the Liquor arising from the Threefold Sway in the Guts in a
troublesome Vomiting and Looseness, especially continual. For this being in part,
or wholly excluded, the Blood will necessarily want its benefit; we judge in an
other place that it conduced to procure the natural Coagulation of Blood; if
therefore the Blood be more or less destitute of it, and is not repaird
continually for want of this, as is newly said, the Blood will be less apt to
rarefie, and open the Ventricles of the Heart, and the Pulse will necessarily
follow a Less.

49. 5. The same Pulse will be Deficient in Greatness, and hence in Strength by
the Defect of Air to be Inspired in any straitness of the Mouth, and Nostrils,
or Jaws, or sharp Artery; for which the Air coming in less plenty cannot bestow
the desired coolness on the Blood, or any other Change; wherefore the Blood
being driven through the Lungs more slowly, and not making a sufficient place
for the new Blood following out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, hinders
the Contraction of the Heart, and is the Cause of the Pulse hitherto Less.

50. 6. The same Pulse will be deficient in Greatness, and hence in Strength,
by the Defect of Chyle, both in a preposterous Hunger, whether voluntary, or
compeld, and in the Fermentation of Food, or Separation, or Transcolation, or
Conveyance any way hindered. For unless Food be taken daily, and especially in
the accustomd time, by which the Chyle drawn from it may be carried to the
Heart, the Blood continually lost will not only be unrepaird, but the Humors
flowing together in the Heart, and Small Gut, will act too much or amiss upon
themselves, and the rest of the Blood, and sometimes will make the Blood more or
less consistent, and hitherto unfit to the due, or sufficient Rarefaction of it
self, and the Explication and Complication of the Ventricles of the Heart;
whence there will necessarily follow a Less, and Weaker Pulse.

51. The Pulse will be Less, and more Languishing, not only by the Defect but
sometimes also the Excess of the fore-nam'd Humors. For 1. the abundance of
Blood, called a Plethora, hinders, that the Blood by the defect of space and
place cannot be expeld plenteously into the Arteries, nor therefore the same be
much, and enough rarefi'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart; nor that the
sides of the Heart can be much unfolded and again folded.

52. Yea 2. Choler being carried in a greater plenty to the Heart, especially
in Burning Fevers, does not only rarefie the Blood more then is wonted, and too
potently, with an overgreat and strong Pulse; but after it has at length filld
all the spaces of the Vessels in that too great rarefaction by distending them,
and constituting the Plethora at or in the Vessels so called, or to be called,
however it keep the hurtful Heat, yet it cannot for want of Space spread out
the Blood as before, and produce a Great and Strong Pulse; which is rather
observd Less, and Weaker gradually by the deficient Rarefaction of the Blood,
and the Explication and Complication of the Ventricles of the Heart; till by
any effusion of Blood there is a new Place prepared to receive the rest more
rarefi'd, together with a greater and stronger Pulse soon concurring.

53. 3. The Lympha somewhat sour, if it com's in too great plenty to the Heart
will also make the Pulse Less, and so more Languishing; because it will give a
more firm and solid Consistency to the Blood, then that it can be duly, and
enough rarefi'd, sufficiently to dilate the Ventricles of the Heart, whither a
notable constriction may succeed altogether necessary to make a Great and
Strong Pulse.

54. 4. The same is to be said of that Threefold Liquor of the Small Guts, if
especially its office be, to give to the Blood a natural coagulation, depending
on a somewhat tart sour Liquor: For when this is encreasd, the Coagulation also
of the Blood will be encreasd; on the contrary its fitness to rarefie will be
diminisht, the Pulse will be diminisht, and will also become Weaker.

55. Seeing that a great plenty of laudable Air drawn into the Lungs cannot but
be useful, a Lesser, or more Languishing Pulse cannot be expected nor derived
from it.

56. Yet 5. may the Pulse become Less and Weaker by Chyle carried to the Heart
after any manner in a greater plenty; in as much as it fills the Vessels of
blood too much, and both effects and increases a Plethora.

57. If both the Blood, and other mentiond Humors carried with it to the Heart
could produce a Less and more Languishing Pulse, the quantity being either
deficient, or exceeding, certainly they will no less perform the same, when they
are peccant in an hurtful quality. For 1. the Blood either too fluid or solid,
is unfit for its laudable Rarefaction, which being deficient we have often
already shown you that a Less, and more Languishing Pulse follows.

58. So 2. Choler Glutinous, and not sharp enough will less effervesce, and
more sparingly send forth fiery parts; whence the Blood will less rarefie, and
at length the Pulse will be Less and Weaker.

59. 3. Lympha either too Sour or Tart will not only render the Blood more
glutinous, and so less fit to rarefie, but moreover will not only blunt Choler,
and its fiery parts whencesoever breaking forth, and so will give occasion both
for a Less, and more languishing Pulse.

60. 4. You may think, and speak the same of the fore-nam^d Threefold Liquor
either too sour, or Tart.

61. 5. The North and sharper Air conduces much to coagulate the Blood much,
and hinder its Rarefaction.

62. If 6. Food too Sour or Tart be taken in, the Chyle will also be made like
it, from which the noted inconveniences may be expected with a Less and Weaker
Pulse.

63. A Less and Weaker Pulse is caused also by other Things carried to the
Heart beyond the Laws of Nature, when the Humors are either corrupt in the
Body, or Vapors, or Wind raisd by them, or Poison piercing in at the Mouth,
Nostrils, or Pores of the Skin, or any other way into the Body come to the
Heart together with the Blood, and either too much loosen or dissolve, or too
much coagulate, or curdle the Blood, or render it unfit any other way for its
due Rarefaction, as we have before explaind at large.

64. And that we may more closely apply all, that we have hitherto premised, to
a Swouning and Syncope, and deduce more clearly the Nature and Generation of
both Diseases, because in both the Pulse is not only observd Less, and Weaker,
or None; but the Animal Functions also, Sense and Motion are not a little
weakened, let us see if, and how so diverse Diseases can be produced of one, and
the same Cause.

65. The Symptoms therefore, which are wont to be common to each Disease are to
be considerd, and distinguishd, from those, which are peculiar to a Syncope;
for a cold and glutinous Sweat breaks forth in a Syncope, but not in a
Swouning, in which not so much as Coldness of the Universal Body is always
observd, although it be constant with a Syncope; but the other Symptoms are
often wont to be noted in each Disease. Whence it is manifest that these
Diseases do partly differ in degrees, partly something more grievous uses to
accompany a Syncope continually.

66. If any examine with an attentive Mind all the Symptoms fore-mentiond, as
also the External or Manifest Causes, and compare them with those which we have
now deduced largly of a Less, as well as Weaker Pulse, he may easily conclude
that each Disease, and especially a Syncope, does chiefly arise from a sour
Liquor carried in a more large plenty to the Heart, which obtains rule in the
Blood; not neglecting in the mean while the Glutinousness of several Humors.

67. That this may be more evident, we are pleased to weigh both the noted
Symptoms, and the mentiond Causes in order, and for Younger Physicians sake,
especially Learners, build all things on a sour and glutinous Humor abounding.

68. We have said the Sign of a Swouning at hand is for the most part 1. a
Cardialgie, or Tickling in the upper Orifice of the Stomach. And what is more
apt to stir up each of these Diseases, than a sour Humor? Which if it be
milder, and ascend to the upper Orifice of the Stomach in the form of a Vapor,
will only tickle and gnaw the said part; but if it be too sharp, will bite the
same, and cause a troublesome Pain, known by the name of Cardialgie.

69. We added 2. that sometimes a Compression and Gaping of the Heart precedes.
Although the Compression of the Heart is caused by a Phlegmatic Humor both
plenteous and glutinous, and gaping from Flatulent Vapors; yet because these
Diseases are observd not to urge the Sick so perpetually, as to infest them
before the Swouning suddenly to follow; therefore we must acknowledge another
Cause also, and that either deducing unactive Phlegm into act or producing
Windy Vapors from the same; it is very evident that a sour Humor is requird
both to stir up and increase the force of Phlegm, and to breed Vapors that
cause Gaping; because, especially if it be a little Tart, it will make the
Phlegm more glutinous, which may produce the Sense of Heaviness and Compression
sooner and more potently; and raising an Effervescency vitiously and
victoriously with Choler, as we taught you happend in the beginnings of the
most of the Intermitting Fevers, giv's occasion to Windy Vapors, and so to
Gaping it self.

70. We said 3. that a Swouning did sometimes precede the Distension of the
Belly, Belches, or Gripes: all which seeing they arise from Wind either very
mild, or sharp, deduced and derived from Phlegm either viscous only, or also
sour at a certain time, and a little before a Swouning, the Truth of our
Sayings is abundantly manifest.

71. We taught you 4. that Dimness and Darkness before the Eyes, together with
a Giddiness, and Tinkling in the Ears did often precede a Swouning. And who
knows not that all these arise from Vapors rising from the lower parts to the
Brain, one time mild, another time sharp, having always Viscous, often also
Sour Phlegm for its Matter, and troubling wonderfully the Motion of the Animal
Spirits.

72. 5. Lastly we have Observd that Retchings, and Convulsive Motions do
sometimes also precede Swouning. And because the efficient Cause of Retching
uses to be the same as that of Gaping, and they only differ in the part
affected, hither you may transfer what we have told you before of Gaping. And
because that Convulsive Motions arise (as we intend if God permit, to show you
in the following Book) from an Humor, or Vapor sharp, but withal sour corroding
and pulling the Beginnings of the Nerv's by course, our Opinion is not a little
so confirmd.

73. And now we have declared the Symptoms that usually precede a Swouning, let
us also run over the others very notable which are wont to accompany It: Among
which although a Pulse Less, and more Languid, or None at least manifest to
Sense cannot be reckond the last, yet because for that end we have already
mentiond more of its Causes, lest we do one thing twice, let us go on to the
other Symptoms.

74. In every Swouning therefore the Internal, as well as External Senses are
drawn into consent, and are always darkened more or less, yea sometimes they
cease from all their Operation. And that the reason of this wonderful Effect
and Event may be more manifest, I would have the Younger Physicians to
consider, (for Old Men, and such as are Complete in the Art of Physic need not
mine information) That in every Giddiness, which we told you did for the most
part precede a Swouning, and especially its more grievous kind, the Internal,
as well as External Senses were troubled, and after a manner darkened. And
seeing that it is known by manifest Experience that the swift Turning round of
an External Thing seen, or of the Body it self produces Giddiness, the Animal
Spirits in like manner being moved round, at least confusedly stird; why should
we doubt, when the same Spirits are in like manner moved, disturbed, and
perhaps turned round by Vapors in the Body very much moved and rising up to the
Brain, that the Senses as well Internal as External are not only troubled and
disturbd, but also darkened, so that they seem to cease for a time? For, if they
then do any thing which is unknown to them, yet the disturbed and confused
Mind, not being in its power keeps no Remembrance thereof.

75. These things being thus laid no wonder, if in a Swouning the Animal also,
or Voluntary Motion be Diminisht or Abolisht; and Respiration it self either
Obscured, or Deficient. For the Animal Motion follows the orderly and
perpetual, and also by the Will determind (as the matter and the various
Disease require) Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs to the Fibers
of all the Muscles, or those selected; of which Motions seeing neither can
consist entire with the distur^d, and pervers Motion of the Animal Spirits, it
is necessary, that in such a case the Animal Motion, and Respiration also it
self should be spraind, and loosend.

76. But the External, and Internal Senses, and Animal Motion will not only
cease for a time because of the disturbd Motion of the Animal Spirits; but also
by reason of their Motion hindered or taken away; which may be, when they cease
to be bred and separated from the Blood, because the Mass of Blood is
coagulated and made unmovable by any sour, and chiefly tart thing. For there
is need to perform the Internal as well as External Senses, and Animal Motion
that the Animal Spirits should be freely and plenteously moved to all their
Organs; although it is easier to fancy according to pleasure, then to point and
demonstrate solidly what they are, which peculiarly serve the Internal Senses:
Yet do we observe in any attent Function of the Mind that the Brain is intent,
and many Animal Spirits as it were to be spent and consumd; which may so long
suffice to assign some Organ to the Internal Senses, until all these can be
more distinctly conceivd by the External Senses, and be explaind to others, and
at last the Assent of every one be mildly compeld to have the same Opinion.

77. But let us yet confirm the proposed Cause by those things, which are wont
to be observd, when a Swouning ends. For we said that then the Heart was by
little and little moved, and did palpitate. Therefore the Cause of Swouning was
such, as hindered the Motion of the Heart, and which being overcome and
conquered, Motion is restored unto it.

78. If therefore we have given you the true Cause of the Motion of the Heart in
short before in Chap. 26. Sect. 3. and in more words have explaind it in our
first Disquisition of Fevers, certainly then the Effervescency in the Heart
Ceasing to Sense, and the bursting forth of the Fiery Parts much Diminishd, and
the Rarefaction of the Universal Blood Deficient, and therefore the Desired
Motion and Pulse of the Heart will be attributed to the Glutinousnes, or
Acidity of Humors confusd with the Blood: which is then actually renewd, when
at least in part the extreme force and harm of a Glutinous, or sour Humor is
corrected, or conquered, and that by Choler, or any Aromatic Liquor moved to the
Nostrils, or rather pourd into the Mouth, or lastly elsewhere outwardly applied,
and piercing to the Heart, or any other Fire, or Fomentation of the Evil.

79. For then not only the Blood again rarefies more and more by Choler, or
Aromatics used successivly obtaining rule over a Glutinous and Sour Humor, but
moreover Vapors or Wind are produced, by all which the Ventricles of the Heart
are again Opened, the drowfie and sluggish Animal Spirits are stird up, and
anon the same Veniricles are Foulded in, and so the Blood has its Motion
Restored, yea it becoms more stird and disturbd, that is, there is a
Palpitation of the Heart; of which in the next following Chapter we intend to
say more.

80. Nor, is Motion restored to the Heart only, when a Swouning is ended, which
most commonly is inordinate and with palpitation, but the Pulse by degrees gets
its lost Greatness, and former Strength, although in the beginning it is also
more Frequent: the Cause and Manner of all which is newly given.

81. When the Cause of so many Evils is corrected and destroyed by degrees, as
was said, no wonder if the other Symptoms also be easd by degrees, and taken
away; seeing that when the Cause is taken away the Effect ceases.

82. The Functions which were last weakened, seem to return also more slowly;
although all these vary not a little according to the diverse heat and fomenting
of the evil: which any meanly verst in Practice, and attent to all may easily
observe, and attain them by what has been said.

83. The Symptoms always joind to a Syncope, also here to be weighd in a few
words we showed you was Coldness and Paleness of all the Parts of the Body, but
especially a Cold, as well as Glutinous Sweat; to which is joind perpetually an
extreme Anxiety of the Heart, troubling the Sick no less, then if Death were at
hand; and no wonder, seeing it is often a certain Messenger of Death hasting.

84. If any can by solid and consequent reasoning deduce that chill Coldness
both in the Body, and in a Sweat from any thing else, then from a Sour Humor in
Man, he will not a little make me admire him, seeing that my continual and
solicitous Practice of near forty years, and laborious observation of all
external Causes, I found nothing yet in rerum Natura that can manifestly breed
Coldness in Man beside a Sour Humor, and whatsoever partakes thereof: as I have
testified it in several Exampl's in this Treatise and elsewhere.

85. Seeing I am certainly persuaded that Coldness may, and is wont to be
produced in Man by a Sour and only Sour Humor, I may on good grounds think that
a Sour Humor, or Vapor is the Cause of a Cold Sweat, and Body in a Syncope mixed
from some other place with the Blood, and carried to the Heart. and driven
forward together with the Blood every way, and sticking in the outside of the
Body, and there affording a Sense thereof both to the Sick and Bystanders, and
Physicians themselves. And this will I think and suppose so long, till an other
demonstrate another Cause hereof evident enough.

86. The same Sweat is Glu^inous by reason of (...) Phlegmanic Humor diss^l^d
by the noted Sour Humor, and together with is expeld out, and of its own accord
again congealing and coagulated without the Body.

87. Paleness happens to the Universal Body b^ reason of the same So^r Hum^r
every where bred, esp^cially when there is Glutinous Phlegm; an Imitator and
Companion of the Sour Hum^r.

88. An extr^me An^i^ty of the Heart and Mid^if, un^xplainabl^ ^y the Sick,
does manifest partly the hot Original or the Evil, that is to say the Belly,
and the Parts dis^^n^^^ing themselves into the Guts, and especially the
Pancreas, partly the Fomenting of that Evil, a Humor not only Sour, which may
breed Pricking, or Corroding, or Boring Pains, but moreover Glutinous, which
firmly adhering to all the Parts goes more slowly and difficultly from the
same, and therefore urges more stubbornly; and being deduced by Choler oppressed,
into Viscous and Tough Vapors, and Wind increases the noted Anxiety.

89. And so I seem to my self clearly enough to have derived the rising of an
Universal Languishing, and of Swouning, and of the Syncope from slow and
glutinous Phlegm, partly from an Acid, and sometimes also Tart Juice mixed with
it; it remains, that we subjoin the Method and Reason of Curing those Diseases
by abridging prolixity with brevity. For it does not seem necessary here to
repete many things aforesaid with a vain and unprofitable Labor; seeing that
when the Disease is rightly described and known, its Cure is easily understood
and done.

90. The Cure of an Universal Languishing may be always in that respect
instituted alike; which cannot be said of the Cure of Swouning or a Syncope,
because these Diseases return by Fits, and then they sorely molest the Sick,
out of which they give them respit; which to the Physicians is the best
opportunity of preventing new ones, in no wise to be neglected, seeing they are
wont to be perilous.

91. There ought always to be a continual, and slow Correcting and Amendment of
a Glutinous and Phlegmatic Humor for an Universal Languishing, and also for a
Swouning and Syncope feared; and an Emptying thereof, by Stool and Vrin chiefly
with repeted turns, where it does together abound, or cannot be wholly amended.

92. Because we have often before treated of the Correcting and Emptying of a
Phlegmatic Humor, whither we send the studious Reader, we only intend to annex
here some forms of the more select Medicines for the sake of Younger Physicians.

93. Therefore to Amend the Phlegmatic Glutinous Humor abounding, both in the
Universal Body and Blood a Medicinal Wine or Beer prepared with several
Aromatic parts of several Plants, daily to be used both at Dinner and Supper
time, and at other times in a small quantity, according to the diversity of the
Age, Sex, and Languishing it self may conduce. For Example, from Roots only.

The Roots of Angelica, Galangal, Acorus, of each i. of Smallage, Alicampane,
Fenel, of each ii. of Lovidge i.

Cut and grossly Beat them, then sew them into a Bag somewhat long, and put them
into a Stone, or Glass Vessel of a strait Mouth, then pour on of laudable Wine
xxx or thereabout, and let it be in a Cellar all Night, in which time the
Aromatic Strength of the Roots will be communicated to the Wine, a draught
whereof, as is said, may be taken twice or thrice a day, and another Wine may be
pourd on instead of what was drunk, so long, till near all the Aromatic
Strength is extracted; for then new Roots may be taken, but first dried in the
Shade; which is always to be observd in all the Aromatic parts of Plants to be
used by Infusion.

94. If any please to use Medicinal Beer, then instead of Wine, let them pour
upon the aforesaid Roots their usual Beer, although then I prefer that which is
Bitter before the Sweet, and Observe it is safer every Night to pour upon the
Roots so much Beer, as will be drunk the next day; because the sir^ngth of Beer
soon fades, unless shut up in an Hogshead; whence sometimes whole Hogsheads,
sometime greater, sometimes less, not only of Beer, but Wine also so Medicind are
prepared for daily use: whether they be Roots only, or if other parts also of
Plants be p^^ into them, in more plenty.

95. If Aromatic Leaves be preferred, you may use the following Form or one like
it.

. The Leaves of Rosmary, Majoran, Hyssop, Sage, Garden-Rue, Mountain-Calamint.
Curld Mint, Wild Time, of each Man. ss. Cut these in like manner and put them
into a Bag, and pour upon them Wine, or Beer, and use it as was said daily.

96. Seeing many approve of Wormwood Wine, if the taste of Wormwood please you,
you may ad^ some of it to the rest.

97. When the Sick detaind with a Universal Languishing are also molested with
Wind, then Aromatic Seeds may in like manner be used before other parts of
Plants, and many may be prescribed according to the Form, and imitation of the
following Form.

. The Seeds of Coriander, Sweet Fenel, Anise, of each ii. of Smallage, Parsley,
of each i. ss. of Cardamom, Carua, of each i. Beat them round, and put them
into a Bag, pouring upon them Wine or Beer for daily use.

98. Such Medicinal Wines and Beer may be prepared most commodiously of sundry
parts of Plants joind together after the Example of the following Form.

. The Roots of the Aromatical Reed, Alicampane, of each ii. the Leaves of
Majoran, Sage, of each Man. i. the Flowers of Rosmary; ^love-Gilliflowers,
Arabian Staechas, of each 2 Pugils. Seeds of Poley Mountain, Sweet Penel, Sharp
Cinnamon, of each ii. Nutmegs, dried Orange Peel, of each i.

Cut, and roundly Beat them, put them into a Bag, and pour upon them presently
Wine or Beer in a con^enient Vessel for Use.

99. Although Medicines that Amend Glutinous Phlegm may most commodiously be
continued for a time in the form of Wine, or Beer, yet may you both prescribe,
and use the same in the form of a Powder, Electuary, Tablets, Decoction, Pills,
or any other more pleasant to the Sick. So many Aromatic Species are in use
among Practitioners, most convenient in this case, such as are Diacalamint,
Diagalangal, Dialacca the Greater, Diambra, Dianthos, etc. To which if four
times, six times, or eight times as much Sugar dissolvd in a convenient Water
be added, they may easily be reduced into Tablets. The same if put among Honey,
or a fit Syrup, will make convenient Electuaries; to which you may also add
diverse Conservs. For Example;

. Conserve of the Flowers of Betony i. of Rosemary, Eyebright, of each ss. the
Species Diambra ii. Diagalangal i. Sir. of Mint, what suffices M. for a
Conserv. This Conserv is to be ^^ten sometimes in a day to the quantity of a
Nutmeg.

100. I cannot contain my self, without admonishing Younger Physicians here,
diligently to beware in Correcting Glutinous Phlegm, that they use not Medicines
with much Sugar and very much Sugard; seeing that Phlegm is not so much thence
amended, and loosned, as encreasd, yea daily made more glutinous. Whence after
an ill, yea the worst manner, even here in Belgia the fruitful breeder of all
sorts of Phlegm, many Physicians negligent of those things that Hurt use, shall
I say or abuse, the Conserv of Red Roses daily taken in a large quantity in
almost every Cough continued a while threatening a Consumption of the Lungs* yea
rather furthering it already begun; whence the Vleer risen in the Lungs is not
only not cleansd, dried up, and consolidated, but moreover a Sense of Weight
and intolerable cold is raisd in the Region of the Stomach, together with the
Appetite dejected, and by this means the Evil is at length incurable. Which
evil manner of some they imitate, who after the manner of Beasts follow the
Flock of them that go before, and go whither they go, not whither they should
go.

101. What I have newly said of the Conserv of Red Roses, may also be
understood of Emulsions ill used in this case by certain, even Old Physicians,
whether they be made of cleansd Barley, and the greater cold Seeds, so called,
or sweet Almonds; because they ought only to be used seldom to assuage some
Symptoms, and again be laid aside. And that the Matter is so, Experience will
teach every one that desires to be Wise, being also the Mistress of Fools.

102. They who are better pleased with Pills, then other Forms, may have these
and some like them prescribed.

. Gum Galban. prepared with Vinegar ii. White Amber, select Mastich, of each i.
Male Frankincense, Red Myrrh, best Castor, of each ss. Vitriol of Mars dried
white in a slow fire ss. distild Oil of Mace 8 drops. Make them into forty
Pills to be gilded.

Three or five of these Pills may be taken at any time, and especially in the
Morning fasting, or in the Evening one hour after Supper, or at both times*
whereby they will correct Phlegmatic Humors sooner, and more potently, or more
slowly, and more mildly, and at length do the same benefit to Man.

103. If an Old Wives Veneration possess any of the Old Physicians only
delighting in Decoctions, he may here also imitate them, and use the following
Form of Prescription, or one like it.

. The Roots of Valerian, Acorus, of each ii. of Smallage i. the Herbs of
Betony, Balm, Horehound, Savory, Scabious, the Tops of Centaury the Less of
each Man. ss. the Leaves of Rosmary, Roman Camomile, Arabian Staechas, of each 1
Pugil. the Seeds of Sweet Fenel, Bishops-Weed, of each ii. the Berries of
Juniper i. of Laurel i. ss. Boil them on a gentle Fire (the Vessel being
closed) in clean Water, to (...) xl. To what is straind, add Sir. of Oak of
Jerusalem, Hyss p, Mugwort* Staechas, of each i. Tincture of Cinnamon i. ss. M.

Two or three ounces of this Decoction may be once or twice daily taken at any
time: Least any should in vain trouble himself, thinking with many who are less
moved with Reason, then with Custom that all Medicines are safely taken only
when the Stomach is empty of Food, seeing I have found the contrary true in
many cases, especially as to those that Alter and Correct the Humors. For I
have daily Observd that Altering Medicines, but mild, which only I would have
Physicians use, are often used, a little before or after Food taken in, yea
together with them, then at another time with greater benefit to the Sick: Nor
is Reason contrary to this Experience, for so the power of the Medicin mildly
mixes and incorporates it self not only with Spittle in the Stomach, but with
the Threefold Humor flowing together in the small Gut, yea also to the
Universal Blood, and all the other Humors in the Right Ventricle of the Heart,
and all the Arteries, and Veins: wh^rby the desired Amendment and Correcting of
It, or Them, is performd sooner, easier, and more happily.

104. Hitherto we have proposed Medicines commonly known and approved of all;
and if any being taught to be wiser then common People erect his Mind to
Chemical Preparations, and Medicines more effectual, and so more safe, if they
be both rightly prepared, and administered, we will commend unto him both
Tinctures, and Extracts, and Oils artificially made of the foresaid, and
Volatile, especially Oily Salts to be prepared by Art of most of the Parts of
Living Creatures, and to be conveniently used: Which seeing they are usually
not so ungrateful as common Medicines, may be taken in a much less quantity, and
will work both sooner, and more mildly, and more effectually, are deservedly
desired of the Sick enough afflicted of themselves; so that it may well seem to
a Physician (rejoicing in the name of Favorable) unworthy even unhuman, not to
be willing to ease (when he can well enough) the Infirmity, Loathing and
Queasiness of the Sick with a more grateful Medicin, much rather then willingly
to add affliction to the Afflicted. Wherefore I think that benign Physicians,
and such as do accommodate themselves and their Medicines any way to the natural
infirmity, and sometimes Squeamishness of the Sick are to be preferred before
those which are so morose. For it is far more easy and decent, though with
some pains, and often great enough, for any Physician to seek out, and by
trying to find Medicines more grateful to the Sick, then for a Sick Body being
delicate, and much afflicted with the Disease, and therefore sometimes loathing
the most grateful things, and the most pleasant Meat and Drink, yea at the
sight or smell of Medicines presently Loathing, and sometimes Vomiting, to take
and keep in his queasie Stomach, with a violence offered to Nature, any
Medicines, especially nauseous, and in a large plenty. Which how advers it is to
sound Reason, he that has Reason may judge; and how much with the complaints and
detriment of many Sick, as is known to all, the same is tried, and obstinatly
defended, by some hard hearted Physicians; and especially, seeing there is a
more commodious, and easier, yea safer way brought into Use, and already long
continued by other Physicians no less learned and well verst in an happy
Practice.

105. In a Universal Languishing, of which we speak, they know best, who have
for some time used Medicines Chymically prepared, when their Use should be
continued long, how usefully and happily they may be used, and deservedly
commend the same to others; for so the desired Health, to be preferred before all
earthly good things is obtaind, and gaind with less trouble and almost
insensibly.

106. Phlegmatic and Glutinous Humors, producing an Universal Languishing, may
and ought not only to be corrected, but when they also abound, or cannot be
wholly amended, are to be Diminishd also, and Educ'd out of the Body, and
chiefly by Stool and Vrin; which is easier, and more happily performd, after
that they are at least in part corrected after the aforesaid manner.

107. We have already given you many Forms of Medicines that Evacuate Viscous
Phlegm by Stool; wherefore resting with them for the present we will add one
here, which may carry it down to the Kidneys and out with the Vrin, in the Form
of a Decoction.

. The Roots of Smallage, Eringo, Asarabacca, of each i. the Leaves of Hemp-like
Agrimony, Nettles, Chervil, of each Man. i. Seeds of Sweet Fenel, Hartwort,
Saxifrage, of each ii. Boil them in clean Water, to xxx. straind add, Sir. of
the Five Roots iii. Sp. of Salt dulcifi'd, or Volatile Salt of Amber i. M.

Let the Sick drink a Draught of 3, 4, or 5. of this twice a day when the
Stomach is empty of Meat, that is, at least five hours after Meat is taken in.
It will be better, if used hot or at least warm.

108. Volatile Salts daily taken, even with Food will do the same; as not only
amending and cutting Glutinous Phlegm, but driving forward part thereof to the
ways of Urin, and expelling it in the form of a Settling: which by degrees is
deficient in Urin, and therefore gives an undoubted sign that the most part of
Phlegm is corrected and overcome: which even therefore is here admonisht for
Younger Physicians sake, because there are Elder, who being less verst in
preparing the best Volatile Salts, and less exercised in administering them, and
therefore less accustomd in observing their strength do oppore the same more
indirectly, then directly not without some suspicion of Envy. And so many blame
what they know not, and will not learn with hand-working: as though to turn
over the Writings of some, and unskilfully, to esteem or praise this or that
Man's Opinion before others as he lists without experience were sufficient to
get a solid knowledge of Natural and Medicinal Things. But Skilful Practitioners
deride such unskilful Censurers, and Theoretics though very high Pretenders,
not only in curing the Sick, but in preparing Remedies. I speak all these
things by Experience, though mine Adversaries and other Malevolents fret at it;
for whose sake also I conceal not a few things, which otherwise I would
liberally declare.

109. These may suffice for the Cure of a Universal Languishing: and because we
said that an Acid Liquor, and especially that of the Pancreas did concur with
Glutinous Phlegm, to produce a Swouning and Syncope, a consideration of each
Humor deservedly ought to be had; wherefore always a Correcting, and often an
Educing of the Acid Humor also is then to be instituted, and indeed in
Preventing those Diseases, when the Fit is not present; which being present,
and urging, Medicines more Effectual and Spiritous are to to be used, which can
soon pierce to the parts most affected, and soon remove the danger of Death at
hand.

110. Those Aromatics abounding with a Volatile Salt which we said could amend
Viscous Phlegm, are often said before likewise to conduce to temper and correct
a Sour Humor: Therefore Medicines newly prescribed in diverse Forms may conduce to
both; which let suffice that I have said it once.

111. Hydragogues commonly called, serve to educe the Acid Humor temperd; which
we have often mentiond and prescribed before, wherefore we will only add one
Form here.

. Gum Sagapen, dissolvd in Vinegar and again thickened ss. Rosin of Jalapp i.
Magistery of Gum-Gotte ss. Oil of Juniper Berries 3 drops. M. Make them into
fifteen Pills gilded, or done over with Licorish Powder.

Let the Sick take five, or more, or fewer, as he is more difficult or easy to
be purged.

112. I purposely omit Aloes in the most Pills prescribed by me; because it is
wont to open the Haemorrhoids in many with trouble, and sometimes harm.

113. When the Fit of Swouning and the Syncope is near, and the Signs of it
above-mentiond appear, you may give those things that are fit to concentrate
powerfully, and discuss Vapors, and somewhat Sour, and sometimes also Glutinous
Wind; which we lately said were required to be very efficacious and subtle,
whereby they may pierce every way and be joind to them. And such are both
Spiritous, and Volatile Oily Salts united most entirely by the help of Art. --.

114. Therefore all Volatile Oily Salts conduce, prepared by Art especially of
several parts of Living Creatures, or Plants: Aromatic Tinctures drawn by the
help of Spirit of Wine rectified either by Infusion only, or Distillation also
of diverse Spices, or any parts of Plants, as also Living Creatures. All which
ought to be dissolvd in convenient Liquors, and often given to the Sick. For
Example out of parts of Plants only;

. Mint, Fenel Water, of each i. Scurvygrass Water, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, of
each ss. Laudanum 2 grains. Sir. of Mint i. distild Oil of Cloves, and Mace, of
each 2 drops. M.

115. Let none wonder that in the proposed Mixture to be taken often by
Spoonfuls, I add Laudanum, seeing we have often before assorted that Opium has
an exceeding power to hinder, and mitigate the vicious Effervescency of Sharp
Humors both in the small Gut, and in the Heart, and elsewhere; without which
Effervescency hurtful and somewhat Acid Vapors, and such as cause the Diseases
which are now to be Cured, are not wont to be raisd.

116. Several things prepared (and very efficacious) of the parts of Living
Creatures may be added to the foresaid Mixture, or one like it, as the Tincture
of Castor, the Salt Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, or Vrin, the Volatile Salt and Oil
of Blood, Bones, Horns, Hoofs, etc. the Ods should be rectin'd, and not any be
freed in part from the smatch of the Fire but moreover be made more piercing,
and more potent. Which Rectification is commodiously done with Spirit of Wine
Tartariz^'d.

117. The newly mentiond Volatile Salts, and Oils may be given in a Spoonful of
any Liquor, Water, Wine, Beer, Broth, etc.

118. None, but he who has tried, will be easily persuaded of the wonderful
efficacy of the aforesaid Medicines, and their exceeding power not only in
preventing, but moreover in diminishing and soon curing Swounings and the
Syncope. For these Remedi's may be used not only before the Fit, or when it
coms, but when it molests, by warily pouring in a little of them into the
Mouth, and by applying or anointing the Nostrils with them: For their volatile
force is every way dispersed and piercing to the inmost parts is easily joind to
its like, that is, Volatile Vapors, and alters, changes, tempers, and corrects
them, so that they cease not only to provoke or pull the Sensible parts, or
affect them with a sense of Coldness, but chiefly too much to condens the
Blood, and so far to cloud Life, and almost blot it out with their Acidity.

119. Others, also may be used when a Swouning or Syncope urges, as is usual,
which may stir up any External Senses, such as are Frictions of the External
Parts, Shoutings, Application of Sharp Things about the Nostrils and Mouth, of
Vinegar, Rhenish-Wine, Cinamon-Water, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, the Apoplectic,
Antepileptic, Treacle, etc. Waters. Manifold Fuming as well moist as dry,
Vinegar alone, or joind with Cinnamon, Cloves, or others, Amber,
Partridg-Fethers, and suchlike well enough known by the common People.

120. When the Fit is ended either of its own accord, or by Art the Strength
both Animal, and Vital for the most part prostrated, is to be recreated by
Spiritous, as well as Aromatic Medicines. For the Animal Strength is wont not a
little to languish afterward, whether or no because the Spirits are not bred in
the Brain during the Fit? yet are they restored forth forth with strong Wine,
or its Spirit sparingly used.

121. And Aromatics use to repair the Vital Strength, so called, whether or no
because they do more agree with Choler which is not a little broken and weakened
both in the small Gut, and in the Heart by Acid Vapors? If therefore some
Aromatics be joind with Wine, or the Aromatic Spirit of Wine be used, both
Faculties being Debilitated may be helped by one, and the same Work. For Example;

. Betony-Water ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus i. Confection of Alkermes i. Sir.
of Burrage i. M. to be used often by Spoonfuls.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Palpitation of the Heart.
1. THe Palpitation of the Heart is deservedly referd to its Motion and Pulse
depraved against Nature, which I think is to be estem'd its Convulsiv Motion;
seeing it is indeed an inordinate, forct and often also vehement Motion of the
Heart. For there is not always a notable vehemence, whence the Palpitation of
the Heart uses to differ much in degrees.

2. This inordinate Motion of the Heart may be manifested by the Pulse of the
Arteries in part and after a certain manner, yet not plainly and fully; whence
there is need, that for the most part the Hand should feel under the left Pap:
although in a vehement Palpitation of the Heart the same Motion may be seen, as
also heard often at a notable distance.

3. For it happens sometimes, that there is such a vehement Palpitation of the
Heart, and such a smiting of the Ribs, that they are broken by it, or driven
forth in younger and more tender People, and remain sticking out.

4. There are also, as we hinted before, some degrees in the Palpitation of the
Heart upon the account of its greater or less vehemence; whence sometimes it
will not be manifest unless you apply your hand to the Breast; sometimes it is
soon manifest to Seeing, and also Hearing.

5. I take the Cause of the Palpitation of the Heart to be, whatsoever is apt
to stir it up to the inordinat, and sometimes also vehement Contraction of it
self without intermission; whether it be containd within the Ventricles of the
Heart, or in its Substance, or it be without the Heart, yet continually pulls,
bites, or pricks it for a time or always. Whence a certain Palpitation of the
Heart is noted perpetually troubling the Sick, another urging for the time and
again urging, or wholly departing.

6. Whatsoever is effus'd out of the Veins and E^^lets into the Ventricles of
the Heart, and is again soon expeld by its Contraction into the Arteries,
becoms sometimes the Cause of a Greater, or more Potent Pulse, but not of
Palpitation; to produce which there is need, that its Cause should stick to or
in the Heart, and continually provoke it to Contract it self, which therefore
will be both inordinat, and unequal, and besides together vehement.

7. Now having examind, and weighed those things, which I have both observd in
the Sick troubled with a Palpitation of the Heart, and also seen noted of other
Physicians, I judge this Palpitation of the Heart for the most part, arises from
Humors, or Wind very Viscous and together Sharp carried to the Ventricles of
the Heart, and sticking in them, and continually provoking the Heart to an
inordinat, and unequal Contraction of it self.

8. These Humors, and Wind, may be more frequently carried out of the small Gut
to the Heart, whether they be driven forward of their own accord being moved by
their vicious Effervescency; or being stird up are carried by a more stird
Motion of Body, especially in their ascending a steep place, or a grievous
Passion of Mind, Anger, Fear, Sorrow, or Joy; or be in like manner constraind,
or urged by an External Cause as the Heat or sharp coldness of Air; by sweet or
sour Food; by a potent, and that sometimes sweet, other times ungrateful, or
like smell of any thing to raise an Effervescency, and produce Vapors as well
glutinous as sharp, to be transmitted to the Heart.

9. Hence it is, that in the most kinds of Hypochondriac Symptoms, the
Palpitation of the Heart is so frequent, and familiar.

10. Hence it is, that so often about the beginnings of Intermitting Fevers,
while Cold still urges, or remits, as also in their Vigor, when the Heat is
exceeding, the Palpitation of the Heart is perceivd troublesome.

11. Beside the noted Humors, and Wind sometimes there are observd Fleshy
Tumors, or Bone like or Gristle-like Excrescencies in the substance of the
Heart, to which a Palpitation being joind till Death, was not undeservedly
ascribed.

12. Worms found in the Pericardium by pricking the Heart, or a Sharp Humor by
biting may be the Cause of an unwonted Palpitation; as also a Wound given to
the Heart.

13. The Causes noted in the two latter Paragraphs as they are difficult to be
known, if not impossible, so neither can they be cured.

14. The most frequent kind of Palpitation of the Heart mentiond in the former
place when the Fit molests may be Cured, if it rise from Wind, by Medicius that
both Cut, and Discuss, and especially Temper an Acid Acrimony, often proposed
before. For Example;

. Parsley, Fenel-Water, of each i. ss. Matthiolus his Aqua Vitae i. distild Oil
of Mace 4 drops. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac 20 drops. Laudanum 3 Grains. Sir. of Mint
i. M.

Let the Sick take one Spoonful of this Mixture every quarter of an hour, till
he get some ease.

15. If the Palpitation of the Heart be thought to be produced from a Viscous
and Sharp Humor, the same Altering Medicines that Cut and Temper Acrimony are to
be used: yea sometimes, if the Fit persevere long, (which is usual) use those
that empty out the Humor.

16. To Cut and Temper the named Humor the Mixture newly prescribed, or one
like it may conduce: And to Educe it I prefer before all others, Pills to be
made of Gums, seeing They loosen the Glutinous Humors, and dispose them to be
easier carried out. For Example;

. Gum-Galbanum dissolvd in Vinegar of Squils, and again thickened ss. Vitriol of
Mars calcined white i. the Troches Alhandal ss. Diagridium 15 Grains. Oil of
Carua's 6 drops. M. make them into xxv. Pills, to be gilded.

Take five or seven in the Morning, the Stomach being empty; drinking upon it
half an hour after, Broth, or Beer boild with a little Bread, and aromatiz'd
with Mace.

17. They who abhor Pills, may use a Decoction prepared of such as Cut,
Aromatics and Purgers; for which end we commend the following very bitter and
efficacious.

. The Root of Smallage i. of Angelica i. Shavings of Lignum Sanctum iii.
Berries of Laurel ii. Pulp of Colocynthis i. Seeds of Carua ii. Orange-peel ii.
Boil them according to Art in pure Water, in xxx. of what is straind, dissolv
the solutiv Sir. of Roses with Senna iii. Sp. of Wine rectified ii. M.

Let the Sick take iii, iv, or v. If the Sick purge little or nothing by so
much, he may drink as much, or more, as the Physician thinks fit, either in the
same day or the next, and so diminish and educe the hurtful Humor by easy
purging.

18. Out of the Fit suchlike may and ought to be used both Alterers and
Emptiers, and that daily. For the named Humors cannot be weakened unless in
length and continuance of time: which are also to be educ'd by Intervals, being
more stubboru, and past amending: where it is safer to empty them at times, and
by degrees, then to cast the Sick into more grievous Diseases by trying the
same together and at once.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Flowing of Blood out of the Left Ventricle of the Heart
through the Great Artery to all the Parts of the Body depraved.
1. THe Blood being perfected in both Ventricles of the Heart and the Lungs
between is carried at last through the infinite Branches of the Aorta or Great
Artery to all Parts of the Body, whereby They may be Nourisht, and out of it
Liquors farther Useful or Unuseful for their dispensing in Man's Body are
separated in several places, and again sent back to the Mass of Blood, or are
excluded straight out of the Body.

2. This Flowing of Blood through the Arteries is depraved sometimes, either
Universally, or in some Parts; and that 1. when it flows too slowly, or not at
all; or 2. is moved too quickly, or too potently; or 3. so flows into the
Substance or Cavities of the Parts, that it sticks there; or flows out of the
Body.

3. The Blood flows Universally too slowly, or also is quite stopped and stands
still in its Motion: 1. in the Plethora called in the Vessels, by defect of a
sufficient space to receive the Blood perfected in the Ventricles of the Heart,
and therefore also more rarefi'd.

4. 2. In a Swouning and Syncope, as also a Universal Languishing of the Body,
because the Blood is not fit to rarefie; as was largely said and explaind in
Chap. 34.

5. The same Blood flows particularly more slowly through the Arteries, or is
also sometimes stopped and stands still because of any kind of Straitness in the
Arteries of some Part, and especially a Compression or Obstruction; for I can
scarce conceive that a Stopping Uniting together, or Settling can have place in
the Arteries.

6. The Arteries may be Comprest by an over-hard Tumor near them, by hard
binding, etc.

7. The Arteries may be Obstructed, and especially the Capillaries both by
Glutinous Phlegm carrid together with the Blood through Them, and either of its
own accord or by degrees again closes, or coagulated by the Cold of the Air
piercing thither through the Pores of the Skin, then compacted from the Blood
It self because of External Gold, or a Sour Humor injoining it self thither.

8. The Blood is Universally moved through the Arteries too swiftly, or too
potently in all Burning Fevers, as well Continual, as Intermitting, as long as
the Pulse remains not only too frequent, but together Greater and Stronger for
after that the Blood is then so far rarefi'd, that it distends the Vessels too
much, and makes a Plethora at the Vessels, the Pulse usually becoms both Less
and Weaker; till by letting Blood by opening a Vein a greater space is prepared
to receive the Blood, and together the Vital Fire being near Suffocation is as
it were recreated and stird up by the same means; whence the Pulse also is then
again both Greater and Stronger.

9. In like manner the Blood mov's Universally too Potently, and too swiftly in
the Palpitation of the Heart, because of the Heart as well forced, as provoked
to an over-frequent contraction of it self.

10. The same happens after a notable, but not extreme Effusion of Blood, and
that either of its own accord, or artificial, or by chance, to wit, by a Wound
receivd casually or by force.

11. The Blood mov's more swiftly and potently to a certain and determind Part,
because of Blood effus'd out of the same, yet not in too great or high a
quantity; because, where this happens, the rest of the Blood is carried
thither, yea is so carried out, that by its defect the Vital Fire is diminisht
in the Heart, and the Blood deficient, and little, however rarefi'd there, can
less open the Ventricles of the Heart, and therefore can less provoke its
Musculous Substance to contract it self, therefore the Blood is less driven
every way, and at last fails, unless Life be speedily helped, after a Universal
Languishing.

12. The Blood effus'd flows into the Substance of the Parts, or Cavities of
the Body, and is gatherd there out of the Arteries any way internally opend and
lying open: as the same flows out of the Body and Arteries hurt about the
superficies of the Body.

13. A Pleth^ra at the Vessels for its Causes argues an healthy Constitution of
the Body, and a more liberal use of the best Food, a Mind void of Cares, little
Exercise of Body, much sleep, and suchlike.

14. We have spoken of the Causes and Cure of Blood less apt to rarefie in
Chap. 34. where you may see them, which make hither.

15. We must speak elsewhere of the Rising, Causes and Cure of several Tumors;
and of an Obstruction of the Vessels of Blood, and its Causes, Effects and
manner of Curing it, we intend to propose more in Chap. 40.

16. Of Fevers, as also a Palpitation of the Heart we have professedly treated
before; but of the several Differences, and Causes, and Cure of Wounds, perhaps
we may comment elsewhere, God willing.

17. We will therefore admonish only one thing among many that make for a Cure of
the noted Diseases from the Flowing of Blood through the Arteries depraved of
Curing a Plethora at the Vessels so called soon, and safely; to wit, that it
may be absolvd by a sufficient letting Blood out at an opend Vein: where I
would have you observe, that according to the proper Constitution of every one
to be Cured the Blood be let out at one, or more times, and that sometimes in a
greater, sometimes in a less plenty.

18. The Increasing of the same Plethora may be prevented; 1. by diminishing
the quantity of Food which is of much and laudable Juice; and by substituting
in its place Food of more difficult Fermentation, and that which contains less
of a nourishing Juice.

19. 2. By daily exercising, and wearying the Body more.

20. 3. By withdrawing by little and little something from Sleep.

21. 4. By calling into use, and Increasing Cares, and serious Occupations of
the Mind, which ought not to be too much vexing.

22. 5. When by these means the too great increase of Blood cannot yet be
enough hindered, endeavor must be used, that moreover the Blood nevertheless
more encreasd, should be diminisht in time by opening a Vein.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Nourishment of all the Parts depraved, and in especial of
Atrophia, or Pining.
1. THe general Use of Blood carried to all and every of the Parts is their
Nourishment, or repairing of the Particles by degrees departing from them and
perishing; as also in Youth their Increasing to a decent bulk and bigness.

2. This Nourishment, and Eucreasing of all the Parts is depraved sometimes
either Universally or Particularly, and that often according to the Flesh of
the Muscles, and Fatness, seldom according to the Substance of the Bowels, and
Bones.

3. This Depravation happens when 1. that Nourishment is Deficient in an
Atrophie, or Pining: 2. when it is too Much, specially in Fleshiness, or
Fatness. 3. When it is Unequally or Evilly in a Cachexie, Anasarca,
Leucophlegmatia, Rickets, etc.

4. In this Chapter we will Treat of an Atrophia, or Defect of Nourishment, in
the following, of the rest.

5. The Nourishment of the Body is wont to be Deficient manifestly, as is said,
upon the account of Fatness and the Musculous Flesh; and not upon the account
of Gristles, Bones, or the Substance of Bowels.

6. When Fatness only is consumed, and is not equally repaird, (...) may be
called Leanness; when the Flesh is together diminisht, and is not restored,
Pining. Neither is it a new thing to observe Men, whose Fat only decays; but
sometimes also, those whose Flesh perishes more, then their Fatness.

7. This double Atrophia is often Universal, through the Universal Body; but
not so often Particular and in some determinate Parts only, especially in the
Lims.

8. This Atrophia happens often by the Fault of Blood, seldom by the fault of
the Part affected.

9. The Atrophia happens by the fault of Blood, when it is either deficient in
the Universal Body, or some part; or is unfit to repair the Parts that grow
lean.

10. Blood is Deficient in the Universal Body, both because of a voluntary, or
forced Hunger; by any kind of notable Effusion of Blood; by the defect of
convenient Food; by too much Motion of Body; by Watchings too long continued;
by permanent Cares; by too much and too long heat of Air; and because of a
Looseness prolonged.

11. The Blood is usually Deficient in some Part because of its hindered Flowing
unto or into It, and so the Cutting or Compression whatsoever of the Arteries
tending to it, by the Vnjointing of the Bones, hard Tumors, Bonds, etc.

12. The Blood is unfit to nourish and repair the Body Containing, and its
Parts more, or fewer because of a vicious Quality, or Vicious, Salt, Viscous,
Purulent, etc. Humors mixed with it.

13. The Blood often retains a vicious quality after great Symptoms and Diseases
gone before, Burning Fevers, the Dysenterie, etc. or as yet present, an Hectic
Fever either single, or Tisical, Wasting, and slowly or suddenly consuming the
Body: Although I then think the vicious Humors are to be considerd, which
produce the noted Fevers, and do moreover vitiate the Blood, and make it unfit
to nourish the Body, especially Matter infecting and corrupting the Blood in a
Tisic.

14. We have in several places, and still intend to propose in this Treatise
the rising of Vicious, Salt, Viscous, Purulent, etc. Humors, whence they may be
sought.

15. Pining happens by the fault of the Parts to be Nourisht, when they suffer
some harm by what Cause soever, and especially External, and Accidental, to wit
by a Chance, Contusion, great Wound, etc. whence the Vessels carried through
Them are not only burst, or cut, but the Flesh it self, and the Membrans, etc.
are wasted and vitiated wherefore the Blood is not only deficient, but the Food
also coming to them is corrupted.

16. The Cause of Pining which some seek or place in the Defect of the Radical
Moisture, or Inbred Heat, or the Inward Temperament changed into too hot and
dry, I think is to be sought, and found in Choler, Lympha, and also Spittle,
and the Juice of the Pancreas not feignd and commented, and so Chimaerical but
actually existing, observd by many, and sensible Humors, but after diverse
manners changed and vitiated.

17. In an extreme Pining, beside the Hippocratical Face, consisting in the
Temples fallen, the hollowness of the Eyes, the Nostrils sharp, the Chops
giving out, and the Mouth gaping, the Ribs in the Breast stands out, and the
Gristle called Ensiformis is seen crooked; the Sholder blade, and Collar bones
appear like Bows; the spine of the Back shows it self; the Belly appears
fallen, and contracted; the Buttocs are lank, or consumed; the Legs, Arms,
Feet, and Hands with Fingers are beheld dry, and Swellings about the Joints
seem to stand out; the Nails are crookt; the Hair falls off; and the Skin
becoms limber, wrinkled, swart, and dry; mean while the Veins swell out, being
conspicuous and wan every where; and the Universal Body is observed in some
almost transparent and pellucid.

18. All Physicians testify, whom Experience favors, that a Pining,
especially after it has continued for some time is hard to Cure, and oft-times
Incurable; although the most think that it is not hard to cure in the
beginning, so that it be known.

19. Pining may be Cured, 1. by Repairing the Universal, or Particular Defect
of Blood; and by using the best Food, in a moderat quantity, and by removing,
or amending every Cause of that Defect; of which we have spoken, or will,
elsewhere.

20. 2. The same Pining may be Cured, by Correcting any kind of Fault in the
Blood, and by Removing from it every vicious Humor mixed with it, by those that
Evacuate, most convenient for every one, Vomits, Purges by Stool, and
especially Diuretics, or Sudorifics, and moreover Salivating Medicines: of which
we have spoken elsewhere, whence they may be selected, which are most profitable
here.

21. The Correction of Blood alterd and vitiated several ways may be vari'd
according to the variety of their faultiness, by using Medicines most fit for
every Fault, unless you have at hand Universal Correctors, such as are made
most efficacious of Minerals and Metals, and other things less determinat to
the parts of Living Creatures, and therefore the best, and in special of
Antimony, Gold, Iron, Vitriol, Coral, Pearl, etc. whence the Tinctures, and
Sulphurs, etc. to be made of these abovesaid, are not undeservedly mentiond,
and commended.

22. The same Pining may be Cured 3. by Repairing the harm of the Parts to be
nourisht com'd by a mischance, of which thing we intend to speak professedly in
the Chirurgical part of Physic.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of an over-Fleshy and Fat Constitution of the Body.
1. WE said in the former Chapter, that Nourishment was too much notably, both
in the Fleshy Excrescency of the Muscles, and in Fatness, whence the whole Body
is observd greater; which is not equally, when the Substance of the Bowels, or
Glandul's increase to too great a bulk, by reason of which there are Tumors
only thought to be every where produced.

2. The Musculous Habit of the Body becoms more Fleshy by much and laudable
Blood; the Motion of Body, and moderat Exercise concurring; the Life void of
anxious Cares; a moderat or more prolongd Sleep; a large taking in of Food of
much Juice, and easy to ferment.

3. The Body becoms over-Fat in Habit and Superficies, as within, by Blood too
Fat, to produce which the healthy Constitution of the Body conduces, yet an
Acid Juice concurring plenteous enough, but mild, and temperd; as Choler
over-sparing, and not very sharp; the Motion of the Body little; Life also
without corroding Cares; Sleep pleasant and too long; continual and much taking
in of fat Food.

4. The Body is seldom laden with much or too much Flesh, but commonly with
Fat.

5. Too great an Increase of the Musculous Flesh, may be Cured, 1. by speedily
Diminishing Blood with opening a Vein. 2. By Exercising the Body much and
longer then is wonted to a Weariness notable enough. 3. By Employing, and
Vexing the Mind with grievous and solicitous Cares. 4. By Increasing Wakings,
and by lessening Sleep. 5. By Using more sparingly Food of much and the best
Juice, or in their stead taking those that less nourish, or are more
difficultly fermented.

6. The same Fatness of Body may be Cured, 1. By Using often and plenteously
any sharp Sauces, both Sour, and Aromatic, that is, salt, or bitter; which as
well make the Glandulous Liquors more Acid, as Choler more bitter and sharp.
Such are Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, Spirit of Salt, etc. Pepper, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Mace, Ginger, Cresses, Rocket, Mustard, any Radish, and chiefly
Horseradish, etc. 2. By Moving the Body much. 3. By vexing the Mind with
Cares. 4. By daily lessening Sleep. 5. Wholly abstaining from Oily and Fat
Food; for so by little and little the superfluous Fat will not only be
consumed, but its new increasing hindered.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of a Cachexie, and in special, Anasarca, and Leucophlegmatia.
1. THe Nourishment of the Body peccant in quality may, and is wont to be
called a Cachexie; in which the Native Skin and especially Color of the Face
languisheth, and is changed pale, and sometimes yellow or livid and very wan; as
in some swart red, or somewhat redish, together with little Pimples rising up
commonly in the Nose, and Cheeks of several sorts.

2. In the most kinds of a Cachexie a Dyspnaea concur's, which is more
increased, when the Body is moved, especially overmuch, and in ascending an
high place. And then most usually a Palpitation of the Heart, and a Pulsation
of the Arteries about the Throat, and Temples, manifest to Sight, is produced.
Commonly there is a Weariness of the Universal Body, and Thighs especially.
Often a pressing and vexing pain of the Heart urges, which uses to be encreasd
after Food taken in. Yea for the most part there is a lingering Fever, and that
either Continual, or Intermitting, or Compounded of both. Vrin coms away often
Crude, or Watery, seldom Thick or Troubled, unless they be troubled or changed
by another Disease accompanying, or an External Cause. At length the Universal
Body waxes Lean, and Pines in some; as in others the same Swells and is Turgid.
And an Anasarca comes by a Serous Humor; as a Leucophlegmatia by a Phlegmatic,
and more viscous Humor; and an Ascites, from both, at least the former, when
the Belly with the Thighs only is troubled.

3. A Cachexie spares none, nor People of any Age; although most frequently it
siezes on Women because of their Monthly Courses Staying too long, and hindered,
or any way Suppressed; it is also often enough wont to accompany the
Hypochondriac Disease, and its notable kind, the Scurvy.

4. The Cause of every Cachexie is the Blood endued with a vicious quality,
because of which although the parts of the Body be a little, and for some time
nourisht, yet are they not nourisht, as is required; but their nourishment is
depraved several ways according to the variety of the quality peccant: whence
also more kinds of a Cachexie are observd, to be distinguished both according to
the diversity of Heat changed, and especially of the Symptoms conjoind.

5. The Quality of Blood is faulty both by the Natural Humors concurring to the
Constitution of the Blood in the Heart, but having a vicious quality; and by
the Non-Natural Things so called, vitiating some of the named Humors, and Blood
it self, and so corrupting them, that an ill Nourishment of the Body follows.

6. The Natural Humors, that are wont to be confused with the Blood, and
hitherto known, are Choler, and Lympha of the Conglobated Glandul's, and the
other Parts of the Body, as also Spittle, and the Juice of the Pancreas, joind
together with Choler in the Small Gut, and compounding a singular Liquor to be
mixed with Lympha, and so the Animal Spirits returned any way to the Blood; all
which I scarce think that any verst though but a little in the Art of Physic,
and addicted to the Truth can deny to be affected with a vicious quality, and
to communicate it self with the Blood.

7. We have noted several Depravations of these before, and shall yet relate
more: whence they may be required that make hither.

8. As several Depravations of Humors are sometimes by degrees and insensibly
produced in the Body, so the same are sometimes bred suddenly and sensibly by
the Non-Natural Things, or others to be noted with the name of Poison peccant
in a notable excess, and very much troubling, or corrupting all things in the
Body.

9. The Depravations most frequent and manifest are Acrimony both Acid and
Salt-like Pickle, and sometimes a Lixivial Salt, and too much Viscousness, or
Fluidity: the Causes of which, and manner of breeding we have often proposed,
and explaind before; whither we remit the Studious Reader, lest being too often
spoken it be tedious to the Nice.

10. The reason of the mentiond Symptoms will easily be known to any that
thinks often, and weighs, that as often as the Blood whence-soever has been made
Vicious, and producing a Cachexie; so often all the named Humors, seeing they
arise from the Blood, are also bred faulty; whence likewise not only both the
Appetite of Food is depraved, but moreover their Fermentation; wherefore
Anxieties about the Midrif, and a pressing Pain of the Heart follow as well
before as after its being taken in.

11. But when part, or the whole Mass of Food ill Fermented is driven forward
through the small Gut, the Juice of the Pancreas and Choler which are confused
with it being alike vicious, do not only corrupt the expected Separation of
useful and unuseful parts; but also here happens a vicious Effervescency of
these Humors; yea often manifold Vapors, or Wind being raisd out of that
vicious Mixture do not only increase the fore-describ'd Anxiety, but carried to
the Heart do breed its Palpitation; and carried to the Lungs make a difficult
Breathing; and driven every way breed the noted Weariness.

12. From the same Vitiousness of all the Humors a Continual, and Slow Fever
depends, in as much as they raise a vicious Effervescency in the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, among many other Symptoms they likewise make the Pulse
more Frequent then is wont, and so preternatural.

13. And seeing the Sick through unquietness often lay their Bodies bare that
were coverd with Clothes, it easily happens, that Phlegm being carried through
the Vessels of the Pancreas is coagulated there, and breeds an Obstruction; by
which the Juice standing still may be the Cause of a manifold Intermitting
Fever, and it will be sooner, and easier, if the Body run down with Sweat, and
the Pores of the Skin are open, or the Air be colder and sharper.

14. Vrin comes away Crude, and less Colored, or Thick because of the Humors
mentiond over-sharp, incorporating with the Blood, or Watery abounding, which
diminish the desired Effervescency, so that the Separation, much less Excretion
of the Excrementitous Parts, to be voided together with Urin, being required
and useful does not follow. And as then all the Parts are ill Nourisht, so the
Skin of the Face exposed to the Air and Sight before all others, gives signs of
its harm by Heat according to the variety of several Humors most peccant.

15. When the Acrimony of the Humors concurs, then is it manifested internally
with Pains, or externally with Pimples.

17. When the vicious Humors abound together in Plenty, then several kinds of
the Dropsy at length succeed; if not, the Universal Body grows Lean by degrees.

18. The Cachexie which in special happens to Women because of their Monthy
Courses flowing less commodiously or in due season, God willing, we intend to
give the Reason, and Generation thereof in the Third Chapter of the Third Book.

19. From what has been said here and elsewhere, the p^^^^ction of every
Hypochondriac, and Scorbutic Cach^^ie. may ^^sily be deduced by a Judicious and
(...) ^^^us Physician.

^^. And that we may pass on to the Cure of the (...) k^ow, that if any where,
then for certain (...) his G^lden Precept is to be observd accuratly, proposed
in the following Distich;

Principiis obsta, sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Resist beginnings, late is Physic used,
When the Disease delaid is deep infused.
For unless the Cachexie be helped in time, it becoms often by degrees so
stubborn, and rebellious, that it can be cured only late, or never. Therefore
are the Sick and their Parents, or Kindred, or Friends to be admonisht by their
ordinary Physicians, though unaskt, so soon as the ^^gns of a Cachexie
beginning manifest themselves in the Color of the Face changed, that that
Evil, as it is in the Proverb, be not neglected in the Blade, seeing that it is
soon wont to take deep root, and hard to be rooted out, which afterward cannot
be overcome unless by an Herculean Labor.

21. The Cure of every Cachexie will consist in the Correction and Amendment of
the Blood any way vicious. Where the kind of the Viti^usness and true Canse is
to be observd whether it be one, or manifold.

22. As therefore this or that Humor is primarily and most peccant after this or
that manner, and depending on this or that Error committed in the Non-natural
Things has vitiated the Blood, and produced a Cachexie, so are the Medicines to
be selected, which may mildly, and by degrees alter, and reduce both the noted
Humor, and the Blood it self to their natural constitution; or, if they cannot
be clearly and wholly amended, yet do they empty out by d^grees the same at
least corrected after a certain manner; mean while not neglecting the
Non-natural Things, or others producing, or cherishing these Evils; which
unless they be corrected, or shund the happy wished for Cure, and laudable
Success of what is to be done will be expected in vain.

23. You have often told you before by what Medicines and Forms the mentiond
Corrections and Emptyings of several Humors may, and ought to be perfected;
where they may be seen.

24. We must therefore persevere a while in the Use of convenient Medicines, and
especially, when the Cachexie has continued for a space, and fix^ its growth,
which will depart slowly; yea, in the use of any Medicin profiting, so long as
the Sick do^s not only amend by it, but can ^^e it without loathing, and
dislike: As soon therefore as it c^ases to please, or benefit though the most
grateful, o^ also best Medicin, prescribe an other, or the same to be given in
another form.

25. In a long continued Cachexie the Medicines are always convenient that
Correct, and Evacuate tough and glutinous Phlegm, seeing that all Prolongd
Diseases depend on it either wholly, or at least in part.

26. If a Humor Sour, or like Salt Pickle be coupled with Glutinous Phlegm,
which commonly happens, or a Lixivial, or Choleric Salt which seldom happens,
Medicines that satisfy both Indications are to be joind together, which are often
proposed and mentiond; by the help whereof the gaining of Health lost may
sometimes be expected sooner, other-times flower.

CHAP. XL. Of the Reflux of Blood through the Veins, from all the Parts to the
Right Ventricle of the Heart depraved; and in special of an Inflammation.
1. AS the Universal Blood is carried through the Arteries from the Heart to
all and every Containing Part of the Body, both to Enliven, Nourish, and
Increase them, and also to separate all the Humors, or useful and unuseful
things Containd any way from the remaining Mass; so the same Blood remaini^g
after this manifold benefit many ways bestowed on both Bodies, yea many ways
despoild of s^^e part of it self and decaid is again carried from all the same
Containing Parts through the Veins to the Heart there to be renewd by the
mutual Mixture, and after that the Effervescency, and Vital Rarefaction of
several Parts concurring.

2. This Flowing of the Blood and reciprocal and altering Reflux, is now known
and made known by the name of the Circular Motion.

3. The Blood is sometimes hindered in its Reflux, when it either Stands still,
and stops in its* Vessels and Ways, or is effus'd out of them, whether it be
within the Substance of the parts beside it, or Cavities of the Body, or it hap
out of the Body.

4. The Blood stands still in its Vessels, either because of a great Plethora
and that called at the Vessels; or by a straitness one while by Their
Compression, another time by their Obstruction made.

5. We sufficiently mentiond the Plethora at the Vessels in Chap. 36. which may
be seen there.

6. The Veins are Pressed to hinder the Reflux of Blood, sometimes by hard Tumors
near, other-times by Bands about the parts, straightly binding the Veins, as well
as Arteries.

7. The Veins sometimes are obstructed by the Blood it self, or Phlegm
Coagulated and compacted in them, other-times though seldom, by a Stone bred in
them, and by degrees more encreasd.

8. I would have the Hollow Substance of every part referd to the Veins,
through which I think with many that the Blood for the most part goes out of
the Arteries into the Veins.

9. The Blood is Coagulated both by the great Coldness of the Air or Water very
much affecting the parts; and by Medicines potently Astringent, or Tart,
communicated to the Blood from without or within, and Congealing it.

10. Phlegm is Coagulated in the aforesaid Vessels by the same Causes, most
frequently by the Cold of the Air, Water, Drink, or other things suddenly
invading the Parts before warm, either Externally or Internally, and again
there curdling and thickning the Phlegm, specially Viscous, by what Cause
soever dissolvd especially in the small Gut, and hence carried to the Blood,
and together with it driven forward every way.

11. Phlegm in the small Gut is wont to be Loosend, 1. By the hot Air of the
Sun, Fire, Bath, etc. 2. By Food, as also Medicines both Spiritous and Aromatic,
or abounding with a Volatile Salt. 3. By a vehement Motion of Body; whither
Frictions, and Coverings may be referd. 4. By immoderat Anger. 5. By prolongd
Watchings.

12. Where note, how much the more causes do concur, and are peccant in a
greater excess, so much the easier, sooner, and more plenteously the named
Phlegm is loosed and transferd toward the Blood.

13. The Blood standing, and by little and little collected in its named
Vessels, distends them more, and more, and so, that sometimes they burst or any
other way give it an Outlet; whence there then happens an Effusion of Blood
out of its Vessels, whether it stick in the Substance of the adjacent Parts, or
be collected in a near Cavity of the Body, or be wholly pourd out of the Body.

14. The Blood Enclosed as yet and standing in the Capillarie Vessels, and
perhaps in the middle sinuous substance of any of the Parts; or Effus'd am^^^
(...) mean plenty at least gatherd without those its wonted ways, but opend and
patent into any kind of porous, and especially fleshy, or membranous substance
of their parts, that are near, or their spaces between presently of its own
accord waxes hot and produces a troublesome Sense of Heat in a sensible part;
and being by degrees corrupted, is wont to turn into Purulent Matter. Whence
the first Change is called an Inflammation, as the latter, and Abscess or
Aposteme.

15. I judge the Blood is kindled and breeds an Inflammation in as much as out
of it being in Vessels very much distended, or standing in any other Parts the
Spiritous, and more Volatile and Subtle parts, that are wont to temper both the
Acid, and Salt Parts, do afterward begin to vanish; whence both being made
Sharper do more sharply rise up one against another, and stir up an Hot
Effervescency because of the Oily Parts of the Blood present, yea by degrees do
so corrupt the Blood, as to turn it into Matter, different according to the
variousness of the Blood corrupted.

16. Blood Effus'd into some Cavity naturally void of Humors, as of the Breast,
or Belly, and there Collected and Corrupted into Matter constitutes a
Suppuration.

17. The same Blood Effus'd into the hollow Parts of the Body, the Stomach,
Guts, or Vrinary Bladder, makes a various change, because of the several Humors
then mixed with it, unless it be soon sent out of them.

18. The Effusion of the same Blood out of the Body, is called in general an
Haemorrhagie; although in particular this name is given to Blood bursting out
at the Nostrils; as the same when it flows out of the Vessels of the Fundament
is called Haemorrhois: and Blood distilling every Month out of Women's Wombs, is
known by the name of Monthly Courses; and that which uses to be evacuated
plenteously after Birth that way, the Lochia.

19. Where it is to be noted, that there is no natural Efflux of Blood beside
both newly mentiond proper to Women, of which variously depraved we intend to
speak at large, if God permit, in the Third Book of this Work. For every other
Haemorrhagie, whether coming of its own accord, or by chance, or if it be
procured by Art; or whether it be hurtful, or useful, always happens beside the
ordinary course of Nature, seeing that none such is to be expected of perfectly
healthy People.

20. Therefore the Cause of every Efflux of Blood is any kind of Opening of the
Vessels, whether it be by too much Distension of the Vessels by plenteous, much
rarefi'd, or retarded Blood, or Wind; or by the corroding Pain of an Humor
stopping either in, or out of the Vessels, or by an hard and sharp thing
wounding; or by a blunt thing bruising or if the same happen any other way.

21. We intend to speak elsewhere of the most Causes, and the Cure of Blood
Effus'd beside nature out of its Vessels, in this Chapter we will prosecute the
Essence, and Cure of an Inflammation.

22. It is required to the Cure of an Inflammation and Aposteme following,
that. 1. The Compression, or Obstruction of the Vessels be taken away. 2. That
the Motion of Blood Stopped, and standing still be restored. 3. That the Blood
effus'd out of its Vessels, if it can be, be removd thence before it turn to
Matter. 4. That if the Suppuration cannot be removd, and so hindered, it should
be ripend, and promoted. 5. That the letting out of Matter bred be hastened. 6.
That the cleansing and consolidation of the Ulcer be most spedily absolved.

23. I. The Compression of the Vessels by Bonds straightly cast about the parts
may be taken away, when they are taken away; or by an hard Tumor, when it is
cured; of which, elsewhere.

24. An Obstruction of the Vessels by Viscous Phlegm, or Blood Coagulated in
them may be Cured, by using Medicines that as well internally, as externally
loosen the Humor peccant, and again make it fluid.

25. Among Internals, Volatile Salts prepared of several parts of Living
Creatures conduce before all others, as having an egregious power of dissolving
all things Coagulated and Conglutinated in man's body, and of reducing the same
to their wonted fluidity, and moreover to move sweat; which together being
mildly promoted that desired and amiable Dissolution of those Gathered together
is obtaind much easier, sooner, and more happily.

26. Hence it is, that often by one Sweat prepared of these mentioned Volatile
Salts, or suchlike, given in season a Pleurisy, that is an inflammation of the
Side has been most happily cured without opening a Vein, and letting Blood.

27. Hence it is, that Mixtures prepared of such like, and used by spoonfuls by
short intervals in time, have cured both a Pleurisy, and Peripneumonie, and
Inflammations of other parts soon, safely and pleasantly.

28. I here set down an example of such a Sudorific Mixture for Younger
Physicians sake, which

. Parsley, Hyssop, Fennel-water, of each i. Simple Treacle-water ss. Sp. of
Salt Ammoniac ss. Laudanum Gr. iv. Sir. of white Poppies i. M.

29. Instead of Sp. of Salt Ammoniac you may add Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or
any other, and according to its greater, or less Acrimonie add more, or less of
it to the Mixture, which may be taken in a greater, or less quantity at every
time, and the body be kept in a warm place, especially in bed, to promote the
power of the Medicin every way, and after that to facilitate a Sweat; although
there is scarce need to raise a sweat continually; seeing it profits not,
unless in as much as the volatile and Salt force of the Medicin pierces easier,
and sooner to the place affected and Obstructed.

30. Crabs Eyes, the Jaws of a Pike, the Bone of the Heart of an Heart, etc. may
and ought to be referrd to a Volatile Salt seeing they abound with it.

31. In this case likewise All fixed Metallic and Mineral Sulphurs conduce;
wherefore Diaphoretic Antimonie is hither referrd being broucht to some
fixtnes; although these are here convenient for many causes.

32. Nor do the Volatile Salts of Living Creatures alone conduce here, but all
made of several parts of Scorbutic Plants so called being sharp, emulating their
strength, such as are the Juices of Hedge-Mustard Scurvie-grass, Garden and
Water Cresses, Dandeleon, etc. Treacle-Waters, etc. So that they have power to
loosen and dissolv Phlegm Coagulated or Blood Clotterd.

33. Among the Externals the compound Ointment Martiatum, and of Marshmallows
are convenient, etc. the Oil of white Lilies, Camomile, Dill, Bay, Bricks,
(commonly called) Philosophers, etc. which may commodiously be mixed together,
and be anointed on the external affected part; using before or adding often the
rectified Spirit of Wine, as well simple, as compound, and several ways
aromatiz'd,

34. In this Case also Cataplasms, more Dissolving, than Mollifying, or
Ripening may be outwardly applied; which may Cut, and Loosen the Humor, Blood,
or Phlegm Coagulated being prepared of the parts of Sharp and Aromatic Plants.
For example take this following.

. Onions roasted under the Ashes, or in an earthen Vessel, and beaten ii, the
Leaves of Hegde-Mustard, Chervil, Garden-Cr^sses, Elder, of each M. ss. Meal of
Beans, Lupins, of each i. One Swallows Nest. Album Grae um i. Make it a
Decoction in Butter-Milk to the Consistencie of a Cataplasm.

Apply this Cataplasm meanly warm to the affected part Externally; by the help
whereof internal Obstructions also may be loosned: and Observe, as soon as it
begins to be dried, it must be renewd.

35. II. Motion is restord to Blood Standing still and stopped in its Vessels for
the most part and most happily by Sudorifics, sometimes by opening a Vein, and
Letting Blood.

36. By Sudorifics; in as much as by their help the Blood becomes not only more
fluid, and moveable, but moreover is moved actually being more, and more
rarefi'd by the Volatile Salt that is in them, and again loosens, pulls asunder,
and therefore mov's the Blood by degrees more or less clottering, only by its
stoppage because of it is Acid Spirit.

37. Hence it is, that the Pulse so continually more Frequent, as often
together Greater and Stronger is wont to accompany Sweat; unless an extreme
dejection of Strength concur: for then both a Less, and more Languishing Pulse
is joynd to one more Frequent.

38. For when the Volatile Salt of the Sudorifics coms to the right Ventricle of
the Heart, there the Blood rarefies more, and more potently, and does not only
seek an outlet for it self of its own accord, but provokes and forces the
Ventricle of the Heart by di^ating it more both to a more Frequent, and more
Valid Contraction of it self, and so to the expelling and driving the Blood
forward; and therefore raises, moves, and every way puts forward from the Heart
the Blood first by degrees deficient in its Motion.

39. When that mentioned Power of Sudorifics coms to the place of Obstruction,
it attempts the Matter obstructing be it what it will, and cuts, attenuates,
loosens, and makes it fluid; whence it is farther driven forward together with
it more easily, and happily, the assault of the Blood coming more potently
moved and forced to it.

40. By opening a Vein, and letting Blood, its Motion is restored to the Blood
standing still, in as much as that which was next is carried into the place of
that which is let out, and a larger space being so made for the Universal Blood
all the Blood mov's both more swiftly, and potently; wherefore it, which first
stopped standing still in its Vessels, the Plethora being now taken away it stops
no longer, but is more potently stird up, and helped to renew its interrupted,
at least much diminisht motion; unless a more grievous Obstruction hinder this,
that will not yield to Blood alone too vehemently moved, but moreover wanting
those things that cut and dissolv the Humor obstructing.

41. And then after a sufficient quantity of Blood is taken away, it is
profitable to give a Sudorific, and Cutting Mixture at several times by
Spoonfuls, such an one as we noted in Sect. 28. whether little or no Sweat
follow at its taking, if that the rebellious Obstruction be loosend, and taken
away.

42. III. The Blood Effus'd out of its Vessels, and dispersed through the
Substance of the more near parts, is to be removed thence, wholly or in part as
soon as may be, if it can be removed at all, by hindering its coagulation,
potently dissolving its over-thick parts, discussing those that are more
tender, and together tempering those too sharp; and that as well by Internal as
External Medicines.

43. The Coagulation of Blood is hindered by Crabs-Eys, Diaphoretic Antimony,
Mumy, Sperma Ceti, Gum Galbanum, Sagapen etc. Opium, Spruse Beer, etc. besides
the most of these named do dissolv the over-thick parts of Blood, and discuss
those too thin, and moreover temper those too sharp, especially when they are
joind with others, which promote or increase their force. For Example;

. Hyssop, Fenel-Water, of each ii. distilld Vinegar, vi. Sp. of Wine rectified,
or any Aromatiz'd ss. Crabs Eyes i. Sperma Ceti, Mumie of Alexandria, of each
i. Laudanum iv Gr. Sir. of the Five Roots i. ss. M.

Let the Sick often take a Spoonful of this Mixture; by the help whereof the
Clottering of Blood Effus'd will not only be hindered; but its over-Thick parts
incided, and by degrees attenuated; and its over-Thin parts will continually be
Discust together with Sweat or insensible Transpiration; and the Pain will be
aswag'd its over-sharp parts being temperd, and at length wholly taken away;
and so the Obstruction it self will be loosned and dissolvd: and by suchlike
alone used in time, and diligently Pleurisies, and Peripneumonies, and
Inflammations of other Parts beginning, grievous enough, and troublesome with
Anxieties, or sharp Pains have often been Cured.

44. You may anoint upon the part affected, the Ointment Martiatum, that of
Marsh-Malows compounded, or any other Aromatic; to which you may refer
May-Butter prepared with the Juice of Aromatic Plants; sometimes adding Aromatic
Oils in like manner, that of Bays, Dill, or others more potent, or distild, of
Earth, Turpentine, Amber, Bricks, etc. but in less quantity.

45. Among Plasters that of Sperma Ceti is deservedly commended, which

. Virgin-Wax. iv. Sperma Ceti ii. Gum Galbanum, dissolvd in Vinegar i. M. Make
it a Plaster according to Art, through which melted draw a Cloth, and let it be
a Serecloath commonly called, to be applied by course on both sides.

This Egregious Plaster does not only preserv the Blood in all the External
Parts of the Body, but Milk also from curding in the Paps, yea sometimes it
again loosens and discusses, or restores it meanly curded.

46. Fomentations also made of Aromatic Plants and potent Discussers boild in
Water, or Wine may conduce; adding moreover when they are used some of the
Spirit of Wine. For Example;

. The Roots of Briony, Smallage, Fearn, of each ii. the Leaves of Elder,
Hemp-like Agrimony, Germander, Mint, Wormwood, of each Man. i. the Flowers of
Melilot, Roman Camomile, of each Man. i. ss. Cumin-Seeds, Bay Berries, of each
i.

All being grossly beaten Boil them in Rainwater, on a slow Fire, the Vessel
being shut. Keep them for your Use.

47. This Fomentation may be used, by sowing the beaten parts of the Plants in
a Bag, or Bags, and after they are boild by expressing the superfluous Liquor,
and applying Bags meanly warm to the part affected; where they must be left so
long, as they are hot; and as soon as they want heat, they are to be removed,
and others warm to be applied. Also a Woolen Cloth, or soft Sponge fit to cover
the part affected may be laid on the warm Fomentation, and after be applied to
the part paind the superfluous Liquor being expressed, as is aforesaid, sometimes
be renewd. Yea so much of the Fomentation as is needed, may be pourd into a
Beasts Bladder cut off from its Neck and softened in warm Water, that is, after
the part that wants its Neck is ti^d again, the Bladder turgid, but not full
and stretched with the Fomentation may be applied loosly on any part: for so all
harm easily happening from moist and soon after cold Shirts, or other Linen
Cloths near the Body is prevented.

48. By the help therefore of these several Medicines, the Indications mentiond
will be satisfied; nor will they only be shund, or the Coagulation of Blood be
repaird; but moreover its over-thick, or thickened parts will be attenuated; and
those more thin will be discust and carried out by insensible Transpiration;
yea those too sharp will be temperd, if any such cannot be soon after together
dispersed, whereby at length they by degrees vanish away, at least they may be
easier, and more happily suppurated.

49. IV. When the Blood is effus'd into such, or so deep a place, out of which
it cannot be commodiously removed without Suppuration and an Aposteme; the
making and generation of Matter is to be promoted, and hastened.

50. All Emollient and Ripening Medicines do this, the Roots and Leaves of
Marsh-Malows, Malows, White Lilies, Brank Ursme, Orage, Mercury, etc. the Seeds
of Lint, Fenugreek, Marsh-Malows, etc. or their Meals, as also that of Barley,
fat Figs. Man's, Swines-Grease, etc. the Fat of a Goose, Hen, Calf, etc. the
Marr^w ^f all Bones, any Butter, Oil of Olives, Sweet Almonds, and almost any
that is expressed of several Seeds, or Kernels* or boild with Emollient Flowers,
etc.

51. When Phlegmatic and Viscous Humors are joind with the Blood, the Knobs of
Onions, Squils, etc. are to be added to the former, and sometimes Gum Bdellium,
Galbanum, Ammoniac, etc. Liquid Styrax, Wax, Turpentine, Honey, and many
suchlike.

52. Cataplasms are wont to be most commodiously prepared of these; For Example,

. The Meal of Marsh-malow Root, of Barley, of each ii. the Leaves of Malows,
Brank Vrsine, of each Man. iii. the Seeds, or Meal of Lint i. ss. fat Figs
bruisd x.

Boil them in Water or Small Beer on a slow Fire, or when there is an extreme
Heat, in Butter-Milk to the consumption of their Moisture, and softning of
those things boild; then all being exactly beaten, add Swines Grease, new
Butter, of each i. ss. M. for a Cataplasm.

53. When Glutinous Phlegm is mixed with the Blood, and breeds a lighter Heat in
the part, then prepare this following.

. Onions roasted in Embers, and then beaten iv. the Meal of Beans,
Fenugreek-Seeds, of each iii. Flowers of Roman-Camomile, of Elder, of each M.
i. ss. Boil them according to Art in Small Beer, or pure Water, to be a
Cataplasm.

54. When there is much heat in the part Inflamed, and the Sick cannot bear Fat
things, beware diligently of all Oils, and Oily things; and then I have always
observd that Butter-Milk, which is, the Whey of the Creme of Milk butterd is
useful; in which if a Decoction be made, the Cataplasm by help of this will
egregiously temper Heat, and hinder, St. Antonies Fire from being easily joind
with the Inflammation.

55. If Ointments, or Plasters please the Sick better, and they be not hurt by
Fat things, the Part paind may once or ofter be anointed with the Ointments of
Agrippa, Simple, or Compounded Marsh-Malows, the Pectoral, etc. Ointment, and
either alone, or with convenient Oils added, of White Lilies, Sweet Almonds,
and suchlike reduced to the consistency of a Liniment; and afterward the
Plaster of Diachylon Simple, and sometimes with Gum be laid on it, as also that
of the Mucilages, chiefly when the Body and Blood abound with much Phlegm, and
that Viscous.

56. V. The Generation of Matter being promoted and finished by these or
suchlike Medicines; Its Outlet is not to be delaid, seeing while it is present
the Pain persists, and being let out is diminisht; and the Matter becoms
sharper by delay, and therefore more hurtful, and the Parts near it are more and
more corrupted by it, and so the Ulcer is made greater, and so more difficult
to cure; chiefly when the Vessels near it are corroded by that Matter being too
sharp, and sour naturally.

57. For the Aposteme that is deep is seldom opend of its own accord, and not
without a long time: wherefore, when Matter begins to appear ripe by the
Softness of the part affected manifest to touching, as also Redness and Pain
diminisht, as often as may be, the Outlet is to be prepared for Matter either by
a sharp Knife, or a potential Cautery, in the softest and lowest place of the
Tumor.

58. If the Sick admit of neither, or be delicate, or morose, endeavor to draw
the Matter toward the Superficies of the Body, whereby the Skin fretted may be
sooner perforated by It; for which use the following Plaster often approved by
me may serve, which

. The best Honey, Rie-Meal, of each i. one Yolk of an Egg.

Set them on a mild Fire, and stir them to the consistency of a Plaster: Spread
it on a thick Linen Cloth, and apply it to the part affected, daily to be
renu'd.

59. Figs also may be beaten and applied warm like a Cataplasm to the softest
and most swelling place of the Tumor, whereby the opening of the Aposteme may be
facilitated and promoted.

60. When there is much Matter containd in the Aposteme, diligently beware,
that all be not let out at once, but by little and little; because otherwise
the strength of the Sick is not a little prostrated. But when there is only a
little Matter, nothing hinders that all may be let out, which is fit, and ready
to run out; not pressing it hard, nor long, which is familiar with many
Surgeons, by which I never observd that the Sick get any good, but often
much hurt. When Matter sticks in a place remote from opening, or is only
carried in a crooked passage to the place of opening, then may it, yea ought it
to be forced out by a mild pressure of the parts.

61. VI. A way being made and opend for Matter we must now forthwith proceed to
Cleanse and Consolidate the Ulcer; to which end several Medicines are wont to be
given, all which I neither blame, nor carp at. I have often considerd with
admiration the laudable effect of Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of Turpentine,
Anise, etc. in this case, incredible to many, if a little of it be dropped in, or
anointed on the Ulcer. For shortly after the generation of new Phlegm is so
diminisht, that often by the help of this one Balsam I have in a few days
perfectly cured notable Apostem's after Inflammations bred both in the Breasts,
and elsewhere.

62. By this Experiment not a little to be estem'd, I judge the Cleansing and
Consolidation of Ulcers following Apostem's to consist in the Correction of
Acid, and Corroding Matter, cleaving to the Ulcerated Part, and corrupting the
Blood at least in part that is apt to nourish it, and turning it into new
matter: and this Matter adhering to the part affected is Corrected by the
mentiond Balsam of Sulphur, chiefly by its Aromatic Oil, and so abounding with
a Volatile Oily Salt; by which the Acid Spirit abounding with Matter, and daily
corrupting the Blood into Matter is not only dulld, but moreover mitigated, and
so amended, that the Blood flowing to it soon repairs the parts before
consumed, and finishes the last Consolidation.

63. What farther may be deduced from this Experiment to perfect Physic also in
other things, let both Ingenious and Judicious Physicians and Surgeons weigh
and judge. I had willingly added more, unless my great and toilsom Business had
denied me necessary leisure to finish this, and other things.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Generation and Separation of the Animal Spirits in the
Brain, and Cerebellum, or Hinder Brain Depraved.
1. THe Blood affords Matter not only to nourish and restore the Consistent and
Containing Parts of the Body, but to prepare and repair the Fluid also and
Containd Parts everywhere.

2. For a Volatile, anon to be called an Animal Spirit, is Separated from the
rest of the Mass of Blood in the Brain, and Cerebellum, as we taught in our IV
Physical Dispute Sect. 28, etc. which although it be not perhaps seen and
discerned with the Eyes of the Body, yet is it demonstrated to the Mind by
solid Reasoning, and that manifold.

3. This Separation of the Animal Spirits, commonly called Generation of them
is depraved 1. when there is None, or at least too Little. 2. When perhaps it
is too Much, or too Plenteous. 3. When the Spirits come ill Affected.

4. I. If at any time No Animal Spirits be separated, it seems not likely to me
that a Man can live long, but I think he will soon die being destitute of
Motion, especially of the Heart, and Breast, and Midrif.

5. It is manifest enough that the Animal Spirits are often separated too Few
from the Blood, and that sometimes by the Fault of the Blood, other-times of the
Brain or Cerebellum.

6. This is by the fault of the Blood, 1. if it contains little of a Volatile
Spirit in it self, because of suchlike Food used too long, either of its own
accord, or by chance, or by force.

7. 2. If it adhere more inwardly to the Mass of Blood, by want of the
Fermentation of Food in the Stomach, or any other thing together taken that
more entirely unites the Spirits with the Blood, such as I judge every sharp and
tart thing is; whither also 3. among evident Causes, great and especially
permanent Sorrow and Fear of Mind. 4. Sluggishness, and Slothfulness, and rest
of Body. 5. A loose Mind, and not busied with any thing; 6. An overlong and
deep Sleep, etc. seem to contribute.

8. If we could attain, and conceiv clearly, and distinctly how, and by what
means the Brain and Cerebellum are affected rightly to finish the Separation of
the Animal Spirits, perhaps we could with less difficulty determine, what ^aild
it, when this Separation is depraved and lessned by the fault of it.

9. Certainly he that granted that the utmost Substance of the Brain, and
Cerebellum was required to be open and open enough, whereby the most spirituous
part of Blood might pierce, and be as it were straind through it; as I judge
will grant that the same being more compact then is wonted is unfit for the
mentioned percolation.

10. The Coldness of Air, Water, or Snow vehemently affecting the head seems to
confirm yea to prove this Cause; from which not only a Stuffing in the Head,
but also a more sparing production of the Animal Spirits uses to follow. And as
we observe the Glandules of the Brain are affected and thickened in a Stuffing of
the Head by Coldness not always very great; so I think the Brain and Cerebellum
are ill affected when the Separation of the Animal Spirits is diminisht by very
great Cold compacting its soft substance, and thickning and straitning it in
its perous passages.

11. And although I deny not that the Blood also tending to the Brain may be
ill affected by an external great Cold, yea that it is sometimes clotterd then
in its Vessels; yet in such a Clottering of Blood there will not only follow a
diminisht Separation of the Animal Spirits; but most of all the motion of the
Blood hindered, and after that an Inflammation and whatsoever very grievous
thing uses to accompany such an Inflammation in the Head; which yet is not
always observd when the Separation of the Animal Spirits is hindered by cold:
whence it appears that the Head, and Brain, or Blood found in the Head is not
always affected after the same manner by cold.

12. And as External Cold (that is, that which produces cold in us, and is
found in the Air, Water and Snow) hinders the Separation of the Animal Spirits;
so Internal Cold (that is, whatsoever being in us breeds the Sense of Cold
there, to wit in the beginning of Intermitting Fevers) seems in like manner to
hinder the Separation of the Animal Spirits, whence they that are taken with
vehement feverish cold are for the most part unfit to perform the Animal
Motion, yea or any of the Animal Functions, which I judge is by vapors carrid
together with the Blood to the Head breeding cold, and partly making the Blood
unfit by its Tartnes to yield its Spiritous parts, partly compacting the
external substance of the Brain, or straitning its hollow pores, and so at
least in part denying passage to the most Spiritous part of Blood.

13. II. The Animal Spirits seem to be Separated more Plenteously from the
Blood in Men vehemently, moved in Body, and Mind especially with Joy and Anger.

14. The Cause of this Separation of the Animal Spirits increasd is to be
sought, and found sometimes in the Blood it self, othertimes in the hollow Pores
of the Brain and Cerebellum.

15. When the same abounds in the Blood without Spiritous parts, especially
incident to strong Drink turgid with a volatile spirit being too liberally used;
and by serene and meanly hot Air it is made more fit for the separation of the
spiritous parts; especially when an over-swift motion of Body, or grievous
Passion of Mind happens driving all things in the Body out too vehemently; such
as are Joy and Anger before others exceeding mediocritie.

16. By which the Blood is made not only most fit for a plenteous separation of
the Spiritous part, but the porous, Hollowness or sinuous Pores become more
open, and therefore more convenient the easier to transmit a larger plenty of
the Animal Spirits.

17. III. The Animal Spirits are to be thought ill Affected or Depraved, when
1. they are too much Stupid, or Stirred, or also wrong Moved; when 2. they are
Impure and Defiled by any thing mixed with them beside nature.

18. The Sleepiness, or too much Agitation or Inordinat Motion of the Animal
Spirits is most easily observed when the Animal Motion is together depraved; as
their Impurity and Defilement when the Internal, as well as External Senses are
thence depraved.

19. The Animal Spirits are Sleepy and unfit for Motion by a Narcotic Force
mixed with them, or by degrees bred in the Body, or entered in from without
sometimes by the Air inspired defiled with the smoke of Coals, othertimes by
Medicinal Food, especially spiritous wine making drunk, or Medicines themselves,
to wit Opium, and all Opiats wrong, that is, immoderatly taken or applied in
any respect.

20. The Animal Spirits are too much Agitated, and moved, both by the very hot
Air, and Food very Spiritous used too plenteously, but not in the greatest
excess, and by a continued Weariness of Body, Watchings too long Protracted, a
persevering solicitude of Mind, and over-vehement Anger.

21. The Animal Spirits are Wrong Moved in Giddy people, when often Objects
themselves, often the Place, in which the Sick stands sits, or lies, often the Sick
himself, often all these together are believd to turn round and to go in a
circuit about. Hither also is the Disease to be referrd, wherein the Sick not
only Insants: but also People of Years think that they are either actually
tumbling down headlong and fall, or at least are in danger of falling and
tumbling headlong, and ask, that they may be taken hold on and kept against the
feared tumbling headlong, and fall.

22. The Cause of the Giddy-Motion is sometimes External to wit an attent
looking at any Object turned round, or also an attent looking at things very
remote, or high, or deep: othertimes Internal a daily Turning about of the Body
it self; all which Causes are manifest: beside which sometimes several are more
hidden, as the ascent of Vapors, and Wind to the Head, by which joynd to the
Spiritous part of Blood, and carried together with the Animal Spirits into the
Passages of the Brain, and Cerebellum the Motion of wheeling about (by which
they are moved) is communicated to the Animal Spirits, and so a Giddiness seems
to be produced.

23. Sometimes also the Animal Spirits are troubled the Mind being vehemently
troubled, and smitten especially with a panic and vane terror, and being too
much agitated they make the Body stagger, and breed that fear of a Fall, of
which anon not yielding to any reason, or reasoning.

24. The Animal Spirits become Impure, both by Air impure, cloudy, and defiled
by several exhalations of Plants ill smelld of themselves, or by burning, of
man's and brutes Carcases, of Minerals kindled, or otherwise stirrd by force of
fire, and more or less partaking of the nature of sulphur; and by hurtful and
corrupt Food, in the time of dearth, sieges, far voyages etc. and also by the
Mind together, and potently stirrd up by several and often contrary Passions,
whence diverse vapors are necessarily raised in the Belly by several Humors ill
affected, and anon carried thence to the Heart, and thence to the Brain to
infect the Animal Spirits.

25. I. An over little Separation of the Animal Spirits may be Cured, 1. by
using Food abounding with much, and loosend Volatile Spirit, Strong Wine rightly
fermented, and sometimes Spirit of Wine rectified, either single, or aromatic.

26. II. By Promoting, or Restoring the deficient Fermentation of Food in the
Stomach, by Medicines proposed in Chap. 7. Sect. 26. and 33. among which the
newly mentioned Spirit of Wine is named as also any Volatile Salt taking a few
drops with a little Wine, or any other ordinary drink once or twice at dinner,
and supper: seeing that it also corrects all tartnes of what is taken in, or
otherwise corrupted in the body.

27. III, By Freeing the Mind from Sorrow and Fear, and that by reasons whence
soever taken, that will stir up, and recreate the mind afflicted.

28. IV. By Driving away Sloathfulness, and moderatly exercising the body.

29. V. By busying the Mind in serious matters, but also grateful.

30. VI. By diminishing Sleep by little and little daily.

31. When the head is ill affected by the external Cold of Air, Water, or Snow,
or a Stoppage of the Head be also bred, or the Defect of the Animal Spirits
chiefly urge, then I have observd the Sick to be happily and soon cured, if
whatsoever has pierced into the Head or any other parts of the body bringing
harm to them be driven out again as soon as can be, and that by Sudorifics both
spiritous and volatile taken at once, or, (which I like better) often and at
times; as being such that not only alter, and correct the Cause of Cold* and
other evils accompanying it, but do also amend the harm entered into the Body
Containing, and Containd.

32. To this end I commend this following Form.

. Fumitorie, Fennel-Water, of each ii. Simple Treacle-Water, or any other
Aromatic i. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac xx. drops. Oil of Cloves iii. drops. Mineral
Bezoard ss. Laudanum ii. granes. Sir. of red Poppies i. M.

Let the Sick take two spoonfuls of this Medicin, and expect a Sweat being
meanly coverd; which he may facilitate, and get what he desires, if he always
take a little of it in half an hours space, till the sweat break forth: for
then he may use it more seldom and sparingly; using moreover a little of pure
broth, or mixed with a little wine, whereby his Strength may be recreated, and
made fitter to bear a Sweat longer. For nothing so much helps the Sick, as a
Sweat continued mildly a while; which Experience has often taught me.

33. When the natural, and sufficient Separation of the Animal Spirits is
hindered by an Internal or Feverish Cold, or any other without a feverish fit
often seizing on Men, then the desired Separation of the Animal Spirits so
useful, and necessary to man's felicity is restored sooner, or more slowly by
such a Sudorific, as is newly mentiond rightly used, the Sweat coming forth one
while sooner, another while latter.

34. For by the help of this Spiritous, and volatile, and also Aromatic medicin,
or one like it the Vapors and Wind that produce the hurt and troublesome Cold in
man, and Srupidness of all the Senses, and Dullness of Motion are discust.

35. They who let Blood while such an external, or internal Cold urges, or
think they can carry out the cause of the evil either by vomit, or siege, put
the Sick into danger of life, or at least of more grievous evils, as I have
seen done often by Men more verst in reading Books, then in observing the
Symptoms befalling the Sick, and therefore often hurting themselves as well as
others. So much can the Mind anticipated do by false prejudices, and therefore
unfit to weigh, and discern things equally.

36. II. An over-Plenteous Separation and Breeding of the Animal Spirits, may
be Diminisht 1. by Laying aside very Spirituous Drink, and in its stead
substituting more Watery.

37. 2. By enjoying by degrees more cold Air, such as the mountain, or marine,
especially Northern, and Subterraneal.

38. 3. By less stirring and exercising the Body, and so giving it to quiet and
sleep.

39. 4. By freeing the Mind from all vehement commotion of Joy especially or
Anger, and keeping it appeasd, quiet and almost idle.

40. And because all sudden change is wont to be together dangerous, there
ought to be careful endeavor, that the noted changes by degrees may happen in
the noted non-natural things.

41. And as the more open Cavities of the Brain, and Cerebellum destind and
ordaind to strain through the Animal Spirits do follow the mentiond errors of
Diet, we need not doubt, but likewise a Diet somewhat contrary to the former may
bring again, and reduce them to a natural, and laudable straitness.

42. III. The Animal Spirits Drowsy and unfit for Motion may be stirra up, and
freed from the narcotic force mingled with them by Volatile Salts, but such as
are very sharp, and all medicines endued with an aromatic biting, Pepper,
Cloves, Castor, Garlic, Horseradish, Mustard, Scurvie-grass, Hedge-Mustard and
suchlike often used in a small quantity, for example.

. Scurvie-grass, Hedge-Mustard Water, of each i. Tincture of Castor i. Oil of
Cloves 2. drops. Sir. of Scurvie-grass vi. M.

Let the Sick often take a spoonful of this mixture.

43. If any pretending Physician disdain the name of a Mixture, prepare a
Decoction after this following form,

, Galangal-Root ii. Horseradish Root ii. the leaves of Hedge-mustard, M ii.
Cloves ss. Boil them in Water and White Wine of each alike the vessel being
shut, in xx of what is straind, dissolv Sir. of Scurvie-Grass iii, Tincture of
Cinnamon i. M. for a Decoction.

Let the Sick lying in bed, meanly coverd use often in a day 5. or six
Spoonfuls of this Decoction, whereby if possible, a light Sweat may break forth,
to ease the Sick.

44. By the help of these medicines the Animal Spirits will not only be freed
from their Drowsiness, but even the narcotic force bred in the Body either in
length of time, or receivd in from without may also be corrected and at length
overcomd,

45. The Sick will be raisd from Sleepiness and Stupidness, usually the
companion of Drowsiness by potent external Objects sharply moving the External
Senses, and mean while not hurting their organs. So a great Light should be set
before the Eyes; a strong Sound should be raisd near the Ears; sharp Smells
applyd to the Nostrils, Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, of Hartshorn, and suchlike;
also sharp Spices, or Salts should be put into the Mouth; his Skin should be
rubd with rough clothes; his Body should be exposed to the Fire, and heat of
the Air, but not to Cold: seeing it is known that Numness is caused by External
Cold. Yet does it not follow thence that Opium likewise producing Drowsiness
ought to be esteemed cold, because the same effect may proceed from several
Causes, diversely acting: add, that Opium is bitter, being of a fat nature,
which they would have to be signs of Heat: which thing is properly to be
treated in Physics, of the possession whereof although many glory, hitherto have
I found none, who after the manner of the Mathematics compeld the assent of
those that differd.

46. The Animal Spirits being too much stird and moved may be composed, and
reduced to their natural, and mild motion, by amending, or removing the
Non-Natural Things occasioning too much motion: that is, by Changing the hot
Air into a little cold; by Diminishing the use of Spiritous Food, and in their
stead using, those that may breed Phlegm a little tough; by Granting rest to
the weari'd Body; and by Causing a mild Sleep by Anodins, and when the Matter
requires, Narcotics; by freeing the Mind from all anxious and biting
solicitude, and especially by resisting bitter Anger, and by gaining to the
Mind a pleasing tranquillity.

47. Musical Sounds will mildly reduce the Spirits too much agitated to a
decent, and composed motion, but Anodyns more potently, and at length Narcotics
used prudently, that is, by times and in a small quantity.

48. The Animal Spirits turning round may be reduced into their order, the
External Causes being removed, and Internal Causes being corrected; lastly, the
Spirits themselves being brought to some rest.

49. Let the Sick therefore cease to look at Objects turned round, more Remote,
High, and very Low, let them cease to turn round their Body: but rather let
them do all their endeavor, to get Sleep by Medicines often mentiond in this
Chapter, and elsewhere prescribed in convenient forms.

50. When the turning round, and Giddiness of the Animal Spirits depends on
occult Internal Causes, without the noted manifest Causes, then the Producing
and Ascent of Vapors, and Wind are to be hindered, or suffocated, or discussd.

51. Their Production is hindered by Medicines that correct, and lessen the
Humors peccant in Acrimony and Glutinousness, often proposed before.

52. Their Ascent is hindered chiefly by Anodyns, and Narcotics often mentiond
and commended.

53. They may be suffocated by a liberal taking Decoctions prepared of more
mild and grateful Aromatics.

54. The same may be Discussd by Oils made by distillation of the Seeds
especially, that are commonly called, and by Tinctures drawn by Infusion only
of any parts of Aromatic Plants with the Rectified Spirit of Wine, or by a
distillation following; adding both Syrups, and common Waters in a convenient
quantity to make a more grateful taste. Many of which Forms we have all over in
this Book for Beginners sake.

55. When the Animal Spirits with the Mind are troubled by a vain and panic
Terror, then, as long as he is in his Senses, endeavor, that that Lymphatic
fear so often deadly to many, be turned away by the weight of potent Reasons,
and Sleep anon banishing it be speedily brought by any helps, and so by
Narcotics themselves: for unless this be very speedily, in a little time Physic
will be late in preparing.

56. The Animal Spirits made impure by External things will not be purified,
unless they be removed; seeing that the cause, remaining, the effect remains.
Remove therefore the Air any way defiled, and corrupted Food, at least let the
Man shun them: who moreover should use Medicines amending, and expessing the
harm that is more, or less entered into the Body.

57. Where note 1. Harm receivd with the Air is more commodiously driven out by
Sudorifics, those taken with Food by Vomits and Purges.

58. 2. Medicines that Amend may then also be profitably used, when the mentiond
Evacuations are instituted: which also ought to be continued, after these
Evacuations are begun; as not seldom before they are begun.

59. Seeing that Volatile Salts are drawn from all the parts of Man by a light
Art, (of which therefore I conclude they consist) let it seem strange to none,
if I so often commend, and praise Volatile mild Salts among the Medicines that
Alter, and Amend the depraved Humors of Man; to which also I now deservedly
attribute the first place in correcting, and amending the harms by Air any way
defiled, or bad Food communicated especially to the Body containd. Nor doubt I,
but, as many as now through unjust prejudice, or mere petulancy blame, or laugh
at me so often extolling Volatile Salts, if any time they would experience, how
much those h^^ed Salts may do to preserv, and restore Man's Health that art now
so hated, or ridiculous to them, being confused with shame they would blush;
not so much because of my words, as the Gitts of God the Avenger despised, and
contemnd.

60. Lastly, When several Humors are ill affected by several Passions of Mind
somewhat contrary, together and potently agitating Man which very often has place,
and so, that manifold Vapors raised by their conflux and vicious Effervescency
in the small Gut are carried to the Heart, and Brain also, and defile and make
the Animal Spirits impure, then 1. the immoderat Passions of Mind are to be
Composed. 2. The vitiated Humors are to be Corrected. 3. The hurtful Vapors are
to be Amended, or Discussed. 4. The Animal Spirits are to be Cleansd from their
acquired Impurities. And how all these ought to be obtaind, is often told
before; where mild Volatile Salts may do very much: whatsoever many Physicians
noise and talk in this Belgia, being ignorant of most natural things, although
puffed up with an empty Title of Doctors, and the practice of some years.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs Depraved.
1. THe Animal Spirits being severd from the Blood in the Brain and Cerebellum
are every whither carried by their continued Marrow as it were in a Pipe into
the Nervs, not only to exercise the External Senses, and Animal Motion, but
moreover, at least in my conjecture, yea Opinion to temper any Humors, Choler,
Spittle, the Pancreatical, or Melancholic Juice, or Lympha of the Conglobated
Glandul's, and perhaps to afford the primary Matter to generate Seed.

2. This Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nervs according to Nature, if
I may be Judge, is Continual and Equal; but Changeable, and Unequal according to
the diverse Diseases of the Mind.

3. This Motion of the Animal Spirits is depraved, 1. when None, or Fewer
Spirits are moved through the Nervs then is wont; 2. When More, then ought, or
was expedient; 3. When they move Unequally, Inordinatly, or beside, and against
the Will to certain, or all the parts.

4. I. When No Animal Spirits are carried to the Organs of the External Senses,
or Animal Motion, the mentiond Functions of Seeing, Smelling, Hearing, Tasting,
Touching, and the Sense of Heat, as also of Motion in the Apoplexy and Palsy
cease all that time.

5. When Fewer Animal Spirits then are wont are carried to the same Organs, the
same Functions are observd to be Imperfect and Weak, in a trembling and infirm
Motion, not long continuing, when the Sight is weak and soon weari'd, etc.

6. No Animal Spirits, or Fewer then is wonted are carried through the Nervs,
sometimes by their own fault, other-times by the fault of the Nervs.

7. The same haps by the fault of the Animal Spirits, when they are Deficient,
or Drowsy, more or less: of which we have spoken in the former Chapter.

8. The Motion of the Animal Spirits to the Parts is Deficient wholly, or in
part by the fault of the Nervs, when they are Cut in two, Comprest, Obstructed,
(when they can be obstructed) or Closed.

9. The Nervs are Cut in two by any sharp things, that are apt to wound the
Body.

10. The Nervs are Comprest by Bands, hard Tumors, or compacted Humors, lying
upon the Nervs.

11. That the Nervs cannot be Obstructed, I even therefore think, because their
Pipes seeing they are continued to the strait Pipes of the Brain, and
Cerebellum, will receiv nothing into them, that is not exceeding small and has
first got into the Pipes of the Brain, or Cerebellum: Into which if any contend
that Vapors, or Wind may enter together with the Spirits and soon get into the
Nervs, I see not how and by what means the same can judge that the noted Vapors,
or Wind can congeal again, that they may there breed an Obstruction.

12. The Palsy arising by a cold Rain, whence the Clothes are wet, so
affecting this or that part, seems to prove that Phlegmatic and Watery Humors
abiding about the Nervs may moisten and perhaps so far loosen the Tunicles, or
Membrans, and hence the Marrow that it slipping down by a closing, renders its
Pipes unfit to let the Animal Spirits pass through, so that sometimes one,
sometimes more parts do more or less lose Motion, and Sense.

13. II. More Animal Spirits are moved through the Nervs, then the External
Senses, or Animal Motion required to their perfection, 1. By reason of a
vehement Motion of Mind, much vexing and molesting Man, especially immoderat
Anger, Fear, or Joy. 2. Because of a continual and grievous Irritation urging
about the Head of the Spinal Marrow in an Universal Convulsion, or in a
sensible part of the place grievd, or in its Nerve in a Particular Convulsion.

14. This Irritation for the most part, and perhaps always arises from an acid
and sharp Spirit driven forward in the form of a Vapor into the rising of the
Spinal Marrow primarily affecting in a Universal Convulsion, and gnawing it
sometimes without a notable, sometimes with great pain; to wit, as it less or
more offends the part likely to be affected.

15. The concurring Symptoms considered and weighd with an attentive Mind will
confirm that these Sour Vapors rise either always, or at least most commonly
out of the small Gut.

16. Which same Symptoms will evince that these Vapors are peccant in an Acid
Acrimony, as also the Cure performed by most simple and known things.

17. The true Cause of a Universal Convulsion secondarily affecting, and
chiefly coming upon a Particular Convulsion seems to me the encreasd and
fierce, and by the continuance of the Cause provoking by degrees more encreasd
and fierce, at length the evil urging all over more obstinatly most fierce
Motion of the Animal Spirits by reason of the Part primarily affected; for
which thing all the Muscles in the whole Body are most vehemently contracted,
and breed a Universal Convulsion.

18. The same Irritation may be bred in a Particular Convulsion; 1. By a Sharp
and Acid Humor, or Vapor fretting the Nerves or Membran's, or Tendons, carried
to the Muscle laboring of a Convulsion. 2. From any kind of Prick of the same
Nerve, Membrane, or Tendon proceeding sometimes from an External, other-times
Internal Cause, as by a sharp Splinter of a Bone. 3. From any other Cause, as
an Inflammation, St. Anthonies Fire, etc. producing a sharp Pain in a more
sensible part of the Muscle affected, and especially the Tendon.

19. III. The Animal Spirits are moved Unequally, Inordinatly, and beside, or
against the Will through the Nervs to the moveable Parts in a Convulsive
Motion, and forcd Trembling, or Shaking of the Lims. For this troublesome
Trembling, though the Body rest and lie down, is to be distinguished from the
Trembling Motion, of which we spoke in Sect. 5. and which ceases when the Body
is at rest, and returns again the same being moved.

20. The Convulsive Motion whether Universal, or Particular, procedes from the
encreasd but alternat Motion of the Animal Spirits against the opposite Muscles.

21. This Alternat Motion of the Animal Spirits, gets an Alternat Irritation in
the Nervs carrying the Animal Spirits to the opposite Muscles.

22. The Irritation in a Universal Convulsive Motion, such as often occurs in the
beginning of an Epileptic Fit, (for a Convulsion is wont at length to succeed)
is to be appointed about the first spreading of the Nervs tending to several
Muscles.

23. The Irritation in a Particular Convulsive Motion, such as is often observd
in either Arm, or Leg, or elsewhere is to be placed about the rising of the
Nervs carried to the opposite Muscles of the same Member.

24. And this Irritation is altogether to be ascribed to a thing very moveable
and apt to pull at the opposite Nervs, and so to sharp and sour Vapors, most
frequently rising up from the small Gut and piercing to the original of the
Nervs.

25. A forced Trembling arises from the Animal Spirits driven forward through
the Nervs inordinatly and continually with some force to the Muscles of the
trembling Members: whether it be Universal, or Particular; whether the Body be
yet strong; or weak.

26. But the Couse of that Inordinat and Continual Fierce Motion of the Animal
Spirits is for the mo^^ part to be sought in the Spirits themselves inordinatly
agitated, and especially in a Universal Trembling; sometimes also in the Nervs
vexed with a continual but less grievous Irritation otherwise it would be a
Convulsive Motion, which I judge has place chiefly in a particular Trembling.

27. The Animal Spirits are inordinatly agitated by Wind and Vapors continually
ascending to the Head with the Blood, and together with the Spiritous Substance
of the Blood going forward into the Pipes of the Brain and Cerebellum, soon
after into those of the Nervs, and inordinatly, and impetuously agitating the
Animal Spirits.

28. That a Trembling is sometimes produced by a lighter Irritation of the Nervs
is manifest, because that sometimes a Convulsive Motion follows it, sometimes
ends in it.

29. I. Seeing the Nervs Dissected cannot be cured, thus far the Defect of the
Animal Spirits in any part cannot be repaired. Yet because for the most part
several Nervs are carried to the same part both to give it Sense, and Motion,
no wonder if Sense and Motion oft-times remain in any part one or more Nervs
being cut asunder in it, although not a little Diminisht, with some Stupidness
and Numness of the Part.

30. Motion may be Restored to the Animal Spirits through the Nervs comprest,
1. the Bands straitning them being loosned, or removed.

31. The over-Hard Tumors being Cured by Inciding, Mollifying, and Resolving,
or Ripening Medicines: of which we intend to speak elsewhere.

32. 3. The tough and compact Humors being Cut, Mollifi'd, and Resolved, or
Deduced, and drawn forth in the manner of imperfect Matter by Medicines
described in Chap. 40. Sect. 33, 34, 35, etc. 50, etc. Where I mind one thing
to be added, that Volatile Salts may be here externally used with great success,
if in the time of using them they be joind to Fomentations, and Cataplasms, or
be mixed with Ointments in a small quantity; whose incredible benefit such as
are honest and fearing God will wonder, and celebrate.

33. If the Nervs may be Obstructed, and be indeed noted Obstructed, Volatile
Salts will conduce before all others both Internally, and Externally used, and
often mentiond and prescribed by me in this Book.

34. Both Internal Sudorifics, chiefly Aromatic, and External Inciders, and
Discussers, among which I again mention Volatile Salts will Correct and Remove
the Phlegmatic and Watery Humors sticking about the Nervs, and too much
moistning and loosening their Membran's and Marrow; and if the same abound much
in the Body, Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues may conduce used by turns: whose
forms we have often set down before.

35. II. When the Animal Spirits are carried through the Nervs in greater
plenty, then ought, and should be, 1. By a vehement Passion of the Mind, then
it is to be composed, at least to be reduced to Mediocrity, and Sleep is to be
had for the Body, even by Narcotics, when the Matter requires, but used in a
small quantity by turns.

36. When the same happens 2. by a continual and grievous Irritation about the
Head of the Spinal Marrow in a Universal Convulsion, and indeed by (...) Acid
and Sharp Spirit carried thither from the small Gut, then 1. the sour Humors
are to be amended, 2. The rising of Vapors is to be hindered; and 3. Their
Acrimony is to be diminisht, and temperd; and 4. Their Expulsion by Sweat, or
Insensible Transpiration is to be procured; then 5. The Part affected by them
is to be restored, and freed from Pain; and 6. The over-Motion of the Animal
Spirits is to be restraind and brought to tranquillity, that is, a more quieted
Motion. All which how they may be obtaind, is often mentiond before, convenient
Forms of Medicines being added.

37. But when the noted Irritation in a Particular Convulsion is made in a
sensible part, or its Nerve of the Place affected by the same sour and sharp
Humor, or Vapor, then the fore-mentiond Remedies conduce, unless that then
Externals prepared with Aromatics and Volatile Salts may be together used with
great success; which likewise are often proposed.

38. But when the same Particular Convulsion arises from a Prick of the Nerve,
or Tendon, as it is known to be sometimes by the unskilfulness, precipitancy, or
accident, or troubled Mind of the Surgeon in opening a Vein, then most
speedily pour into the Wound the Oil of Turpentine hot with the rectified
Spirit of Wine, as Ambrose Pare in the Ninth Book, Chap. 38. wrote, was done by
his counsel with good success in Charles the Ninth King of France.

39. If this be done too late, or the Wound of the Nerve, or Tendon yield not
to this Medicin, the same is to be cut asunder cross-ways; seeing it is safer
for some part that its action should perish, then that the Sick should be
exposed to the danger of a deadly Convulsion.

40. So when the Nervs, or Tendons of the Muscles are pricked by sharp Splinters
of Bones, soon after a Particular, and at length Universal Convulsion with
grievous Pains succeding, then, if possible, the extreme and sharp fragments of
Bones are to be cut away; or, if this have been neglected, or could not been
done, and all incline to a Universal Convulsion, you must hasten to cut off the
part affected in the most commodious place about the Fracture of the Bone;
seeing otherwise the Sick must die of necessity by a Universal Convulsion.

41. When a sharp Pain raisd by an Inflammation, or St. Anthonies Fire, etc. in
a more sensible part of the Muscle, occasions a Particular Convulsion, then
diligently Labor, that that Pain be diminisht, as well by Internal, as
External Anodyns, or Narcotics also, and their Cause, whether Inflammation, or
St. Anthonies Fire, etc. be most speedily and pleasingly Cured, not omitting in
the mean time Medicines, already mentiond, useful to diminish and allay the
over-encreasd Motion of the Animal Spirits.

44. III. Seeing the more remote Cause in the Body of a Convulsive Motion, and
so of the Epilepsie it self differs not from the more remote Cause of a
Convulsion, unless in the manner of acting here continually, there by turns
fretting and irritating the beginning of the Nervs, no wonder, if for the most
part these Diseases follow and are cured with the same Remedies mentiond in
Sect. 36.

45. But a Convulsive Motion is wont for the most part to return by Intervals
sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, and but seldom constantly to afflict, and
then, to kill sooner not otherwise then a Convulsion, which is wont for the
most part to continue long.

46. A Rational and Dogmatical Cure of a Forced Trembling, depending on an
Inordinate, Perpetual Motion of the Animal Spirits made with force to the
trembling parts ascribed to Wind, and Vapors, mixing with them, and evilly
stirring them up so may be orderd, if 1. the Material and Efficient Cause both
of Wind, and Vapors be corrected by a convenient Alteration, and if it be
together peccant in quantity encreasd, be diminisht by a Purge and sometimes
Vomit, Vrin or Sweat; to which ends useful Medicines, and their Forms may be
found here and there.

47. If 2. the production of the same Wind, and Vapors be hindered by Medicines
often proposed.

48. If 3. the Wind, and Vapors already bred and everywhere occurring be
discussd, or compeld to fall by Medicines in like manner often mentiond.

49. If 4. The Animal Spirits forc^d to an Inordinate, Involuntary, and
Impetuous Motion by them be by little and little freed from them, and reduced
to a calm, ordinat and voluntary Motion. Whereof the first may be by the most
subtle, volatile and spiritous Medicines promoting Sweat, at least Insensible
Transpiration, and so expelling them forth; but the latter by both Anodyn, and
Narcotic Medicines us^d in a small quantity, and at times: which two will not be
inconvenient, but expedient to be given together, seeing that so these
commended Medicines do the easier come to the place of the Animal Spirits, and
hurtful Vapors and Wind, and the more happily absolv both Works, whereof you may
find many Forms in this Book.

50. The Trembling which is bred by a lighter irritation of the Nervs carrying
the Animal Spirits to the Muscles, may be Cured the same way as a Convulsive
Motion; of which we have already spoken.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Over-perfecting of Blood in the Spleen depraved.
1. THat Blood is carried to the Spleen through the Arteries, and the Animal
Spirits through the Nervs; and that Blood is again carried out from the Spleen
through the Veins, and Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels may be known by
Anatomical Experiments to any that Desire, and cannot be unknown to those that
put their hand to the Work, and to ingenuous Searchers of Truth.

2. And seeing that beside the 4 fold already mentiond kinds of Vessels there
are no other observd hitherto, that can carry any thing to the Spleen, or out
of the Spleen the natural Function of the Spleen is deservedly drawn from them,
and chiefly according to that, in which they have receivd something peculiar.

3. Like as we have long ago cleard by ocular inspection that the Short vessel
so called is not a different Vessel from the branches of the Vein of the Spleen
carrying Blood back from the Spleen and Stomach, but carrying it to neither.

4. The admirable Texture of the Nervous Fibers about the Ingress of all the
Vessels in the Spleen, detected in this age by diligent Anatomists, does not a
little confirm my Conjecture of making the Blood there (...) s^btil and
spiritous, and so over-perfecting it by the Animal Spirits plenteously coming
thither.

5. For seeing that the Spleen neither servs for Sense, nor Motion, it receivs
the Animal Spirits in a notable plenty for an other end: and for what other
benefit, unless that they be joynd to the Blood flowing thither, and be
entirely mixed, and that they make it more subtle and spiritous then is wont,
that is, more perfect, and so over-perfect then the rest of the Blood which is
already perfect?

7. Nor hinders it, that some cut out the Spleen from living Dogs: for any
Creature may live, although its blood be not very spiritous. For the Spleen
seems not given to Creatures so simply for life, as for a more commodious life;
as the Lungs together with the right Ventricle of the Heart are given to such
only as Breath. Add that it is not yet manifest, whether the Dogs can long
survive so without any detriment to their health.

7. I therefore imagine this over-perfection of Blood absolvd in the Spleen not
as yet overthrown, but to be required, and depending on the Animal Spirits, is
depraved when it is either Diminisht, or also often Encreast, seeing that Virtue
consists in mediocrity.

8. When the over-perfection of Blood in the Spleen is Diminisht, there is
fear, least the whole Mass of Blood become by degrees very Glutinous and Tough;
such as we so often observe wonderful Crusty in this Belgia, and too much
cohering in its superficies, so that it can scarce be divided with a sharp
knife; as on the contrary, when the same over-perfection of Blood is Encreast,
there is fear, least the Universal Blood becorn less Consistent, and do not
enough conjoyn, and cohere; unless on the contrary it be counterveild with a
tart-like Sour humor, on which its natural Coagulation seems chiefly to depend.
For this very cause I judge that the Blood of the Spleen is joynd in the Liver
not to Lympha going forward with the Descending Blood to the Heart, and
carrying with it the Sour and Tart parts of the Humors, but to Choler carried
with the Ascending Blood to the Heart, and hindering the Consistency of Humors.

6. This over-perfection of the Blood of the Spleen brought by Me upon the
stage seems to be Dinimisht 1. by the Defect of the Animal Spirits as well
Universal; (of which we have spoken in Chap. 41.) as moreover Particular in the
Spleen, because of its Nervs either Fewer, or upon whatsoever account hindered
in their work.

10. 2. By the Blood more Glutinous and Viscous, whence it is less apt to
receive its over-perfection.

11. 3. The over-perfection of Blood seems to be diminisht by the fault of the
spleen ill affected. For when the Blood coupled with the Animal Spirits pierces
through the Vessels of the Spleen, and receivs some change in them, there is no
doubt but that something is to be expected should come to it from the singular
Substance of the Spleen. For if its Substance be more solid and firmer, the
Blood will not only move slower etc. more hindered through its Vessels, but
besides its attenuation, and exaltation will be less pr^moted.

12. Contrarily the same Exaltation and Attenuation of Blood in the Spleen may
be Encreasd 1. by the Universal, or Particular abundance of Animal Spirits in
the Spleen following many or great Nervs inserted in it.

13. 2. By the Universal Blood Thinner and more Spiritous by an over-immoderat
use of Spiritous and Aromatic Liquors.

14. 3. By the over-Tender and Loos Substance of the Spleen not only giving the
Vessels a free place, but facilitating the attenuation and exaltation of the
Blood.

15. The Diminisht Exaltation and Over-perfection of blood in the Spleen by
reason of the Universal Defect ^f the Animal Spirits may be Cured 1. by using
strong and Spiritous Drink enough fermented, and so the spirit of Wine, and
chiefly rectified, as well single, as A^omatical, mixed with a Volatile Salt.

16. A Particular Defect of the Animal Spirits in the Spleen by too few Nervs
carried to it is Incurable; but when the Nervs are hindered, they are to be
freed with subtle Medicines endued with an abstersive quality, which nowhere is
more evident, then in Volatile Salts, hitherto so little known to the great
prejudice of mortals, and therefore so seldom used.

17. 2. Nothing does so cut and amend over-Glu^inous, Viscous and Tough Blood,
as any Volatile Salt daily used at any time, but chiefly at dinner, and supper
with wine, or any other convenient liquor.

18. 3. The over-solid and firm Substance of the Spleen may be made looser and
more tender by the so often mentiond Volatile Salts and more mild Aromatics
continued for a longer time: seeing every chronical and continued disease
arises from a Phlegmatic Humor, at least has it conjoind to its Cause, which
yields easier, sooner, and safer to no remedy, then to a Volatile Salt used
according to art.

19. But The Encreasd Exaltation of Blood in the Spleen 1. because of a
Universal abundance of the Animal Spirits in the universal body may be Cured by
Medicines somewhat Tart often used according to art in a small quantity, and by
abstaining from the daily and notable use of too Strong Drink, and so all
Spiritous Liquors.

20. The same when it proceeds only from great Nervs carrid to the Spleen, I
see not how the forementiond Medicines may be safely enough used, unless in the
least quantity.

21. 2. The same Exaltation of Blood in the Spleen encreasd because of its over
Thinness and Spiritousness by the more immoderate use of Spiritous and Aromatic
Liquors may be cured, partly by bidding adieu by little and little to an
immoderat use of these things noted, partly by using wisely somewhat Tart
Medicines and Sauces.

22. 3. The same Exaltation encreasd because of the over Thin and Loos
Substance of the Spleen, may be Cured, if possible, by both internal, and
external Medicines somewhat tart often mentiond by me long enough used.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Generation of Choler depraved.
1. I Now begin to treat of the Place and Manner of the Generation or
Separation, as also the Use, and true Manner of the Motion of Choler, with the
Depravations, Causes and Cure of each, a matter indeed, before all others
perhaps even now obscure in Physic and therefore hard, and full of differences
and contradictions.

2. I thought in my 6th Physical Disputation Sect. 36. according to Experiments
then known to me, that Choler was bred of the parts of Blood most like to it
carried through the Cystic Arteries to the Bag of Choler, and by degrees
piercing into the Cavity it self through the Pores of the same Coat, and there
soon turning into the same nature with the rest of Choler.

3. I judged the same Choler was driven forward out of its Bag through the
Cystic Passage into the Common Passage so called, hence partly through that of
the Guts to the small Gut, partly through that of the Liver to the branches of
the Port and Hollow Vein, thence together with the ascending Blood to the Heart
for notable Uses proposed in the same Disputation, and more largely to be
proposed here in these following Chapters.

4. Against these my thoughts of the Rising, Motion and Use of Choler several
things are sought out, and invented by diverse or occurring of their own accord
the experiments and arguments are brought into public; the most whereof do not
so much evince them of falsity at least as much as I can judge, as render them
dubious; one excepted, of which anon.

5. Nor is the controversy moved against me publicly upon this matter elsewhere
only by Famous and Learned Men, but, which you may wonder, and at which mine
Adversaries rejoice, even here by some ^^^y Students seeking a little praise in
a trivial matter, shall I not say singing to themselves moreover a triumph
before the victory is got, war was not so much denounced against me, as brought
suddenly upon me not open, but coverd, and conceald, whereby some perhaps did
hope that I would be 1st surprised before I had notice of the contest
approaching, and to be undergone.

6. But, I being only addicted to the searching out of Truth, and to promote
the common good of m^n have learnd also being conquered to triumph w^t^ the
Conquerors* I was not in the least afrighted from my purpose with so many
troops diversely armd, but rather excedingly stirrd up and corroborated in
prosecuting the same more cheerfully.

7. And although hitherto I did hope that all, to whom I have bin in stead of a
Parent by a faithful information and manuduction to practice (that I do not now
mention evident testimonies of my love an^ benevolence) would be mindful of
their oath, o^ sponsion solemnly given when they were here mad^ Doctors of
Physic, being then put in mind agai^^ that they should account Me instead of a
Parent, an^ if they thought they had observd any thing less consentaneous to
truth, or the benefit of mortals in wha^ I said, or wrote that they would
courteously tell m^ of it as I often desired them, and mine other Auditors* Yet
was the contrary done here, nay rather their councils and arts by which some of
them did glory that much would be detracted from my reputation whatsoever it
was and my fortunes also, were made known on what hope of Promotion I
understand not, sooner to mine Adversaries then to me.

Therefore I being secure of the good event, when it was signified to me by my
Friends in the neighboring Cities, and anon by those that livd in t^is also
careful of me, and my reputation so called in question in what great danger my
fame seemed to many to be brought, that Physicians my own Students would carry
away the solemn and public desired victory of me conquered, and dejected, with
greater praise of their own name, I took care that the following Corollary
wherein their chief arguments were containd should be inserted in the
Disputation to be held publicly in the Physicians Auditory, I being President.

8. That neither 1. The defect of a Bag in H^rses, Hearts, and other Brutes; n^r
2. the insertion of the Cystie Passage with that of the Guts to an obtuse
Angle, and with that of the Liver to an acute Angle; n^r 3. the Ligature of the
Cystic Passage, or the cu^ting asunder the Bag, and the collection of Choler
(but m^re fluid, pale, and less bitter, then was taken out of the Bag it self)
in a Glass Vessel fastened to the Passage of the Guts do disprove the Motion of
Man's Choler out of its Bag through the Branches of the Hepatic Passage to the
Heart.

9. Against which Position of mine, my noted Academic Students invited to this
Banquet, disputed sharply in the 15th and 19th day of December, 1668. who,
otherwise then I, thought that both the Observations of Anatomists mentiond in
the Corollarie, all the Rules of Mathematicians about Motion, and the subtle
Rules of Logicians stood for them: and with what success that Fight was carried
on, Learned Men alone then present, and void of Prejudices, could and ought to
judge. At least I surviving that Fight am prepared to begin another Dispute at
any time to search farther the Truth, now much latent in this Controversy of
the true Motion of Choler, be it of what sort soever private, or public,
honestly to Discourse in Writing or by Word of Mouth with any.

10. But, that I may more from the beginning repeat this M^tter to a greater
illustration of the Truth, I confess of my own accord that among the Arguments
offered by many and communicated to me against my Conjectures of the Rising, and
Motion of Choler, I never met with any that much urged, beside those things
which Marcellus Malpighius, a Man for many Causes accounted Excellent, and not
only most diligent in unveiling the Secrets of Nature by Anatomy, but most
candid and courteous in refuting friendly and mildly, even to the Example of
others the Opinions of those that think otherwise.

11. He from his Experiments (which although I my self could not as yet reach
by the multitude of business, yet take them from so ingenous a Man for true)
says that the whole Liver consists of manifold Lobes, which are joind to
certain Glandulous Knobs; by which the extreme parts of all Vessels bringing in
and carrying out, that is to say of the Port, and Hollow Veins, Hepatic
Arteries, Nervs, and Hepatic Passage of Choler, and of the Roots springing from
the Bag of Gall are ended: all which, as being very small Vessels, although
unperceivable, yet seems it consentaneous to Reason that they are so, as he
admonishes.

12. Which things so observd, being supposed or granted, the Separation of
Choler may be expected in the mentiond Glandulous Kernels; as the same most
Ingenious Man very probably thinks that all Purifying, and Separation of the
Juice, whether Excrementitious, or Useful out of the Mass of Blood is had in
the Glandules only.

13. And although according to the Experiments of that Illustrious Malpighius
admitted, I seem at least in part to change the Place, and Manner of the
Separation or Generation of Choler hitherto believd and assigned by me, and the
Manner, whereby I judged Choler was moved, yet I see not that the Use of
Choler, which I esteem the chief thing to perfect a Body of Physic, and whereat
I aim, is refuted.

14. For although, his Experiments being supposed Choler be separated in the
Glandulous Kernels of the Liver, and some part of it be carried straight way
through the Hepatic Passages of Choler toward their Trunc to that of the Guts,
and another part through the Roots of the Bag to its Cavity, and thence through
the Cystic Passage to that same of the Guts, and the Gut it self: yet does it
not follow thence 1. that nothing of the same Choler passes out of the same
Kernels to the least Branches of the Hollow Vein implanted also in the Kernels.
2. That none of the same Choler carried through the noted Hepatic Passages of
Choler passes into the Branches of the Port Vein closly conj ind to them. For
it is neither proved hitherto by Him, nor any other, as I know of that Choler
is separated out of the Venal, and not Arterial Blood. It is indeed said, but
not proved by Him, or any else that the Port Vein does supply the Office as an
Artery; which being Hepatic, is not wanting but appearing.

15. Before I proceed to the Motion of Choler, I have one thing to admonish of
its Rising, even according to the Experiments of the mentiond Malpighius, that
it is to be determind twofold, the one single of Choler received out of the
Glandulous Kernels through the least Branches of the Biliar Hepatic Passage,
and driven forward straight way toward the greater Trunc; the other double of
Choler admitted through the Roots of its Bag out of the same Glandulous
Kernels, and anon carried to the Bag it self, and staying ^here a while, and
getting if not a new, then at least a farther change before it be poured out
through the Cystic Passage. Whence perhaps (as is set down in Sect. 8.) the
Choler receivd out of the Passage of Choler alone is more pale, fluid and less
bitter, then that which is gatherd in its Bag.

16. None ever denied, that Choler is moved to the small Gut, seeing it may
easily be cleard by evident experiments; but many deny that it is carried
upward through the Liver and the Branches of the Hollow Vein to its Trunc, and
so with the Blood to the Heart, as for me I do not doubt now to assert, being
moved with two Arguments especially, least I should be too long; whereof one
argues Motion through the Hepatic Passage of Choler to be possible, the other
that it is necessary.

17. None can deny that Choler may be carried through the Hepatic Passage to
the Heart, that knows there is an open way for it through this Passage, and
hence through the Hollow Vein which the Experiment made by me, and others,
described in my Sixth Physical Dispute, Sect. 51. proves, which is by thrusting
in a Pipe, and then blowing Wind into the mentiond Passage, out of which Wind
is observd by degrees to have pierced to the Trunc of the Vena Cava, and the
Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so to the Lungs themselves: seeing all those
parts are puffd up by that Wind.

18. The Jaundice demonstrates Choler to be necessarily carried out of the
Liver toward the Heart, not only out of its Glandulous Kernels, but also out of
its Bag through the Passage of the Liver; whether it be ascribed to the Passage
into the Guts Obstructed, as is the common Opinion of Physicians, or be caused
by the Spiritousness of the Universal Choler, and especially that of the
Cystica encrest, that is, elaborated in its Bag according to Sect. 15. which I
judge to be most consentaneous to Truth for Reasons often to be proposed in Chap.
46.

19. As therefore in the Jaundice, in the preternatural state of Man, either
all, or at least the most of Choler is manifestly carried toward the Blood, so
in a mean Health, and a natural State of Man we must wholly conclude that much
of it is carried thither: especially seeing not one solid and binding reason
against this Motion, is hitherto offered by any, as far as I know.

20. Now these things of the Rising, and Motion of Choler being changed after a
certain manner according to Experience, the Use assignd to it by Me remaining
still, let us see how many and what ways every one uses to be depraved; the
Separation, or Generation of Choler may be depraved 1. When it is more or less
Deficient. 2. When too Much. 3. When bred variously with a Vicious Quality.

21. 1. The breeding of new Choler is more, or less Deficient both by the fault
of Blood, and of the Glandulous Kernels.

22. This coms to pass by fault of the Blood, as often as the useful and
necessary parts that are required in it to repair, and restore Choler, are
entangled and detaind in it, and so hinder its Separation.

23. All Aromatics especially those that are bitter, and Volatile Salts, chiefly
those that are Oily do conduce to repair Choler.

24. The Contraries to Choler are Acids, and especially Tart, as also Viscous,
and Earthy things hindering its Separation.

25. The Blood becoms so 1. by cloudy and cold, and so North Air. 2. By
viscous, and tart Food. 3. By much and deep Sleep. 4. By sorrow and terror of
Mind. 5. By too much rest of Body. 6. By a more Costive, and sometimes loose
Body.

26. Choler may be Deficient by the fault of the Glandulous Kernels, as often as
they are less apt to promote its Separation: although, it is not yet evident,
what kind of ones are required to that end.

27. I have at least observd this, that Medicines, rendering the Blood fit for
the Separation of any Humor, do likewise render the Parts, in and from which
all Separations come, apt to finish the same Separation: whence I conclude that
there is such an affinity between the Parts, and Humors to be Separated in
them, that the Blood, and Parts appropriated to that Office are helped, or hurt
by the same thing: From which affinity I hope it will come to pass, that the
Nature of every Part serving to every Function or Separation will sometime be
found out by any called to it.

28. II. The Separation of Choler out of the Blood is Encreasd in like manner
sometimes by the fault of Blood, other-times of the Glandulous Kernels.

29. It coms by the fault of the Blood, when it abounds with very convenient
parts to breed Choler; and is not hindered by the contrary things noted in Sect.
24. by reason of all the External Causes, at least the m^st, and together most
desirable concurring for some space.

30. The Blood abounds with fit parts to produce Choler, 1. Because of warmer
and hot, and so Summer Air. 2. Because of Spiritous and Fat Food, and chiefly
abounding with an Oily Volatile Salt, such as are strong and sweet Wine, fatter
Flesh, the best Leavend Bread, stronger and bitter Beer, etc. Hitherto belong
all Sauces, both Aromatical, and especially Bitter. 3. Because of daily
Watchings. 4. Because of frequent Anger. 5. Because of vehement and great
motion of Body. 6. Because of a Costive Body, Choler being retaind in the Body,
or looser, it abounding, and seeking an Outlet any way.

31. Sweet and sugard, or honied Sauces seem to me not so much to increase, as
trouble, and stir up, and force Choler to make a vicious Effervescency: whence
often an hurtful, yea sometimes together deadly Vomiting and L^^s^^ss uses to
follow their over-use, and so abase.

32. The Separation of Choler may be encreasd by the fault of the Glandulous
Kernels when they have got a vicious, and new, or at least encreasd convenient
disposition to separate plenteous Choler by reason of the same fore-mentiond
primary faults of Diet longer continued.

33. III. Choler is bred with a vicious quality, when 1. it is more purely, or
obscurely yellow in Color according to its proper sensible qualities; more or
less bitter in Savor; more or loss sharp or ^oetid in Smell; in Hardness when
congealing into stones it gets a notable consistency and firmness: or, 2.
according to its common sensible qualities, it is sometimes more consistent or
fluid then is naturally; and therefore sometimes more glutinous, other-times more
liquid, that I add nothing of its changed, and already proposed plenty.

34. Seeing that both Colors, Savours and Odors are observd to undergo
incredible changes from most different things, I of mine own accord confess
that hitherto I cannot assign exactly their true Causes and accurate Reasons;
and would receive them with a glad and grateful Mind from any so happy. Which
things lying hid, yet to be found out by the multitude of Observations, and to
be brought to light by the help of Ingenuity, I wish the Royal Societies,
appointed by the Authority of Great Kings, and without doubt abundantly
instructed with necessary helps to absolve such a Matter, would not forbear to
take pains useful to the Commonwealth.

35. I am taught by the Observations of some years that the Consistency, and
hence Glutinousness of Choler, and often the other Humors in the Body are
Encreasd by a frequent use of Tart things, the same on the contrary are
Diminishd by the continued use of Volatile Salts and Sharp Aromatics.

36. I. The greater or less Separation of Choler Deficient, causd either by the
Blood; or the Glandulous Kernels of the Liver may be Cured 1. by Air Hot
naturally or by art. 2. By Food and Sauces abounding with a Volatile Salt and
Spirit, and especially bitter. 3. By Watchings a little exceeding custom. 4. By
moderat Anger. 5. By Exercise of Body somewhat to vehement. 6. By the Body kept
soluble, but not too loose, and fluid.

37. Among Medicines having experienced I commend a frequent use of Oily Volatile
Salts; as also of bitter Aromatics and chiefly of Wormwood, and suchlike any
way used.

38. II. The excretion of Choler more, or less encreasd, may be Cured; 1. By
more cold and Northern Air. 2, By Tart, Glutinous, and a little Spiritous Food,
and Sauces. 3. By Sleep encreasd even by Art. 4. By moderat sorrow of Mind. 5.
By rest of Body. 6. By keeping the Body somewhat Costive after Choler is purged
out by Rhubarb.

39. All Tart and Earthy Medicines increasing the Consistency of Blood may avail
here, whither all fat and sealed Earths belong, Bole Armeniac, and Coral, Pearl,
etc. In the use of which beware, least while you avoid one mischief you fall
into another, they are therefore to be used in a small quantity, and at times,
whereby so the Blood turgid with Particles of Choler may be degrees be amended.

40. III. The Savor of Choler being less bitter, may be corrected by frequent
use of Sauces, or Medicines mildly bitter, especially of Wormwood, and Wormwood
Wine made of it, and suchlike.

41. The Hardness ascribed to Choler, compacted into Stones may be Cured by the
Juice and Decoction of Grass, as also by the Spirit of Nitre as well pure, as
dulcifi'd used in Wine, Beer, etc.

42. The encreasd Consistencie of Choler may be Cured by somewhat sharp
Aromatics, and chiefly by all Volatile, but especially also Oily Salts.

43. The encreasd Fluidness and Liquidness of Choler may be Cured by a prudent
and continued Use of mildly Tart things, Verjuice, Quinces, Medlars,
Wild-Plums, etc.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Retention or Excretion of Choler in its Bag depraved.
1. SEeing that enough of Choler is always observd to be gathered and kept
during Health in the Bag of Choler in all Creatures that have a Bag (which if
it be not sent out through the Cystic Passage perpetually, then at least by
Intervals, whithersoever to be sent afterward) it is deservedly inquired into
the Causes and Cures of it Retaind, or thence Sent out beside nature.

2. Choler is too much Retaind and therefore accumulated in its Bag either by
the fault of it self, or of the Bag.

3. Choler is Retaind too long by the fault of it self in its Bag, as often as it
is too Glutinous, and so less fit for motion, or compacted into Stones, and
therefore most unfit for excretion: neither does the motion and contraction of
the Bag seem to be so potent, as to expel the Stones within it.

4. Choler becoms more Glutinous by suchlike Food or Tart Sauces, long used;
as also by cold and sharp Air; and sorrow of Mind by which the Juice of the
Pancreas especially, and hence the universal Mass of Blood, and anon all the
Humors become too Glutinous.

5. Choler is compacted and coagulated into Stones by a Lapidescent so called
by some, or rather to be called a Juice making a Stone, which I suspect gets
its strength from a Tart acid, seeing that Stones and Gravel are dissolved by a
subtle and sharp Acid.

6. Choler may be Retaind too long in it by the fault of its Bag, as often as its
Fibers become too loos by reason of an exceeding collection of Choler, or the
Animal Spirits become deficient in them, chiefly because of its Nervs ill
affected (although I think either of these Causes seldom has place here) or
its Outlet may be cl^structed by Choler compacted into an extremely Glutinous
Humor, or Stone.

7. The same Choler is sent forth too much out of its Bag in like manner by the
fault either of it self, or of its Bag.

8. By the fault of it self, when Choler is more fluid and liquid, by
over-using Aromatic, sharper and bitter Sauces, or Medicines and any kind of a
Volatile Salt; by which before all other things Choler is made very Liquid and
fluid, yea the Universal Blood also, and anon any Humor separated out of it.

9. Hither belong The warm and summer Air, frequent Anger, motion of the Body
vehement enough long continued and prolongd Watchings.

10. Choler is too much sent forth by the fault of the Bag, as often as the same
is very much provoked to contract it self; which seems to have place, when the
Bag is provoked by sharp and very volatile humors, and so with suchlike
Poisons, as Arsenic, etc. either first vitiously effervescing with Choler in
the small Gut, and sending suchlike vapors through the Lacteal Veins toward
the Heart, hence every-whither with the Blood and to the said Bag, or otherwise
carried thither any way, and corroding; or a Vicious Effervescency with Choler
is stirrd up in the same, whence the same Bag is likewise provoked to Contract
it self by vapors then raisd because of their plenty or acrimony.

11. The over Glutinousness of Choler may be Cured, by changing as much as may
be, the Diet mentiond in Sect. 4. into a somewhat contrary diet, and using
Aromatic, somewhat sharp and bitter Sauces and Medicines, and especially Oily
Volatile Salts; by the help of which I have often cured the toughness of Choler
exceeding.

12. Seeing it is hard to know that Stones are bred of Choler, no wonder if
their Cure seems an unheard of thing to many Physicians. Yet because, when
Stones are found in the Bag of Choler after death, the the rest of Choler is
like lees, and abounds with dregs and excrementitious setlings; such as I have
often observd sent out by vomit; I should think such are to be feared, least some
part of Choler grow into stones, whilst the other turns into such excrements;
and therefore Medicines that dissolve these Stones of Choler, as also that hinder
any Concrescency are then to be used.

13. Among medicines that dissolve Stones of Choler I doubt not to refer (which
I mentiond in one word in the former Chapter (...). 41.) the roots and herbs of
Grass, either distilld, or, which I prefer, boild or bruisd, and the Juice
expressed out of it, Sugar or Honey being added to make it pleasant; seeing that
it is known by manifold experience that Oxen and Sheep whose food in Winter is
hay, and have a stonelike, or gravellish crust compacted in the Passage of
Choler, so soon as they are again turned to grass in the month of May, are by
degrees freed from that disease; it being a sure argument that green and new
Grass has that force of dissolving Stones, that is lost, when it is dried into
hay.

14. The Spirit of Nitre also conduces to dissolve Stones, which therefore I
likewise commend in this case; and chiefly, after it is dulcifi'd and made mild
with the spirit of wine: which may be used safely to x. xii. or more drops, in
Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor, though Physical, and that often in a day.

15. Any Volatile but chiefly also Oily Salts will hinder a new Concretion;
being such as purify, and cleanse Choler, as I am taught by manifold experience.

16. If after a great collection of Choler, and exceeding distention of the Bag,
its Fibers are greatly loosend, I see not how they can be restored except
gradually, more mild Aromaties being used for some space as well internally, as
externally.

17. The Defect of the Animal Spirit is to be repaird by Spiritous Food used
prudently, that is, in a small quantity, or daily.

18. An Obstruction being in the Outlet or Passage of the Bag, and arising
from Choler compacted into a most tough humor or stone may be Cured by
dissolving that Humor or Stone by the newly made or purified Juice, Decoction,
or Water of Grass often taken, adding the Spirit of Nitre either single or
dulcifi'd, together with sugar, or honey to make it pleasant.

19. On the contrary Choler more Fluid and Liquid may be Amended, and its too
great excretion may be Cured by shunning Aromatic Medicines and Sauces, and all
Volatile Salts, and in their stead using any thing that is somewhat Tart,
Verjuice, Wild Plums, and their Juice, several fat Earths, Bole Armeniac, the
Earth Lemnia, and any that is Sealed.

20. Hot Air is to be changed into Cold; Anger into Sorrow; Motion of Body into
Rest; Watchings into Sleep, to which we must something give way.

21. As often as a great Irritation of the Bag of Choler, and a plenteous
Excretion of Choler is made by Poison taken in, so often the Acrimony of Poisons
is to be temperd all sorts of ways, yea it is to be expeld by Vomit or Stool as
speedily as may be.

22. Fat things before all others do Temper and Blunt the Acrimony of Poison,
whence sweet Milk is even in common use, chiefly hot, or warmd, Oil of Olives,
or of sweet Almonds, fat Broth, a Decoction of Figs, and suchlike, which taken
alone, or with warm Water plenteously, and often do blunt, dilute, and render
Poison taken in voluntarily, or by chance fit for Evacuation upward, or
downward.

23. When these suffice not, mild Vomits, or Purges may sometimes be given.

24. To Blunt the Acrimony of Poison, and to drive it creeping to the more
inward parts of Man forth through the Habit of the Body Opium, and all Opiats,
Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, Orvietanum, etc. conduce.

25. The vicious Effervescency of Choler both in the small Gut, and in the Bag
of Choler may be hindered, temperd, and at length allaid by the fore-mentiond
Opiats, especially Diascordium; as also somewhat tart earthy things likewise
fore-mentiond, the Lemnia and Sealed Earth, Bole Armeniac, Dragons Blood, Blood
Stone, Crab's-eyes, Pearl, Coral, Chalk, etc.

26. I add not the Forms of Medicines in every place, seeing it is easy for a
Young Physicians to invent new Forms, and such as may satisfy every Indication
from those many already before proposed.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Motion of Choler to the Gut hindered, and in special of the
Jaundice.
1. THat Choler in a most healthy state slow down to the small Gut through its
Passage of the Guts, is not only sufficiently proved by the Fabric, and
Structure of all those Parts, but by Choler it self found in the said Gut, yea
by the Excrements colored by it; that I bring not Arguments taken from the same
Choler in a Non-natural or Preternatural State sent forth bitter enough, and
that plenteous enough by Siege or Vomit.

2. The Motion of Choler to the Guts is sometimes hindered, when it is more
glutinous and viscous, and therefore more unfit for motion, of which depravation
we spoke in the former Chapter; or when there is a straitness in the Cystic
Passage, or in that to the Gut, because of which Choler is moved with more
difficulty, and so more slowly, and sparingly through them; which may be both
by Choler very glutinous glued to the sides of the noted Passages, and also by
the same growing together into a stone-like Matter, and in like manner adhering
by degrees to the noted Sides. For it seems not impossible that that may befall
Men sometimes, which is observd so often to happen to Cattle and Beasts in the
Winter Season.

3. The descent of Choler to the Gut may be wholly taken away by an Obstruction
of the Passage of Choler unto the Gut, risen either by Choler it self most
gluti^ous overlaying and at length wholly filling that Passage by degrees more,
and more, or by the same Choler lapidescent, and likewise stopping the whole
Passage.

4. It is commonly receivd that Choler wholly hindered in its natural Descent
ascends with force to the Liver, because of the noted Obstruction of the
Passage to the Gut, and is so carried to the Blood, and anon transferd with it
to the habit and superficies of the Body, and there breeds the Jaundice.

5. And although I suppose the Jaundice may sometimes be raisd by the foresaid
Obstruction, yet do I not judge that that Obstruction suffices to breed it,
unless Choler then abiding in its Bag especially get a new change.

6. And that I should be so persuaded, very many both Anatomical, and Practical
Experiments move, and in a manner constrain me; which I desire may be always
conjoind, as often as may be, by those who desire to do any thing profitable to
Mortals, and so to Physic it self in the Illustration of the more obscure
Natural, and Physical things. For it often falls out, that some Anatomical
Experiments seem to contradict Practicals, whence by their long comparison
together, and an accurat weighing of all the Circumstances, Truth the more
happily and profitably appears. But if this be neglected, our Knowledge is
rather obscured, and things now occurring to us less distinctly of themselves
are the more confused.

7. I have Observd 1. in diffecting Icterical People that the Passage to the
Gut, or that called Cystic was not always obstructed.

8. 2. I have Observd, that the Excrements are not always pale in the Jaundice,
although less dyed then usual.

9. 3. I have Observd the Jaundice often sooner bred, not only by a peculiar
Poison, but by a grievous and unexpected sorrow of Mind, then that any can
persuade either themselves or others, that an Obstruction could be bred so
suddenly from what Cause soever at length then present and acting in the
Passages of Choler.

10. 4. I have Observd the Jaundice Cured by Medicines, and that soon enough, by
the help whereof any (unless prepossest with Prejudice) can scarce believe an
Obstruction could be opend, or so soon opend. To this number I refer Cows Milk
boild with Hemp-Seeds, by the help of which only benefit I have cured several,
and known many of the Common People cured: Hither I refer Soap prepared both
with the Oil of Olivs, of Turnips, or of Whales; and in like manner dissolvd in
Milk and taken.

11. 5. I have Observd many Infants born with the Jaundice, or the Jaundice
soon break forth in them after Birth.

12. Seeing from these Observations it is manifest that the Jaundice may be
produced without an Obstruction of the Passage of Choler, it is deservedly
asked, what is, or may be its true Cause?

13. That this may be the more happily and easily searchd out, I will premise
the commonly known Symptoms that indicate the Jaundice instant or present, anon
I will join some others, noted perhaps by few.

14. The Compressive Pain therefore of the Heart so called, most troublesome
about the Lower Region of the Stomach, is wont more frequently to precede, and
also to accompany the Jaundice in the beginning Anxieties and obscure Gripes
concurring in the Right Hypochondre, where both the Bag of Choler, and its
Passage is.

15. The Excrements are usually white, or of an Ash color, and not diversely
dyed by Choler, as at other times; yea the Sick have more seldom a motion to go
to Stool.

16. By and by the Vrin comes obscurely red, and coloring a Linen Cloth dipped
in it of a Saffron Color.

17. At length there breaks forth in the Face and Neck, and more evidently in
the Coat of the Eyes called Adnata, constituting their White, hence through the
universal Skin of the Body a Citrine and yellow Color, yea sometimes inclining
to an obscure greenness; whence it is sometimes called the yellow, sometimes the
black Jaundice.

18. When the Jaundice inclines, sometimes a great itching is felt in all the
Superficies of the Body.

19. Among the External Causes I have often seen the Jaundice bred by the abuse
of Spirit of Wine, and of other strong Drinks, and the Dropsy Ascites
succeding, for the most part deadly.

20. All which being rightly weighed, I think whether the Obstruction of any
Passage of Choler have place, or such an Obstruction cannot be feignd, that
then Choler suffers a notable change, by reason of which it is moved and
carried more fiercely and plenteously toward the Blood, with which
notwithstanding it is less mixed then is wont to be, but only confused with it,
and therefore it the easier severs from it, and not only joins it self to the
Skin, and External Parts, but to the Muscles also, and Bowels, and infects and
dies them of its own Color.

21. For Choler being as it is naturally is mixed and imbodied not only loosly,
but most entirely with the Humors occurring both in the small Gut, and also in
the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and that so, that it cannot be more separated
by them: which Union is by reason of its Effervescency instituted in both
mentiond places with the Sour Humor flowing there.

22. Because therefore in the Jaundice that most entire conjunction of Choler
with the other Humors, and according to some parts thereof a Mixture, as also
that mentiond Effervescency seems to be required, if not wholly, at least in
part hindered, let us see, wherein the Cause of both these effects, yea and the
Cause also of the Jaundice may be known, what is required in Choler to perfect
each Effervescency, and what may befall it, as to diminish or remove it.

23. It is now known to all sorts of Persons, that any Effervescency happens
between an Acid and Lixivial Salt, or that which partakes of a lixivial Salt;
and in as much as it partakes thereof.

24. And whoever shall examine Choler, and confuse it as well with Sour
Liquors, as with Lixivial Salts of any kind, will easily see that Choler
concurs to stir up an Effervescency by reason of its Lixivial Salt, but much
temperd many ways in it; least there should be a potent and vehement, and so
hurtful, inslead of a mild and to Nature friendly Effervescency in the Body.

25. And if Choler has the esteem of a Lixivial Salt in stirring up an
Effervescency, let us go farther and see, how its Salt may be affected, that it
becoms less apt for an Effervescency.

26. Again it is known by Experience that the purest, and so sharpest Lixivial
Salt is most apt for an Effervescency; which same on the contrary howsoever
dulled becoms more, or less unfit for an Effervescency.

27. Many things Blunt the Acrimony of a Lixivial Salt, and 1. indeed Oily and
Fat things; which any Soap testifies. 2. Every Volatile Spiritous Liquor; which
the Salt of Tartar volatiz'd with the highlyest rectified Spirit of Wine
testifies. 3. Every Earthy Thing; which Coral, Pearl, Crab's-eyes, Chalk, and
many others testify.

28. Water promotes and facilitates the Effervescency of a Lixivial Salt, if a
little be joind to it; and it abates and allays the same, if much be poured to
it.

29. Fire alone sharpens and increases the Acrimony of the same Lixivial Salt;
whence how much the longer it is urged by the force and flame of Fire, so much
the sharper it becoms, and more convenient for a potent and vehement
Effervescency.

30. And that we may accomodate all these things to-our present Business, and
according to our Ability bring a clear Light to the Doctrine of the Jaundice
enough obscure, who ever shall attentively consider Choler, will easily own
that not a little of Oily and Fattish is mixed with it according to Nature;
because of which, as the most potent and effectual, and therefore that which
does primarily blunt a Salt Acrimony, the Effervescency of Choler either in the
Heart, or in the small Gut is never observd sharp or great during Health.

31. That something of a Volatile Spirit is mixed with the same Choler any will
acknowledge, who not only sees that Nervs great enough are carried to the Liver,
but moreover knows that it will be easily mixed with any thing; which would not
be, unless a Volatile Spirit were mixed with it in a notable quantity: for by
reason of its Oiliness accompanying a Lixivial Salt, it is more difficultly
mixed with any thing, to which as often as a Volatile Spirit is joind, it is more
apt to mix with any. And thereby the Salt of Choler is rendered more temperat;
whence also hitherto its Effervescency is also more mild in a natural state.

32. Something of Earth is found in Choler; yet not so much as many evilly
think, because they either work ill, or reason ill; otherwise it would be le^^
movable, and fluid, and less joining it self with other things, yea rendering
the same movable; as that is peculiarly manifest in the matter of Colors,
which is rendered more fluid, and apt to cast a color by Choler mixed with it.
By Earth although but little mixed with it, the Effervescency of Choler is
weakened, least it should be potent, and sharp in an healthy state.

33. I cannot pass by here with silence the gross and hurtful error of certain
Men in gaining knowledge of natural things by Chemistry: For they think all
things, that are in natural things, are manifested by Distillation only, and
that nothing is containd In them, that coms not off by Distillation; as though
Fire alone, as some wrongfully think, were the Agent, and that Universal, which
brings every change to Natural Things; which they who assert, do ther^y fully
testify how little they are verst in taking up Chemical Experiments; seeing
that infinite changes occur, which cannot be deduced from the Fire, and not a
few, that are advers to the Fire. Of which Matter I intend to mention more, if
at any time God give me leisure, and other necessaries to perfect that Work;
whereby I may communicate in public the Science of Natural Things which I have
ponderd in my Mind 36 years.

34. Such, and so great a Fire in man's Body by which the Lixivial Salt of the
Choler may be burnt, and become sharper cannot certainly be feignd by any of a
sound mind, no not in a stare most declined from that which is natural; seeing
that, if any examine the matter rightly, the primary Cause of a more intens Heat
that is in the body it self in a non-natural, or praeter-natural state is to be
required, and deduced from Choler.

35. I said the primary Cause of Heat in the body, whether Internal; whereby I
may distinguish it from any External Cause, which nothing hinders but that I
may call it either common Fire kept in with any kind of fuel, or by the Sun by
which that all the Humors and especially Choler become more sharp is known to
every one.

36. Therefore as often as Choler is renderd Sharper in man's body, and that in
its proper acrimony to wit consisting in a Lixivial Salt, so often that acrimony
is to be sought, and deduced from the External Heat sometimes of the Sun,
sometimes of common Fire.

37. I said in its proper acrimony, whereby it may be distinguished from the
Accidental, which happens by an Acid sharp acrimony mixed with it, which breeds
Choler sometimes Green, sometimes Black, to wit as a sharp Sour acrimony is more,
or less mixed with Choler, and constitutes a compound Humor although known only
by the name of Choler.

38. Seeing therefore among those things, which are found in the Body, and may
and ought to be referd to the Internal Causes, nothing occurs, beside the Sour
Juice that may render Choler Sharper, it is also very evident, to what the
Burning of Choler commonly more celebrated, then understood, or explaind ought
to be ascribed.

39. These being so premised, we must further enquire To what especially the
unfitness of Choler in mixing, and entirely uniting it self with the other
Humors in the Jaundice is to be ascribed.

40. That this may be more easily, and evidently manifest, consider that the
Jaundice is in a short while raisd by the biting of a Viper: whose Poison,
because it is wont speedily to absolv its work, is wholly to be judged very
moveable, and so subtle, yea of a Volatile and Spiritous nature.

41. The Jaundice often enough coming upon drinkers of more strong wine and
especially of its Spirit, because of the neglect also of other more solid food,
and chiefly when any sorrow of Mind has preceded, and remains does seem to
confirm, yea to prove that the Jaundice may be bred by a very Volatile Spirit
too plenteously mixed with Choler, and making it more Spiritous.

42. So that it seems not absurd or improbable to me, that Choler is rendered
over-Spiritous when it causes the Jaundice, sometimes by the most potent and
spiritous Poison of Vipers in a short time, sometimes stronger Drink daily used,
and for a longer time, and less apt to effervesce with Acids conveniently, and
hence most entirely to join it self with the other Humors.

43. But some attentive to this matter may say, If Choler may be so changed by
the Poison of a Viper, or any other thing or too strong Drink, that the
Jaundice may be bred without an Obstruction in the Passages of Choler, Choler
will not cease at least to be carried to the small Gut; from which although a
less and weaker Effervescency with the Juice of the Pancreas happens there, why
are not the Excrements at least colored by the same, as it is wont to be in
other causes?

44. To which difficulty that I may give satisfaction, I Answer 1. that in
every Jaundice the Excrements are not equally white, and therefore less died
with the yellow color of Choler: whence I judge sometimes more, sometimes less of
Choler is also mixed with the Excrements in the Jaundice, by which they are
More, or less died.

45. I Answer 2. that in every Jaundice, Choler is not alike evilly affected;
whence thus far also it may be mixed more or less with the Excrements, and die
the same.

46. I Answer 3. That the Excrements should be rightly died by Choler, there is
required a previous and sufficient Effervescency of the same with the Juice of
the Pancreas, because of which its diverse parts separate from each other, and
having a Tincture are joind to the Excrements.

47. I Answer 4. If during the Jaundice Choler be more Spiritous, and volatile,
and therefore more fluid and moveable, the same may more easily pierce out of
the glandulous kernels of the Liver through its smallest Passages to the roots
of the Hollow Vein and with the Blood to the Heart; chiefly, if the Passage of
Choler to the Gut being provoked is more narrowly Contracted or sometimes also
Obstructed by the same Choler more spiritous; wherefore the assault being made
to the Liver, Choler may persist in the same, its ordinary, though great way,
toward the small Gut being neglected.

48. For it may come to pass, that, if the Passage of Choler to the Gut be not
wholly obstructed, it may at least be straightened by Phlegm made more viscous
chiefly after a grievous Sorrow, covering it any way; or the same Passage may
be irritated to a more strait contraction of it self by Choler made more
Spiritous, and therefore turgid and effus'd out of its Bag; because of which a
free passage to the Gut is denied it, and therefore almost all of it is carri^d
upward to the Liver through the Passage of the Liver, anon being carried with
the Blood to the right Ventricle of the Heart may be effervescent less then
usual with the Descending and Lymphatic Blood, and therefore may be more
confused, then mixed with the whole mass of Blood, anon every where departing
from the Blood may infect all the Parts with its color, and render them less
apt for a natural nourishment; wherefore either a Pining, or Dropsy may by
degrees succeed the Jaundice, unless it be soon cured.

49. And although I do not think that an Obstruction of the Passage of Choler
is necessarily required to breed the Jaundice, yet do I not see, why it may not
sometimes occasion the Jaundice, whilst it is its cause by stopping Choler in
its natural efflux into the small Gut, because Choler staying there may be
alterd, and if it be lawful to say so, may grow spiritous both with a greater
access of the Animal Spirit, and farther exaltation and attenuation of the
parts constituting it.

50. This even thence seems to be evident, because that an exceeding Anxiety is
wont to be felt by many in that right hypochondre (before they have the
Jaundice) where the insertion of the Passage of Choler into the small Gut is
observd to be, sometimes a grievous Sorrow, or the abuse of Phlegmatic Food
preceding.

51. By Sorrow All the Humors are wont to become glutinous and viscous,
especially in the small Gut, and indeed because of the Juice of the Pancreas
thereby made more tart.

52. But whence-soever Phlegm becoms glutious and viscous, the same is apt to
cover and obstruct the Orifice of the Passage of Choler into the small Gut, and
so hinder the descent and outlet of Choler; wherefore a Narrowness will be
stirrd up there by Choler putting forth its force against the noted Phlegm, and
producing Wind out of it, whilst the remainder acting upon it self is
attenuated, becoms Spiritous and at length stirs up the Jaundice.

53. From what I have already mentiond methinks I have found and described no
improbable manner and account of the breeding of the Jaundice without a
necessary Obstruction of the Passage of Choler into the Gut, to wit the encreas
d Thinness and Spiritousness, and therefore unaptness of Choler to be rightly
and enough effervescent; which I have therefore noted in Choler, because it is
observd then not so much to be mixed, as confused with the Blood.

54. Let us further see, whether the usual and forenoted Symptoms of the
Jaundice may be deduced from its fore-assign'd Cause; lastly, whether its noted
Cure agree with the same?

55. The Cause of a compressive Pain of the Heart is the same, which I said in
Sect. 52. was the cause of Anxieties raisd about the lower region of the
Ventricle in the small Gut, Glutinous Phlegm being there gatherd and in part
rarefi'd into Wind, stretching open, vexing and pressing the Containing Parts.

56. The Gripings in the right Hypochondre are to be ascribed to an Acid Humor
of the Pancreas less broken and so more pure by Choler meeting it less, and
putting forth its harm more potently, and pricking and griping the Sensible
Parts.

57. The Excrements are less died then is wont both by Choler more sparingly
approaching it and by the same less effervescent, and therefore carrying less of
its dying parts to color them.

58. The Sick have less motion to Stool by reason of the same Cause, and Choler
less sharp.

59. The Urine is obscurely Red by reason of plenteous and deeply colored
Choler mixed with it.

60. A different Yellow Color arises in all but chiefly the most tender part
of the Skin, such as is that of the Face, Neck, Hands; yea in the whole Flesh
from the same Choler less effervescent also in the Heart by reason of its
encreasd Spiritousness, and more entire Union of its parts, therefore less
mixing it self with the Blood, and rather only confused with it, and therefore
adhering everywhere to the noted Parts, while it flows through with it, and
coloring them with its Yellow color sometimes more pale, sometimes more
obscure, and sometimes inclining to greenness.

61. When the Jaundice declines an Itching is felt in the Superficies of the
Body by reason of an effervescency everywhere raisd again and somewhat sharp
vapors thence breaking forth, and mildly gnawing the sensible Parts. For it
cannot be, but, that a more potent Effervescency, then was before, of Choler
everywhere at its meeting with the Juice of the Pancreas and Lympha, yea with
the Blood it self more sour then is wont (which I remember I have observd in
the dissection of one dead of the Jaundice) should be stird up after that it is
corrected by the use of convenient Medicines, not only that which is in its Bag,
in which much of it is Gatherd, but also in the Universal mass of Blood, with
which it is consus'd, as also with all the containing and solid Parts, to which
it adheres; by which therefore Vapors somewhat sharp may be raisd, which being
carried to the sensible Parts, and especially the Skin do there cause an
Itching.

62. What is aforesaid may be confirmd more by the Cure of the Jaundice, which
is not to be neglected, but rather hastened, because commonly a Cachexie, and
Dropsy, or Deadly Pining succeds it.

63. The Cure of the Jaundice may consist here in that 1. the more Remote
Causes, Sorrow of Mind, the abuse of Viscous Food, or of Stronger Drink be
removed. That 2. the Mean Causes, Glutinous Phlegm covering, or obstructing the
Passage of Choler, as often as it has place, or any kind of Poison changing and
vitiating Choler, be corrected and carried out. That 3, the nearest Cause,
Choler corrupted and vitiated, to wit over-Spiritous, and rendered more unfit
for a right Effervescency be amended, and again carried down to the Gut. That
4. lastly, the ill-favourd color of the Skin be Separated, and the natural
Color restored.

64. I. Sorrow of Mind is overcom'd and removed by rightly reasoning about any
troublesome matters, and by confirming, and hardening the Mind to bear and suffer
stoutly any adversity.

65. The abuse of Glutinous Food is by degrees to be changed, and in its stead
other Food less Glutinous is to be used; therefore Fishes and especially
Seafish is to be shund; as also the extreme parts of Living Creatures: and
somewhat Sharp and Aromatic Sauces are to be used, Mustard, Horseradish, and
suchlike that correct Viscous Humors; whither Volatile Salts so often commended
by me are to be referd, and added to ordinary Drink, but most commodiously to
Wine, and used most profitably at Dinner and Supper; although they may be also
taken at any other time.

66. Stronger Drinks are to be daily diminisht, and at length wholly to be
omitted, and before all others the Spirit of Wine: Yet must we allow a little
Wine of good age and somewhat sweet, and so somewhat fat to those that are
accustomd for reasons to be mentiond anon.

67. II. I have often taught that Glutinous Phlegm may be Corrected and Cut with
Aromatic and Volatile Salts, whose use I also again commend.

68. When it is in part corrected, or to be corrected by the same means, and
Medicin Phlegmagogues often before mentiond and prescrid'd will educe it: yet we
will add a Form here of an altering and purging Decoction, by the help of which
or of one like it used in time, I have often in a short time Cured People of the
Jaundice.

. The Roots of Madder, Celandine the Greater, Smallage, of each ss.
Broom-Flower M. ss. Seeds of Columbine, Parsley; Anise, of each ii. Crude
Tartar i. ss. Boil them in as much as suffices of an equal quantity of
White Wind and pure Water, dissolving in xx. of what is straind the Sir. of
Diacnicum, of Succory with Rhubarb, of each i. ss. M.

Let the Sick take twice or thrice a day so much of this Decoction, as moves
him to go to Stool twice, or thrice, and he void Choler together with Phlegm.

69. As often as the Jaundice is bred by the Poison of a Viper, or any other
whatsoever, so often all Sudorifics abounding with a Volatile Salt do conduce to
Correct and Expel it, as being such as satisfy to both Indications; nor is
Treacle here mentiond without cause, containing the Troches of Vipers in it,
and several other things prepared of Vipers, abounding with a Volatile Salt.

70. Hither relates Diaphoretic Antimony taken to xv Grains, and which is much
better Mineral Bezoard taken to ss. in any Liquor.

71. Hither belongs the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or any made out of any part
of a living Creature by Distillation, and if it be more potent sometimes used to
v or vi drops or grains in a convenient Liquor. For Example;

. Old Treacle ii. Mineral Bezoard ss. Salt of Hartshorn 4 drops. or Sp. of
Salt Ammoniac v drops. Sir. of Red Poppies, Fenel-Water, of each ss.
Carduus-Water i. M. for a Draught to be taken at once; which being taken, let
the Icteric Person be meanly coverd, whereby a Sweat may be promoted.

72. If the Sick had rather take a more liquid Sudorific at times and by
Spoonfuls, and so by little and little expect a Sweat, let him often use the
following Mixture, by the help of which a mild Sweat may be stird up.

. Fumitory-Water iii. Simple Treacle-Water i. Tincture of Saffron ii. Laudanum
4 Grains. Salt of Hartshorn i. Mineral Bezoard ss. Sir. of Carduus i. ss. M.

73. If the Form of a Decoction please any better, the following Decoction or
one like it may be prescribd for him, which

. The Root of Vipers-Grass i. of Master-wert ss. the Root of Juniper-Wood ii.
of Sassafras ss. the Leaves of Carduus, Scabious, Scordium, of each M. i.
Juniper Berries ii. the Seeds of Columbine, Nettles, Shavings of Hartshorn, of
each iii. Boil them according to Art in pure Water dissolving in xxx. of what
is straind Sir. of Carduus iii. Treacle-Water of any kind i. ss. Salt of Tartar
Vitriolated ii. M.

Let the Sick take as much of this Decoction together or only at times, as is
requird to drive forth a sweat mildly; which afterward not coming forth, Urin
is voided plenteous enough, which likewise is wont to help.

74. III. The depraved and vitiated, and too Spiritous Choler of such as have
the Jaundice may be Amended chiefly by Oily and Fat things, by the help of
which the aptness of Choler for a right Effervescency seems moreover to be
restored.

75. So I have cured several, and seen many cured of the Jaundice by the help
of Hemp Seed alone boild till about its cracking in Cows Milk also fat, and
then straind, and taken twice, or thrice a day to v or vi Ounces, as I mentiond
before in Sect. 10.

76. So I have several times cured the Jaundice happily by any Soap about i.
being dissolvd in hot Milk, and sweetened with a little Sugar, used twice, or at
least once a day after I had premised Medicines which were mentiond before in
Sect. 68.

77. I did indeed formerly think that Soap thus far profited in curing the
Jaundice, in as much as by its Lixivial Salt it dissolvd the Obstruction in the
Passage of Choler into the Gut; which seeing it cannot be said of Hemp Seed
curing the same Disease happily, I now am persuaded Soap conduces upon a
twofold account, both by reason of its Lixivial, but Fixed Salt, of which it is
made; and by reason of its fatness or Oil, with which it is prepared.

78. By reason of its Lixivial, but Fixed Salt, in as much as it being joind to
Choler corrupted according to its increased Spiritousness does diminish, and
correct its over-Volatilness and Spiritousness, by assuming into it self some
part of a Volatile Spirit abounding in it.

79. By reason of its Fatness or Oil, but thick, and in no wise Volatile or
Aromatic, by the help of which it blunts the sharpness of the Volatile and
Spiritous Salt ruling in Choler.

80. And by this double Experiment of the Jaundice cured by Soap and Hemp-Seep
it seems to be evident, wherein its chief Cure consists, and from which, or
which kind of Medicines it may and ought to be hoped for, and expected.

81. For the confirmation of this mine Assertion, I produce Saffron familiar in
the Cure of the Jaundice, and which seeing the Fat is commended, upon that very
account it favors mine Opinion; for Saffron is easily joind to a Volatile
Spirit, by the help whereof there is made an excellent Tincture, and Extract; by
which seeing that besides the Animal Spirits are wont to be brought to rest,
and tranquillity, yea perhaps to sleepiness, sleep succeding both mild, and
sometimes deep enough, the whole Matter becoms so much the more manifest.

82. Opium it self, the most potent Drowsy Allayer of the Animal Spirits, is
Oily and Fat, giving them a slow and difficult Motion, yea almost taking it
away.

83. The Volatile Spirits therefore may be fore'd and bound by Fat and Oily
things, and brought to rest and tranquillity; whence it seems to be evident, if
as often as the Animal Spirits joind to Choler in too great quantity, or exalted
in it, that is, strengthened in their Power and Efficacy, do breed the Jaundice
by making it more Volatile, and movable, so often the same Jaundice is to be
Cured, its noted volatilness and moveableness being overcom'd by Medicines that
are Oily, and do mildly procure Sleep.

84. This same seem the fixed and Anodyn Sulphurs of Minerals, and Metals,
mildly fixing and quieting the Volatile Spirits to confirm, being not without
cause much estem'd by the more Skilful Chemists.

85. The same Choler more or less corrected is again to be deduced to the small
Gut by Cholagogues, chiefly by the most commonly used Rhubarb taken any way;
wherefore I again mention the Decoction prescribed in Sect. 68.

86. IV. The ill-favourd Color of the Skin sometimes Yellow, sometimes of an
obscure Green in the Jaundice is of its own accord, and by degrees lost, and
abolisht, but is sooner removed by subtle Sudorifics, having a Volatile Salt in
them, whether a mild Sweat, or none follow. For it matters little, whether
Sweat break forth then also, or no, seeing that this Choler abiding in any
Parts against Nature may be cleans'd by the said Volatile Salts apt to promote a
Sweat, and may be driven forth with insensible transpiration.

87. For Example, Let the Party Sick of the Jaundice, whose Excrements are of
their wonted Color, whose Appetite is restored, whose Urin is less dyed with a
red Color, whose golden Color in the Skin is no more encreasd, but rather a
little lessend; let him, I say, use often in a day one Spoonful of this
following Potion, by which if a Sweat breath forth, a perfect Cure may be the
sooner expected; but if more of a red Matter, and a little after settling be
rather sent forth by Urin, the removing of the vicious Color from the Skin
must be expected more slow, yet as good.

. Water of Grass, Wormwood, of each ii. Tincture of Saffron iii. Sp. of Salt
Ammoniac 30 drops. Mineral Bezoard ss. Laudanum 4 Gr. Sir. of Fenel i. M.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Motion of Choler to the Blood through the Liver Depraved.
1. ACcording to the Ingenious Observations of that Famous Malpighius about the
true place of the Separation of Choler (which I approved of in Chap. 44.) I
judged in Sect. 16, etc. of the same Chapter that Choler also was carried from
the Glandulous Kernels up toward the Heart with the Blood tending thither from
the Liver.

2. I suppose this Motion of Choler toward the Heart is seldom depraved, that
is, removed, or turned, unless perhaps in the Disease Cholera; and why not so
often therefore deadly?

3. This Rage or Violence downward of the Universal, at least the most of
Choler, if ever it have place, may be ascribed, at least in my conjecture, to
the vicious Effervescency of the Choleric parts of Blood raisd in its Vessels
by Summer-Fruits, or other suchlike hurtful things taken, and carried to the
Mass of Blood; because of which if not all, then sure the most parts will be
hastened to the small Gut, and thence expeld with great force partly upward,
partly downward without a convenient separation of it self in the glandulous
Knobs of the Liver; unspeakable Anxieties of the Stomach and Gut concurring, by
reason perhaps of a new Effervescency also vicious and most troublesome made
with the Juice of the Pancreas in the small Gut.

4. This perverse and partly turned Motion of Choler cannot be Cured, unless the
vicious Effervescency of Choler both in the Mass of Blood, and in the small Gut
be allayd, yielding to Opiats only, as I have said in Chap. 15. Sect. 34.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Mixing of Choler with Blood in the Liver Depraved.
1. THe same Choler which is thought by me to be sent out of the Glandulous
Knobs of the Liver toward the Heart seems first to be mixed with the Blood
returning to the Trunc of the Hollow Vein through its Branches implanted in the
Liver, whereby the Vical Effervescency between the ascending and descending.
Blood may so be more happily raisd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart.

2. This mixing of Choler with Blood seems to be depraved, 1. when it is more
loose and less. 2. When it is more entire and greater. 3. When it is unequal.

3. I scarce think that there can be at any time just no mixing of Choler with
Blood.

4. I. I judge that Choler is less and more loosly mixed, and so rather confused
with the Blood, when it is very Spiritous, as in the Jaundice (of which we have
abundantly spoken in Chap. 46.) or very viscous, or earthy; whence it will be
more difficultly, slowly, and so more imperfectly and less united to the Blood.

5. II. I judge that Choler is more, and closer mixed with the Blood, when it is
more salt and sharp, and perhaps fatter: which seems to be confirmd by Burning
Fevers.

6. III. Choler is Unequally mixed with the Blood in the Liver, when it is not
Homogeneal, but Heterogeneal, consisting of diverse parts, some sharper, some
duller; which I think has place in the beginning of the Jaundice, and other
cases as yet not enough observd; for we get different Choler often enough out of
the same Bag.

7. Whilst we here describe Diseases as yet not enough observd and searchd out
by Practitioners, no wonder if their Signs be as yet uncertain, and several
other things thereto belonging be even now obscure, which sometime may be found
and determind by the diligence of others: mean while we communicate those
things, which we hope may serve the more happy Wits.

8. I. We gave you the Cure of Choler peccant in spiritousness encreasd in
Chap. 46. Sect. 73, etc.

9. The Cure of Choler peccant in viscousness encreasd may be most happily
instituted with a continued use of any more sharp Aromatics, and Volatile Salts.

10. Choler more Earthy and prone to be Lapidescent may be cured with the
dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre, some drops of it being for some time often in a day
taken in Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor.

11. Choler too salt and sharp may be Cured, sometimes by Oily, sometimes by
Viscous, sometimes by Spiritous, sometimes by Acid Things, but more mild: which
seeing they differ much among themselves, the Physician will need prudence,
that, according to the diversity of the other Humors then being together in the
Body, the most convenient Medicines be selected and used. Whence it is no
wonder, if all Physicians have not always the same success, although they use
the same Medicines, but not at the same time, as neither in the same Diseases,
or Causes: whose determination depends on a Practical Judgment rightly
administering every Remedy for every Discase in its own time, place, and measure.

12. Choler peccant in Fatness encreasd may be Cured both by more temperd Acid;
and by a more pure Lixivial Salt of Wormwood, Carduus, etc. and a more earthy,
Crab's-eyes, Coral, Shells, etc. and so by Aromatic, but chiefly bitter Plants;
and by them that are mixed of both, Salt of Tartar Vitriolated, Salt of Tartar
remaining in the Retort after the Spirit of Salt Ammoniac is drawn off, and
getting an excellent Virtue by the conjoind Spirit of that-Salt, and suchlike.

13. III. If the Sick be urged in short Intervals by different Symptoms to be
deduced from Choler and it only, and therefore it be very probably conjecturd,
that Choler is Heterogeneal and Turgid with different parts, great endeavor
must be made in an auxious and dubious Case; that, the parts of Choler which
harm Man being most declind from their natural state, be correcied, and amended
potently, and mildly; which is chiefly to be required from the then most urgent
Symptoms, and sometimes bringing sudden Death in its first, second, or third
access.

14. I wish therefore, that as many as profess the Divine Name of a Physician,
(that truly Devilish Envy, and therefore reproachful to Physicians, although in
(...) manner proper to them being laid aside and suppressed would bestow
profitable pains in searching out, and proposing the true Causes of the more
obscure Disscuses daily occurring in Practice, for the commen^ good of Mortals!
For I doubt not, but that then many things as yet unknown perhaps to any, of
the Nature and Usefulness of Choler may by degrees come to light, God
prospering liberal and ingenious Spirits. I at least do here sacredly profess
and testify before God, that I have for many years taken pains incredible to
the most of Men, whereby I might attain to the Nature, and Benefits of Choler in
Man's Body, and most profit both the Sick, and then afterward mine Auditors
according to those things, which are given me from Above: in which my Heart
void and free from desiring any vain glory, and so quiet, and assured of a good
event even now, rejoices in the midst of the many unjust Slanders,
Contradictions and Calumnies of several.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Preparation of the Glandulous Lympha in the Conglobated
Glandul's depraved.
1. EXperience confirms that Lymphatic Vessels come from every Conglobated, but
not so from the Conglomerated Glandul's: Wherefore I think that Lympha is
prepared in them, and that partly from the more Acid part of Blood severd in
the mentiond Glandul's from the rest of the Mass, partly from the Animal
Spirits carried through the Nervs to Them, and mixed with it.

2. But although I think the more Acid part of Blood is the chief Matter of
Lympha, yet do I not think that purely of it self, but diluted with Water servs
for this use: which then I at length call Impure, when moreover another part of
Blood being mixed meets the same, and renders Lympha less Acid, or Viscous, and
sometimes perhaps somewhat Salt.

3. For as the Serous part of Blood is naturally Insipid, yet in Belgia it is
found somewhat Salt in the half perhaps of Men, at least as much as I could
conceive by tasting the Blood let out of healthy or Sick People; so it should
not seem a wonder to any, if in the same place also different Lympha be
prepared: For an Acid Spirit is very hardly severd from a Lixivial Fixed, but
more easily from a Volatile Salt; such a Volatile Salt I indeed incline, to
believe is containd in the laudable serous part of Blood out of laudable
Choler: In which same serous part of Blood, I suppose an Acid Spirit occurs to
afford Matter for Lympha.

4. As therefore the laudable serous part of Blood may be in the Body, or the
same may be variously changed by External Causes, Air, Food, etc. or Internal,
as, the Motion of the Mind, or Body, Watchings, etc. so also Lympha may be bred
out of it sometimes more Sour, sometimes a little Salt, sometimes more Diluted,
and more Watery, sometimes more Viscous, etc.

5. As again the Animal Spirits may be Plenteous, o^ Few; Pure, or Impure in
the Body; and Their Motion to the Conglobated Glandul's may be Free, or
Hindered; so Lympha may thus far be bred not a little different.

6. As lastly the Conglobated Glandul's themselves may occur in the Body either
Whole, or several ways ill-affecied; even so by the fault of them the
Separation both of an Acid Spirit from the Blood, or from its Serous part, and
the Mixing of the same with the Volatile and Animal Spirit may be diverse.

7. Whence any may see how many ways various kinds of Lympha Vitiated may
arise, all which to prosecute and reckon in order in a new Matter would be
tedious, and perhaps impossible.

8. Let it therefore suffice for the present that we noted the Fountains of
Lympha Vitiated, and handle the kinds observd in practice, and to have designd
the manner of Curing them.

9. The Preparation therefore of Glandulous Lympha may be Depraved, 1. When it
is bred more Sparing. 2. When more Plenteous. 3. When several ways bred with a
vitiated quality, more or less Sour then is naturally, and sometimes a little
Salt, or Glutinous, and if any more Depravations of Lympha shall be observd at
any time.

10. Seeing that all Lympha is carried through its proper Vessels, therefore
called Lymphatic, to wit, its Thoracic Trunc so called to the Descending Blood,
and with it to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, whereby it may there stir up a
Vital Effervescency with the Blood Ascending, and died with Choler, I even now
suppose that Lympha is required to be in a notable quantity and somewhat sour.

11. This Quantity of Lympha ought to answer in due proportion to its opposite,
whereby a laudable Effervescency may arise; whence if the quantity of Lympha be
greater, Choler will be oppressed, and a less and weak Effervescency will arise,
and the Pulse will thus far be felt less; but if otherwise the quantity of
Lympha be less, Choler will then be more essicacious, and the Effervescency of
Blood greater, and the Pulse will thus far be felt greater.

12. That which the greater natural quantity of Lympha does, the same does its
encreasd Acidity more potently effect; as its diminisht Acidity does the
contrary.

13. Seeing these things are of great use in the practice of Physic, they are
worthy to be attentivly weighd by all Physicians, and called into practical
use. For so by little and little many things in the Art as yet most obscure and
confused may be illustrated, and most commodiously explaind: to bestow which
benefit on their Friends, Selves, and Relations, I heartily exhort all
Physicians of excelling Wit and Judgment.

14. Good God! how often are the most Learned, and Experienced Physicians puzzled
when a true Reason is to be rendered of a little, and weak Pulse so often observd
unexpectedly in the Sick! how often they fly to Nature oppressed, or deficient, or
to occult qualities, or malignity, whereby open Ignorance is hid among those
that are ignorant of the Matter! From which darkness of hurtful Ignorance that
at length a Health-giving Light should arise to all Men, I have not shund
according to my power to take huge and envied pains even in this Business;
which foreign and succeding Physicians, will own, and mention more then my
Contemporaries for Reasons enough known to their Consciences, and not unknown
to the Prudent.

15. If a more sparing, or plenteous, more or less acid Lympha does not a
little change the vital Effervescency of Blood, no small change likewise is to
be expected from the same when a little Salt, or Viscous; for thus far it may
be hindered, whence a notable change may happen in the Pulse, and the Life be
often in danger.

16. The breeding of more sparing Lympha may proceed especially from a more
sparing use of more Liquid and somewhat Sour Food, and Sauces, from which
without doubt Lympha has its rising.

17. The Generation of more plenteous Lympha may be ascribed to a more
plenteous use of them.

18. The Preparation of more sour Lympha is to be required from a frequent and
often using of sour Sauces, or Medicines, yea Food. For if Lympha according to
Nature be somewhat sour, if the Juice of the Pancreas according to Nature be
somewhat sour, each Humor is necessary and useful to an happy Life, like as the
consuming of each daily, needs to be repaired, which is to be done by Food;
therefore Food also containing in it Sour Particles, and thus far more or less
Acid should be required; let none expect all Acidity from Sauces, or Medicines.

19. Little Animal Spirit found either in the whole Body, or at least carried
to the Conglobated Glandul's, and therefore less tempering Lympha, and leaving
it more Acid may be a cause why Lympha is more Acid.

20. The breeding of Lympha less Acid may be expected from the seldom, and
sparing use of sour Food, Sauces, and Medicines: as also by the Animal Spirits
abounding in the Universal Body, at least abundantly driven forward to the
Conglobated Glandul's, and there making the Lympha more mild, and less acid.

21. Lympha may be bred somewhat Salt by a more frequent, and over-use of Salt
Food, or seasond with Salt, or Pickle, or dried in the Smoke, as also of
suchlike Sauces; with which many of the Dutch too much indulge themselves,
being more negligent of laudable Health. Which Evil they who make a long Voyage
by Sea cannot shun, being forced to use Flesh, and suchlike seasond with Salt.

22. The extreme parts of Living Creatures, to wit, their Heads, and Feet, and
the most of Seafish, if they be often and much used breed Lympha more Viscous;
as also any Food devourd in too great quantity, and therefore not enough
fermented in the Stomach, yea the rather therefore having an hurtful toughness,
and making suchlike Chyle, and hence Blood, and anon the other Humors in like
manner such.

23. If any other Depravations of Lympha be at any time observd, their Causes
also may without great difficulty be sought out both from Food, and from the
other Non-Natural Things more or less peccant. Of which those things which we
have often mentiond before, may and also ought to be transferd hither, whereby
this Doctrine may become more evident.

24. Seeing it is not yet enough known what Constitution of the Conglobated
Glandul's is fitted to breed laudable Lympha; I have nothing now to add of its
Depravations.

25. The Figure of Pores undetermind and yet very pleasing to its Authors, does
not satisfy my Mind desirous of Truth, not only not proved by forcible Reason,
but not so much as ever made probable by any by manifest Experience. For that
which is said by many of solid or dry things sent through a Sive having Holes
of a different shape, does nothing urge as to liquid and moist things; but
neither is it true as to solid Corpuscles, which are carried equally through
round Holes, if they be Spherical, or Cylindrical, or of any other oblong and
round Form; that I say not now any Corpuscles, of whatsoever Figure they be,
may pass through the Holes of any Figure, when they are less then them. But
take or say for granted according to pleasure I know not what Figures of Pores
likewise feignd, because determind by none in the Parts or Bowels of our Body,
through which Figures according to all the parts of Blood, and Particles of the
Parts of it fluid, and continually flowing through insensible little Arteries,
and Veins some Particles may pass through, more may be stopped in the Passage,
whether this be not to obtrude new Chimaeras, instead of things sought out, to
be believed by credulous Men, let Judicious and Ingenious Men judge.

26. Wherefore they who in things obscure and hid from the External Senses, do
explain the changes made in our Body according to Chemical Operations evident
to the Senses, although even so they remove not all Difficulties seem to me,
whom I therefore follow, to Philosophize more aptly, and to the purpose in
Natural Things: yet do they bring more Light to our Darkness, then the others,
who, however they use sensible Similitudes, yet do not use such, as do enough
square with those things, which come to pass in our Body.

27. And that I may heartily speak, what I think and require in their Opinions
they bind up Natural Changes into too strait Bounds, whilst they adher to
Affections of Qualities alone, not enough weighing that the Affections of
Qualities are far more and much different from the former, according to which
the mentiond changes come to pass in Natural Things. Whose Nature, Essence and
Diversity, yea manifold manner of acting of the Qualities, although it be very
hard to attain to with the Senses or Mind, and to explain clearly, and
distinctly with other things, yet should not Ingenious Persons despair of the
good success, but rather try with importunat Labor this Matter as yet hid in
many things, whereby true Glory may be given to the Inventor, and the Public
Good be promoted.

28. Would God give me more leisure then I have hitherto had, I my self would
try my Fortune now in mine elder years, not doubting, but that I should detect
and observe many things by this both great and pleasant Labor, which would
prepare and make a more easy way for others proceeding farther. For I now have
some things, which for want of leisure I cannot commit to Paper, and
communicate them to my Neighbor. But these and many other things depend on
Providence, and Divine Aid, without which we cannot, nor do perform any thing
laudable.

29. And although, to return to my Matter, we have not as yet obtaind the exact
Constitution of the Conglobated Glanduls, yet let us add a little of their
Depravations, because of which the breeding of Lympha is often, and not a little
depraved. At least we intend here to mention a Tumor, and Hardness as also
Inflammation of them manifest to sense, and often together concurring.

30. A Tumor, or increased Bigness, and Hardness, and Inflammation of these
Glandul's appear to Sense even in Creatures alive, (for after Death they may
also be noted lying hid) both in the Jaws, called the Tonsils, and in several
parts of the Neck, or in other places in no wise coverd with much Fat, or
Flesh, where their noted Depravations are known sometimes by Sight, always by
Touching, or by the Sense of Heat.

31. A Tumor of the Glandul's is to be distinguished from their Hardness, seeing
that there may be, yea there is often a Tumor without Hardness, and Hardness
without a Tumor: although Hardness is ofter joind to a Tumor.

32. The Conglobated Glandul's swell, both when they are nourisht, and encreasd
more plenteously in the best state, and when they heap together the Blood
continually sliding thither beside Nature into their Substance: which is the
easier dispersed through it softer and more flaccid, then through the Substance
of more firm and solid Flesh.

33. Blood is collected beside Nature in the Conglobated Glandul's because of
its Impediment put to the reflux, and chiefly an Obstruction in the Capillar
Veins, or Channels of the Arteries, and interposed Veins, more frequently
happening by Phlegm growing together, more seldom by Blood coagulated.

34. For as often as all the Humors and chiefly Phlegm, together with the Blood
in the Body become more loosend and fluid, yea are more abundantly every way
either by the Air hot both naturally, and by Art; or by Food, or Sauces either
Spiritous, or Aromatical, or abounding with a Volatile Salt; or by the Motion of
Body, or Mind, especially vehement Anger; or by Watchings; so often coldness of
Air, or Water coming upon them, or Food, Sauces, or Medicines actually cold
being used, or otherwise endued with a coagulating force, or the Body being
composed to much rest, or an extreme Sorrow, or panic Fear unexpectedly
oppressing Men as both Phlegm, and Blood is wont to be Coagulated in the other
parts, so in the Conglobated Glandul's; whence they being made unfit for motion
do stick in the Vessels, or Channels between, and stop the Blood flowing
thither, that it cannot go farther through the ways hindered, which being
dispersed through the next substance of the Glandul's distends the same into a
greater bigness, that is, a Tumor.

35. The same humor if more nearly fastened to the substance of the Glandul's,
or becomes more solid and compact after the discussion of its more fluid and
soft parts, breeds an Hardness in the Glandul's.

36. The named Blood when stopped in its Vessels and Passages, or effus'd out of
the same into the substance of the Glandul's, breeds an Inflammation frequent
enough, and apparent in the Tonsils.

37. As often as the Conglobated Glandul's observable about the Plexus
Choroeides, in the side-Ventricles of the Brain and elsewhere are ill-affected,
so often a Stoppage in the Head uses to follow; which urging the Lympha that is
bred becoms sowrish-Salt, and such is tasted in a Coryza.

38. Whence we may probably conclude, what way soever the noted Glandul's are
then hurt, that Lympha declines from its natural State and Quality, and is bred
sowrish-Salt: seeing that their internal Superficies and Skin of the Face
corroded by it flowing down, not only through the Nostrils, but being carried
or distilling every way within the Body, sometimes lighter, sometimes more
grievous Pains are bred, to wit, as its Depravation is lighter, or more
grievous.

39. These Pains as they are commonly ascribed to Catarrhs not enough explaind,
so they are more truly deduced from Lympha depraved, as has been said, effus'd
out of its Vessels, and finding or making a way for it self by its Acrimony
into the adjacent, yea sometimes remote parts.

40. From the same Lympha depraved and more sharp sliding down through the Jaws
into the sharp Artery of the Lungs, and after an Excoriation by degrees
breeding an Ulcer, a Tisic most commonly arises destructive to the most, as
being commonly neglected of all in its beginning, when it is easily Cured.

41. I do not now remember any other evident Depravations of the Conglobated
Glandul's, to which Lympha vitiated may be ascribed a cause; otherwise, if they
be observd by me, God willing, I intend to add them.

42. As for the Cure of the noted Depravations of Lympha; if 1. Lympha be bred
more Sparing in the Body, it may be encreasd with a more large use of
somwhat-Sowr Food and Sauces. To this end Verjuice, Vinegar, Juice of Citron,
of Oranges, etc. may be used in Sauces. Among more grateful Fruits Cheries both
sweetish-sowr, and more sour Curranberries, Barberries, etc. Among Plants
Sorrel, Woodsorrel, etc. Among Drinks Wine of the Meuse, or any other somewhat
sour, yet of good age. For new Wines should be shund, as also very tart Beer,
seeing that Gripes are raisd by them. Among the more Physical things, Spirit of
Salt, and of Nitre, each dulcifi'd are convenient, being used with ordinary
Drink.

43. If 2. on the contrary Lympha be bred more Plenteous in the Body, the Use
of somwhat-sowr Food, and Sauces must be diminishd, and in their stead sometimes
more Spiritous, sometimes more Watery, sometimes more Aromatical Food, and Sauces
and abounding with a Volatile Salt must be used as the Matter requires, that is,
according to the singular diversity of Constitutions and Functions.

44. If 3. Lympha be bred more Sour in the Conglobated Glandul's, its exceeding
Sowrness should be lessend and temperd rather, yea the Generation of it more
Temperd should be procured chiefly by the Use of Volatile Salts prepared in a
liquid Form, and taken together with the other Food daily in a mean quantity.

45. More Volatile Salts, both Single, and Compounded, may be used to this end
according as the Industry and Felicity of Any shall be greater or less. For the
mentiond Salts differ very much among themselves both by reason of their Matter,
and also manifold Preparation.

46. If any want the convenience of preparing Volatile Salts themselves, and so
of inquiring into more grateful and efficacious Salts, let them use the Spirit
of Salt Ammoniac either pure, or mixed with other things, which the Sick may
take to more, or fewer drops in Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor at Dinner and
Supper-time, and may continue for some time in the daily use of the same, till
the ill Effects of more Sour Lympha be wholly removed, and overcomd.

47. If the Sick had rather use his ordinary Drink more pure, and the Volatile
Salt rather in a Physical Mixture: the next Form or one like it may be
prescribed for him, and let him take a Spoonful of this Mixture often in a day,
even soon before or after Meat taken in.

. Mint, Fenel-Water, of each ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus 1. Sp. of Salt
Ammoniac 30 drops. Sir. of Mint i. M.

48. If 4. Lympha be bred less sour, its acidity may be encreasd by Sauces, or
Medicines that have a notable acidity, and used in a large plenty, as, more
sharp Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, and Sour Pomgranats; the Spirit of Salt,
Vitriol, and of Nitre. Oil of Sulphur prepared by a Glass Bell, etc. any of
which may be added to ordinary Drink, or any Julap, or Broths also, to a
grateful acidity for the Sick, and be used daily so long, till signs appear of
Sowrness restored to Lympha.

49. And because Fools, while they shun one Vice, run into its contrary, and an
abuse may easily happen in the over-use of Acids, whither most Men are wont to
incline, they are diligently to be admonishd, least they persevere too long in
using Sour Spirits, and so more hurt, then profit themselves.

50. When the Acidity of Lympha is diminisht and broken by the over-use of
Spiritous Things, then their use is to be diminisht by degrees, whereby the
Acidity of Lympha will become more pure, and sharper.

51. If 5. Lympha be somewhat Salt; abstain from the daily use of Salt, or
salted Food; which is to be tried by little and little, seeing that the most
who are addicted to salted Meat are very hardly removed from their purpose, and
evil Custom, which is as a Law.

52. If 6. Lympha be bred more Viscous, and therefore more slow, beware of much
using both Fishes, especially Seafish, and the Heads, and Feet of
Land-Creatures: yea also among Sauces any Aromatics, and abounding with a
Volatile Salt are to be daily used, such as are the most Antiscorbutics,
Scurvy Grass, Mustard, both sorts of Radishes, both Garden and Watercresses,
etc.

53. If 7. the Conglobated Glandul's be Vitiated by the Errors in Diet mentiond
in Sect. 29, etc. and Lympha be bred sowrish-Salt as is said in Sect. 37. the
harm of the Glandul's, as well as of Lympha is to be amended.

54. A Tumor of the Glandul's, and Hardness proceeding from Phlegm coagulated in
its ways may be Cured by cutting and attenuating Medicines, and especially such
as also move a Sweat, whereby that may be driven forth, which pierced from
without through the Pores of the Skin, and other openings into the inward parts
of the Body, or has affinity with it. To which end the following Mixture may
conduce often taken by Spoonfuls, the Body, when the Sick lies down, being coverd
to promote a Sweat meanly.

. Fumitory, Fenel-Water, of each i. ss. Simple Treacle-Water vi. Spirit of Salt
Ammoniac 20 drops. Mineral Bezoard ss. Or Diaphoretis Antimony i. Sir. of
Carduus i. M.

55. By such a Remedy Phlegm coagulated in the Glandul's is both loosend again,
and being made loose and movable, is removed from the place, in which it sticks
beside Nature, yea is often reduced again into its Vessels, and anon either
wholly amended, and mixed with the Blood, or, when it cannot be amended, only
confused with the Blood, and sometimes sent forth through the Pores of the Body
with a Sweat, sometimes through the Vessels of the Kidneys, and Passage of the
Yard with the Urin, sometimes through the Guts with the Excrements, and cease to
do harm.

56. To the same purpose at least in part a Fuming with Carabe, Mastich and
suchlike may conduce when the Glandul's of the Head are ill-affected, being
receivd in at the Nostrils and open Mouth with the Air inspired, and piercing
to the inward parts; and not only loosening the Phlegmatic Humor sticking in
them, but reducing the Glandul's into their former state, and fencing and
corroborating them against the new Injuries of the Air.

57. By the same Fuming receivd on Clothes the Superficial Glandul's may be
wholly restored by a mild rubbing of the place: To which end the Unguent
Martiatum, and that called the Compound Ointment of Marshmallows anointed on
the part a fected may also be used.

58. If the Glandul's, and in special the Tonsils are troubled with an
Inflammation beside their Tumor and Hardness, both the Phlegmatic Humor
obstructing, and Blood either standing still in its Vessels, or effus'd into
the substance of the Glandul's, and kindled, is to be corrected with Emollient
and cutting mild Gargarisms, in no wise Astringent, but used warm: with which
if it cannot be hindered, its Suppuration is to be promoted by Emollients,
especially and mildly cutting Aromatics, and hence the opening of the Aposteme,
and so effusion of Matter, and hence cleansing and consolidation of the Ulcer:
of which see more in Chap. 40. Sect. 50, etc.

59. Let this following be a Form of an Emollient and mildly cutting Gargarism.

. The Roots of Smallage, Marshmallows, of each i. the Leaves of Mallows M. i.
Raisins of the Sun stoned ii. Boil them in Barley-Water, dissolving in lb i. of
what is straind Sir. of Violets, of the Five Roots, of each ss. M. to be a
Gargarism.

60. Instead also of a Gargarism the expressed Juice of Turnips roasted, or boild
in a little Water may be used.

61. The Inflammation being Cured, if the Sick be not more negligent of
themselves, the Substance and Constitution of the Glandul's before harmd is to
be repaired by a Gargarism prepared of somewhat binding and less sharp
Aromatics, used hot sometimes in a day. For Example take this following Form.

. Bistort, Masterwort-Roots, of each ii. the Leaves of Speedwel M. i. of Sage,
Red-Rose-Flowers, of each M. ss. Boil them in Barley-Water, adding to lb i. of
what is straind Honey of Roses i. M. for a Gargarism.

62. The other Errors in Diet are to be shund, or, if they be inevitable
amended by ways often mentiond before.

CHAP. L. Of the Motion of the Glandulous Lmypha through the Lymphatic Vessels
and Passage of the Thorax to the left Jugular, or Axillar Vein depraved: As
also of the Dropsy of the Breast.
1. I Distinguish the Glandulous Lympha chiefly from that, which I suspect
arises out of the Animal Spirits carried and remaining from the Muscles, and
from other parts; with which it being confused goes forward through the same
Lymphatic Vessels to the Passage Common to Lympha, and Chyle, and through the
Universal Thorax placed at the Spine of the Back, and therefore called Thoracic,
till at length all be unloaden into the left Jugular, or Axillar Vein, where
being joind to the Blood, it descends with it through the upper Hollow Vein to
the Right Ventricle of the Heart.

2. This natural Motion of Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels, and Thoracic
Passage may be depraved, 1. When it is wholly, or at least after a certain
manner hindered. 2. When Lympha moves in another way, and to another place then
toward the mentiond-Veins.

3. If the Motion of Lympha through the Thoracic Passage be at any time wholly
hindered, I judge the Sick cannot live long after it.

4. The Motion of Lympha through more, or fewer Lymphatic Vesseis may be wholly
hindered chiefly because of their Obstruction.

5. This Obstruction may proceed from Glutinous Phlegm carried together with
Lympha through the Vessels of the same, and growing together and Coagulated in
them, and therefore sticking in them, and anon filling them up.

6. Glutinous Phlegm is wont to be carried through the Lymphatic Vessels, as
often as it especially that was in the small Gut is loosend or dissolvd by any
kind of the heat of Air, or a more vehement Motion of Body, or Spiritous, or
Watery Drink chiefly warm, or hot, plenteously swill'd, being 1st of all
confused with the Blood through the Lacteal Veins, and anon the Thoracic
Passage, and afterward driven forward together with it every way, therefore also
to the Conglobated Glandul's, and hence to the Lymphatic Vessels.

7. The same Phlegm is wont to be Coagulated in the Lymphatic Vessels more
frequently by External Cold, Air, Rain, Water, or Snow also any way affecting
the Superficies of the Body with troublesome Cold, and together Coagulating any
fluid thing easily Coagulable in it in any place and forcing it to grow
together.

8. I dare not assert nor deny whether or no as Blood so Phlegm does Coagulate
by a great and unexpected Sorrow or Terror; although it seems less probable to
me.

9. The Motion of Lympha through the Lymphatic Vessels is hindered after a
certain manner; both, when it is more Glutinous, and therefore more slow and
unfit for motion, and, when those Vessels are in part pressed, or straightened any
other way.

10. As often as Lympha stands still in its Obstructed Vessels and being more,
and more gatherd distends them and at length bursts them, so often the same is
pourd out into the next Places, or Cavities near them, and then Lympha is moved
another way and to another place then it ought.

11. By this Effusion of Lympha through its Vessels distributed in the habit of
the Body and obstructed, then burst into the next parts, several Pains and also
Tumors are bred, commonly ascribed to Catarrhs: Amongst which they are not the
least, which possess the upper part of the arm to the very shoulder, and
sometimes also afflict the Neck; to which also they are to be referd, that
resemble the Sciatica which remaining in the Buttocks hinder walking.

12. Some of these pains endure the parts affected to be coverd with several
Clothes, and be warmd by them; others are imbitterd by clothes: whence they are
more difficulty Cured, then the former.

13. They commonly arise from External Cold piercing into those parts first
warm till they Sweat and often laid bare in sleep, and producing various Pains,
yielding only to diverse Medicines according to the diversity of Lympha after
Phleam is Coagulated in the Vessels of Lympha, and an Obstruction, anon a
Bursting made in them.

14. For the Lympha which is more Sour breeds pains more corroding, which may
be allaid by Aromatic Oils and Ointments; but that which is more Salt like
pickle, stirs up pains yielding to oils and ointments less aromatical, such as
is the ointment of Poplars.

15. By this effusion of Lympha out of the lateral Lymphatic Vessels
obstructed, and anon burst, and piercing into the cavity of the Breast through
the membrane that covers the ribs I judge the Dropsy of the Breast arises most
commonly, if not always.

16. An Obstruction of the Lymphatic Vessels in the more inward parts of the
Breast may be prevented, by bewaring 1. that the body do not wax too hot; and if
this cannot be shund, 2. that the Breast being made bare it do not soon cool,
and consequently Phlegm grow not together nor coagulate being dissolvd and
every way diffused potently in several, and therefore in the Lymphatic Vessels.

17. The same Obstruction may be Cured, if as soon as may be, when its mentiond
Causes have had place, and there is danger, least the noted evil be bred, an
attenuating and cutting Medicin be taken together and at once, or at times,
such as Sundry Treacle Waters made with the spirit of wine especially, as also
other Aromatics do afford; Decoctions prepared of the woods Guajac, Juniper,
Sassafras etc, Of the Roots of Masterwort, China, Salsaparilla, butter-bur,
etc. Of the Leaves of Scordium, Carduus benedictus, Carduus Mariae, Scabious,
Dandeleon, etc. Of the Flowers of red Poppies, Elder, Chamomile, etc. Of the
Berries of Juniper, Bays, Elder, etc. Of the Seeds of Milet, Carduus, etc.
Volatile Salts of Amber, Hartshorn, etc. Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoard,
Crabs Eyes, etc.

For example let the following Mixture be used, as has bin often said, to one or
more Spoonfuls, till a Sweat break forth.

. Fumitorie, Dandeleon Waters, of each ii. Simple Treacle Water, or Matthiolus
his Aqua Vitae i. Spir of Salt Ammoniac XXX. drops. Laudanum iii. grains.
Diaphoretic Antimonie ss. Sir. of Carduus i. M.

18. If the Form of a Decoction please any better, let him use this following
often to iii or iv, and being well coverd, let him compose himself to sleep.

. Salsaparilla, Smallage-Roots, of each i. the Shavings of Guajac, and
Juniper-Wood, of each i. ss. the Leaves of Carduus Mariae, Scabious, Scordium,
of each M. i. Elder-Flowers M ss. Milet-Seeds ii. Boil them according to Art in
pure Water, adding to lb iii. of what is straind Sir. of Red Poppies iv. M.

19. If the season of the year be cold, or the Sick abound with much Phlegm,
ii. of Aqua Vitae Matthioli, or any other Aromatic Water may be commodiously
added to the former Decoction, whereby it may serve for more Indications.

20. The viscousness and toughness of Phlegm, and hence of Lympha may be
Corrected by the same already proposed Medicines, to be taken but in a less
quantity, and more seldom even when the noted Harm seems overcomd: when there
will not be need to urge a Sweat, but to amend Phlegm, and Lympha gradually
only by altering them.

21. The Lymphatic Vessels burst, after that they are freed from the noted
Obstruction by Medicines forementiond, will easily be consolidated, as we see it
happens in the Vessels of Blood; seeing that the proper Food of any part is
indu'd with a faculty of conglutinating being more or less clammy or glutinous.

22. Pains arising in the Lims, and especially the upper part of the Arm, and
most troublesome in the Night, after that the abundance of a Serous Humor, if
there be any, is diminisht with Hydragogues, and Sudorifics, they may be
removed by anointing the part grievd with the following Ointment.

. The Ointment called Martiatum, Oil of Worms, of each ss. Oil of Amber i. M.

23. If Pains be encreasd by this Ointment or by Clothes only, use this
following.

. The Ointment of Poplars, Nerv Ointment, of each ii. Oil of White-Lilies iii.
M.

24. If the same Pains affect the Hip, and chiefly so possess the lower part of
the Backbone, that the Body can scarce be stretched out and move, the Balsam of
Sulphur made with the Oil of Turpentine will be the best, if the part affected
be anointed with a few drops of it, whereby I have often cured miserable Persons
in one Night.

25. The Dropsy of the Breast very difficult to be known, though very frequent
in these places, may be Cured most safely, (after an opening and consolidation
premised of the Lymphatic Vessels obstructed, that it may not longer be
cherisht) a Sweat being continued, as well by the mentiond Medicines as by a dry
Stove, and so the Waters standing beside Nature in the Breast, being by degrees
empti'd through the Pores of the Body: whereby if nothing be effected, and it be
certain enough that there is a Dropsy of the Breast, I see not, why it may not
be lawful to institute an harmless Paracenthesis by an hollow Silver Needle in
the Breast; for by such a small Wound there is no danger to the Sick.

CHAP. LI. Of the Preparation of Spittle, as Depraved well in the Upper as
lower Conglomerated Glandul's of the Jaws.
1. AS Lympha in all the Conglobated Glandul's, so a peculiar Liquor is bred in
all the Conglomerated Glandul's; which is not carried into Passages common to
all, but peculiar to every one, and those ending in Cavities appointed to every
one of them.

2. Two Passages called Salival or Salivarie from Spittle carried through them,
empty themselves double on both sides into the Mouth, and arising from the
upper, as well as lower Conglomerated Glandul's of the Jaws: that I mention not
the infinite little Channels risen from suchlike Glandul's and also open into
the Mouth, and pouring out the Liquor they contain, first observd at least as
far as I know by the most diligent and accurat Anatomist Nicolaus Stenonius.

3. I judge all Spittle procedes partly from that part of Blood which is more
glutinous then which servs the Lympha through the Arteries, partly from the
Animal Spirits carried through the Nervs to the mentiond Conglomerated
Glandul's.

4. I judge this Breeding of Spittle naturally Insipid and easy to be mixed with
any Liquor is deprav d; 1. When it is more Sparing. 2. When it is bred more
Plenteous. 3. When it is prepared many ways peccant in sensible qualities.

5. Spittle is bred more Sparing, then it ought, 1. by defect of its Matter, as
often as it is not supplied by convenient Food, such as Broths made of the Flesh
of Brutes, Milk, more thick Drink, stronger Beer, Claret Wine, etc. seem to be
the chief: or it is carried another way, whether it remain within the Body in a
various Dropsy, or be effus'd without the Body in a Looseness, or an
over-excretion of Urin, or Sweat.

6. 2. By the fault of its Ways, through which the Matter required is carried
to the said Glandul's, the greater Arteries, and sometimes also Nervs being cut
asunder, obstructed, or pressed; whence some Defect of Spittle at least must
happen.

7. 3. By the Fault of the Glandul's themselves, when they are unfit to strein
through, or admit the mentiond-Matter, or to change it and turn it into
Spittle. Although it is not yet well known, how those Glandul's are affected
and constituted according to Nature to do this Office.

8. On the contrary Spittle is bred sometimes more plenteous, (as it is known to
befall certain Melancholic and Spitting Persons thence so called, and to some
Sick People troubled with a voluntary Spitting, and that more abundant or
sparing); 1. By reason of the abundance of Salivary Matter, sometimes from the
large use of more Liquid Food, especially Wine a little sour; sometimes from a
more sparing excretion of Urin, or a wonted Sweat.

9. 2. By reason of the largness or multitude of ways carrying the Blood, and
Animal Spirits to the Salivarie Glandul's; because of which more Matter to be
changed into Spittle is carried to the said Glandul's.

10. 3. By reason of the harm of the Glandul's themselves that make Spittle,
because of which more of the Matter of Spittle, then ought, is taken out of the
Blood, and changed into Spittle; although hitherto I cannot determine of what
kind that harm is or may be.

11. That Spittle is sometimes bred vicious in the sensible Qualities, as well
proper, as (excepting Quantity, of which we have already spoken) common, its
Savor sometimes Salt, sometimes Sour, sometimes fulsomly Sweet, sometimes Bitter,
if that it do not proceed from Choler rising up to the Mouth does prove: Its
greater or less Glutinousness or Watriness sometimes argues the same, and if
there be any other Changes observd at any time, or shall be hereafter observd
in its Color, Odor, Savor, Heat, Cold, or suchlike Qualities.

12. The Salt Taste of Spittle procedes without doubt from a Salt Serous Humor
in the Blood, the harm of the Salivarie Glandul's perhaps also concurring,
because of which they are less apt to remove from them, or to overcome that
saltness of the Serous Humor.

13. So the sour Taste of Spittle is to be referd to the exceeding plenty of an
Acid Humor both in the Body, and Blood; and perhaps moreover to some Universal,
or at least Particular Defect of the Animal Spirits in the Salivarie Glandul's.

14. The Taste of Spittle fulsomly Sweet and being equal to, or exceeding the
Sugar of Lead is to be sought in such a like Serous Humor whencesoever
proceeding. For it is very difficult to explain exactly all the Changes of the
Humors happening in our Body according to their almost innumerable Qualities,
seeing we commonly know not what, or what kind of Food the Sick have used, and
chiefly from what, or what kind of things the Savours, Odours, Colors, and
other Qualities of our Humors are so wonderfully alterd; and that indeed, at
least in my Judgment, by reason of experimental (if I may so say) Chemistry
neglected by the most, and Prejudices accounted of the most instead of
Experiments, and Things taken for granted and imprudently, shall I not say
impudently obtruded by others.

15. The bitter Taste of Spittle arises either from Choler belcht up, and for
some time leaving its Relics in the Mouth, and therefore for some time
infecting all the Spittle; or, when such a belching of Choler has not place,
perhaps from the same Choler being more in the Serous part of Blood, and mixed
to the Matter of Spittle in the Salivarie Glandul's: however I doubt much of
this latter manner, seeing that I scarce ever observd the Serous part of Blood
bitter.

16. More Glutinous Spittle arises from Blood abounding with much Phlegm also
glutinous; as more Watery and Fluid Spittle from defect of the same.

17. A more sparing Generation of Spittle to be ascribed; 1. To the defect of
fit Matter, and convenient Food, may be Cured by a more liberal Use of the
same: as the Dropsy being Cured as often as its Matter of nourishment is spent
or turned another away; as also the Looseness being Cured, when its Matter is
evacuated through it; lastly, an over-efflux of Urin or Sweat being removed,
when it happens by the fault of it. The Cure of these Diseases shall be set
down elsewhere, and that in their proper place.

18. 2. The Arteries or Nervs cut asunder cannot be Cured, and the harm thence
proceeding is not except slowly at least in part repaird; in as much as the
other Arteries and Nervs tending to the same parts are commonly by degrees
encreasd, and so they at length repair the loss due to those that are cut in
two.

19. We have spoken and explaind how an Obstruction and Compression of those
Vessels ought and may be Cured.

20. 3. When we know of what kind the Harm of the Glandul's is, by reason of
which Spittle is bred more sparing, a fit Remedy for it will not be very hard
to be found out: although, whilst both are as yet unknown, a prudent Physician
may chiefly use such Medicines outwardly, as are commonly called Strengthners,
which are the most of Aromatics: For Example; the Ointment Martiatum, wherewith
the Region of each Jaw may be anointed, in which the Salivarie Glandul's are
placed; whereby if the Sick receive benefit, that Observation may be noted; and
at another time in another or the same Sick Person, if he cannot bear fat
things, a Fomentation may be prepared of Aromatic Plants, adding sometimes the
Spirit of Wine, and sometimes an excellent I my self have often experiencd this to
admiration.
Volatile Salt; by the help of which also if the Sick get benefit, thus far the
Observation may be useful both in curing others, and in searching out the
natural Constitution and Harm of the Glandul's. So by degrees Man's Knowledge
may be enlarged, and the Art of Physic daily perfected, not to be attaind
unless with strenuous and iterated Labor.

21. A more plenteous breeding of Spittle, may be Cured, 1. By diminishing its
Matter, and daily abstaining a little from more Liquid Food; and by evacuating
it by Stool, or with Vrin or Sweats.

22. Among Purgers Phlegmagogues and Hydragogues mixed together, and often taken
in a small quantity may conduce. For Example, let these following Pills be used
twice or once at least in a week.

. Pills of Mastich i. Rosin of Jalap i. Oil of Amber iii. drops. M. to be xx
gilded Pills.

Let the Sick take three, or four, at Bedtime, that they may purge him twice
or thrice at most.

23. Among Diuretics and Sudorisics Decoctions less ungrateful may be proper to
be happily used sometimes in a day, or instead of Ordinary Drink. For Example;

. The Roots of China sliced, of Smallage, of each i. the Shavings of Juniper,
or Guajac-Wood ii. of Sassafras-Wood ii. Raisins of the Sun stoned iv. Boil
them in pure Water according to Art dissolving in xxx. of what is straind, Sir.
of the Five Roots ii. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac xxx drops. Cinamon-Water i. M.

24. If any desire to evacuate Phlegm, and the Serous Humor by the same Medicin
more ways, he may once or twice in a week dissolv ii, or iii. of our Hydragogue
Electuary (as the Sick is easier or harder to work on, or as the Physician
pleases to Purge him more or less) in ii. of the Decoction before prescribed.

25. 2. The over-largness of the ways that bring matter for Spittle, may be
Cured chiefly by a Fomentation somewhat Astringent and mildly Aromatic made in
Claret Wine, and often applied hot to the Jaws by a Linen Cloth: By the help of
which the more large ways may by little and little be straightened and strengthened.

26. 3. When any Harm in the Glandul's is concluded by rational conjecture to
concur also, although such an Harm is not as yet enough known, yet I think the
forementioned somewhat binding and mildly Aromatic Fomentation may be
commodiously used, both Externally and Internally. For Example take this
following Decoction.

. The Roots of Avens, Bistort, of each i. of Masterwort ii. of Select China i.
of sliced Licorice i. ss. Boil them according to Art in Claret Wine, adding to
lb ii. of what is straind Cinamon-Water, Sir. of Myrtles, of Red-Roses, of each
i. M.

Let the Sick take ii, or iii. of this Decoction twice or thrice a day.

27. The Saltness of Spittle may be removed as well by abstaining from much
using of Salt Meat, as by amending the saltness of the Serous Humor by
Crab's-eyes, Coral, Pearl, Shells, and suchlike things meanly calcined, and
chiefly by the Pills of Hounds-Tongue, or of Styrax daily or every other day
taken to ii, or iii. Grains.

28. The Acidity of Spittle may be Cured by the same, as also with Chalk,
Dragons Blood, Boodstone, fixed, and especially Volatile Salts, seeing they
alter and correct any Humor in our Body more mildly, although also more slowly,
which is also the more to be commended.

29. The fulsom sweetness of Spittle may be Cured, perhaps by Shells and
suchlike things meanly calcined, as also Volatile Salts somewhat more sharp, yea
by fixed Salts also, and Acid Salts sharp enough, lastly Salts joind with Acids,
as the Salt of Tartar Vitriolated and suchlike; although I have have not
hitherto used them to purpose, Volatile Salts avail much in this Case, I speak
by Experience.
because I never had such a Case in hand, from whence to inquire more accuratly
into its Nature and Manner of Curing, and to form my present Conceptions.

30. The bitterness of Spittle causd by Choler rising up into the Mouth will of
its own accord and by degrees depart, if it be driven downward, and expelled ^y
Stool with a Cholagogue; yet a more obstinat bitterness may also be washed out,
by washing the Mouth with somewhat sour Wine pure, or mixed with Water, instead
of which also Vinegar may be used after the same manner.

31. If Choler remain more pure in the Blood, or its serous part, it may be
diminisht by mild Cholagogues, and the remainder is to be corrected by more
temperd and more grateful Acids.

32. The over-glutinousness of Spittle may be amended both by taking in
inciding Aromatic Medicines often mentiond and prescribed, chiefly Volatile Salts
used at Dinner, and Supper-time with a little Wine; and by such like kept in
the Mouth, and anon after it is washed spit out; and by suchlike Food
cautiously omitted and neglected; and by tough Phlegm, if it be also peccant in
encreasd plenty carried out in part after a previous preparation of it, by
Phlegmagogues mildly and slowly.

33. The over-fluidness and watriness of Spittle may be amended by often using
Medicines more Glutinous, and sometimes a little Tart, such as are Medlars,
Services, Quinces, etc. to which as the Matter requires Pills of Hounds-Tongue,
etc. may be sometimes joind.

CHAP. LII. Of the Motion of Spittle into the Mouth and Gullet Depraved.
1. IT is easy for any to try and observe that Spittle of its own accord flows
into the Mouth of every one though they think not of it, and may be drawn
thither more plenteously as any shall please, and the same is anon swallowd
down.

2. This Motion of Spittle into the Mouth is depraved, 1. When it is brought
thither more sparingly or difficultly. 2. When more plenteously, or easily.

3. Spittle flows more sparingly into the Mouth; 1. Because of its defect, of
which we spoke in the former Chapter. 2. Because of the Salivary Passages
Obstructed, or Pressed, or Cut in two.

4. Spittle flows more Difficultly to the Mouth, because of its Glutinousness,
of which we also spoke in the former Chapter.

5. The same Spittle is more Plenteously carried into the Mouth; 1. Because of
its abundance; of which also see the former Chapter. 2. Because of the
Salivarie Passages more widend or enlarged, wherefore Spittle stays not in them
its due time, but flowing out continually makes way for the following Spittle
of what sort soever, for the most part therefore more watery and fluid. This
largness and widness of the Salivarie Passages is causd often by a continual
Spitting accustomd after an ill manner. For by how much the more or less any
shall exercise any Function, by so much it makes the parts ministering to it
either more apt, or unfit to perfect the same more easily and here also more
abundantly, or more difficultly and here also more sparingly.

6. Spittle is more easily carried into the Mouth by reason of its thinness and
fluidness proposed in the preceding Chapter.

7. The swallowing down of Spittle admitted into the Mouth is depraved, as often
as it either cannot be at all or not without great difficulty.

8. Both these Depravations happen especially because of the straitness of the
Jaws, or Gullet, sometimes to be ascribed to a Tumor of the Tonsils, sometimes to
the Quincie, seldom to a Tumor in the Gullet it self, or Flesh growing out of
it: whence the Contraction of the Gullet, and thrusting of what are to be
Swallowd down are with difficulty, if at all.

9. The Motion of the Gullet may also be depraved when it is troubled with a
Palsy or Convulsion, or a Convulsiv Motion frequent in a Hypochondriac
Suffocation.

10. What was mentiond in the former Chapter of the Cure of several
Depravations here named, may thence be required: as also from other places,
which are or shall be set down there.

11. The Salivarie Passages cut in two cannot be Cured: but the Passages
Obstructed, or Pressed, may be cured chiefly by attenuating and cutting Medicines,
used as well to wash as to Foment those parts.

12. The Salivarie Passages more open or wide, may likewise be Cured by washing
the Mouth, and Fomenting the Jaws by a Decoction prepared of somewhat binding
and mild Aromatics; as is described in the former Chapter Sect. 26. But
endeavor should also be, that the Sick would gradually uncustom themselves from
a continual Spittle got into an evil Custom.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Generation of the Juice of the Pancreas depraved.
1. WE call the Humor prepared in the Conglomerated Glandul's of the Pancreas,
and effus'd through the Passage of the same into the small Gut by the name of
the Pancreatic or Melancholic Juice.

2. That the same has great affinity with Spittle, but is of a somewhat sour
Taste from it insipid, although soon sowring, we do no longer suspect to be
distinguished, but affirm it for certain after the Ingenious Observation of
Reguerus de Graaf, that truly industrions, and happy Anatomist, and formerly
our dearly beloved Student not only made in Dogs, but in a Man, and its Juice
collected.

3. The Juice of the Pancreas is therefore naturally somewhat sour in taste,
prepared in the Conglomerated Glandul's of the part of Blood most like to it,
and of the Animal Spirits; and flowing together continually out of the lesser
Passages into the greater, and at length into the greatest and middle, for the
most part single, seldom double, and hence into the small Gut.

4. The Generation of this Juice is depraved, 1. When it is bred more sparing.
2. When more plenteous 3. When vicious in manifold sensible Qualities, in
savor, odor, color, glutinousness, etc.

5. This Juice is made more sparing; 1. By the defect of fit Matter in the
Blood, because of Food containing very little Acidity too long used, or because
of it carried another way in the Dropsy, or effus'd out of the Body in a
somewhat Acid Sweat, and by Vrin also more sour; or in a Lienteric, and Caeliac
Looseness. For that which is conjoind with Gripes, and arises from a sharp Acid
Humor, is chiefly thought by me for the most part to proceed from the Juice of
the Pancreas more Acid, which although it be pourd out of the Body, yet was it
prepared in the Pancreas.

6. The same Juice is bred more Sparing. 2. By the fault of the Ways, and
chiefly of the Arteries, through which Blood is carried to the Glandul's of the
Pancreas, if it happen at any time that they be obstructed, or pressed.

7. 3. By the fault of the Glandul's of the Pancreas unfit to separate
commodiously the somewhat sour part of Blood from the rest, and further to
prepare it with the Animal Spirits into the mentiond Juice.

8. The Juice of the Pancreas is generated more Plenteous; 1. Because of the
abundance of Matter made fit to breed it in the Body and Blood, and by
suchlike Food long and much used, and by the wonted Evacuations of somewhat
sour Humors suppressed.

9. 2. Because of the plenty and greatness of the Arteries and Nervs carried to
the Pancreas; wherefore much Matter fit to breed the Juice of the Pancreas is
carried thither.

10. 3. Because of the peculiar constitution of the Glandul's of the Pancreas
favoring the breeding of much Melancholic Juice: Although here also we as yet
doubt in determining and describing their noted vicious, as well as natural and
laudable Constitution.

11. The Juice of the Pancreas is bred vicious in Taste; 1. When it is made too
sour, and that then because of the over-use of sour Food, Sauces, or Medicines;
and because of a delay of the laudable Juice made in certain of its lesser
Passages obstructed, whence the same becoms anon more sour, and being again
joind to the rest, infects it all at least for that time, and likewise makes it
more sour then it is wont to be: as that is for the most part notably observd
in the beginning of the Fits of Intermitting Fevers with Cold, the off spring
of a more sharp sour Humor.

12. 2. When it is bred less sour, and indeed then because of a more sparing,
or no Use of sour Food, and Sauces; and because of a frequent and plenteous use
of things contrary to it, such as are Chalk, Crab's-eyes, Pearl, Coral, and
suchlike often mentiond, as also both fixed and volatile Salts; and because of
much evacuation of an Acid Humor by Sweat, or Vrin.

13. 3. When it is bred Salt like Pickle; by such a like serous Humor abounding
in the Body, and because of Food seasond with much Salt long taken, and by a
troublesome and persevering stoppage of the Head, corrupting the laudable Humors
into Humors Salt like Pickle, or suchlike Lympha.

14. 4. When the same Juice is bred Tart, and that both because of suchlike
Food; and Medicines taken more plenteously or too long, and by an exceeding
sorrow of Mind, and chiefly when unexpected, and a great unthought-of Terror.

15. 5. When the same Juice is bred ill-savourd, which chiefly happens, when
there is a Corruption in the Pancreas, to wit, the making of Matter after an
Inflammation, whereof when any is joind to the Juice of the Pancreas, then it
gives it its ill savor.

16. 6. When the Color of the same Juice being like Phlegm, or Water is
changed into any other not like its natural Color; which may happen, when some
pure, or corrupted Blood is mixed with it, and does more or less alter its
natural color.

17. 7. When the Juice of the Pancreas is made more Glutinous, and that because
of much Phlegm like it being in the Body, and joind to the Blood, and then
infecting the other Humors, and this especially with its viscousness.

18. Seeing that more vicious Qualities of this Juice do not at present occur,
let us proceed streight-way to the Cure of the mentiond Depravations in its
Generation.

19. A more sparing Generation of the Juice of the Pancreas may be Cured; 1. By
using more abundantly Food and Sauces somewhat sour, when this Evil happens for
want of them; or by curing an Acid Dropsy or Sweat, or Vrin; or a Lienteric,
or Coeliac Looseness, when it procedes from them; of which we have treated
before, or yet may anon.

20. 2. By Opening an Obstruction of the Arteries, by cutting and attenuating
Medicines often already proposed; or by removing their Compression, by freeing
them from Bands or Tumors straitning their Cavity.

21. 3. It will be hard to tell how the harm of the Glandul's of the Pancreas,
by reason of which its Juice is bred more sparing in them, may be Cured, seeing
that we know not as yet the due Constitution of the Glandul's to prepare this
mentiond natural Juice: yet because a somwhat-sowr Juice is separated, or made
in them, I suppose Medicines mildly Aromatical and chiefly Volatile Salts joind
with somwhat-Acid Liquors may very probably be useful here; For Example, The
Volatile Salt of Amber, the Salt Ammoniac made more pure by a repeted
Sublimation, and several others industriously prepared.

22. Where note, seeing that every Change that is to be expected of altering
Medicines ought to be performd by degrees, the use of such must be continued for
some season, whereby the desired success may be had, and here we must make slow
haste.

23. This Juice generated more Plenteously needs for its Cure, 1. That the Sick
would omit, at least diminish the Use of Acid Food, and Sauces, as often as the
same occasiond it, and has afforded Matter for more abundance of the Juice:
which now being in the Body may also be diminisht by Hydragogues, as also
Sudorifics and Diuretics: which will be so much the more beneficial, if an
accustomd Evacuation of the Acid Humors of what kind soever be suppressed.

24. Among Sudorifics and Diuretics I commend in this Case any that moreover
contemperat, dull, and concentrat an Acid Humor, being often mentiond and also
reduced into Forms in this Treatise.

25. 2. If the Arteries and Nervs inserted into the Pancreas could be
commodiously straightened (for they cannot be diminisht) by Internal or External
Remedies; by a prudent, and most slow straitning of them to be expected only
from mildly Astringent Medicines.

26. 3. If at any time the Natural and Preternatural Constitution of the
Glandul's of the Pancreas should be known; it is to be Cured by the Correction
of it by Medicines somewhat contrary to it; which being as yet unknown, they that
mildly bind, and also coneentrat an Acidity may be tried perhaps even to find
out each Constitution sometime, amongst which Boodstone, Dragons-Blood, Chalk,
etc. excel; which, as I newly said of all Altering Medicines, may be used for
some time in a small quantity, and their success, and effects may be accuratly
observd by Prudent Physicians.

27. The preparation of a more Acid Juice may be Amended; 1. By daily
diminishing, and sometimes wholly removing, at least for a time, the Use of
Food, Sauces, and Medicines manifestly sour.

28. 2. By removing the Obstruction made by Glutinous Phlegm coagulated in the
side and less Passages of the Pancreas, both by Medicines that drive it forward
either into the small Gut only, or also out of the Body by Vomit, or Stool, and
sometimes with the Vrin, or Sweat. To which manifold end convenient Remedies are
often before prescribed, so that it seems needless to set down here those that
have been so often mentiond.

29. When the Juice of the Pancreas is bred less Acid; 1. By the defect of
suchlike Food, and Sauces, the same may be made more sour by using somewhat
acid and grateful Food and Sauces, and that not by force, and in a large
quantity, but long, and in a mean quantity; least by hasting too much the Sick
be more harmd, then profited.

30. 2. When it is less Acid by the preposterous use of contrary things, Chalk,
Coral, etc. as also sixth, or Volatile Salts; their farther use must be left off,
it must at least be moderated and diminisht.

31. 3. When the same happens because of a plenteous excretion of an Acid Humor
by Sweat, or Vrin, endeavor must be used, that the Separation of an Acid Humor
from the Blood, and hence an Excretion by Sweat, or Urin be by little and
little diminisht: which the following Conserve very effectual to this end will
most conveniently effect.

. Conserv of Red Roses ii. of Damask-Roses i. Common Diascordium iii. or Our
Diascordium (described in Chap. 51. Sect. 22. of this Book) i. Red Coral, Pearl
prepared, of each scuple; iv. Sir. of the Juice of Pomegranates, what suffices
M. for a Conserve. [ The Author prescribed not his own instead of the Common
Diascordium in the former Chapters, because he had not invented it when they
were printed.]

Let the Sick take i. or there-about of this Conserve in the morning fasting,
as much two hours before Supper, and as much at Bedtime, washing his Mouth, if
he please, with a little of Wine, or any other grateful Drink, and then
drinking it.

32. The Juice of the Pancreas bred Salt like pickle in Taste, which may be
known by vomiting a Humor like it, is to be Amended by a long and sparing use
of Medicines that correct a Serous Humor like it in our Body, and all over
described by me both in the former Chap. 51. Sect. 27. and elsewhere: as also by
abstaining from salted Food; and hastening the Cure of a Stoppage in the Head,
if there be any, least more evils succeed it neglected.

33. If the Juice of the Pancreas be bred Tart, (which the frequent
Hypochondriac Suffocation, with fear of being Strangled, as also the Vomiting
of Tart Humors argues) he must Abstain, 1. from farther use of Tart Fruits, or
Medicines; 2. All occasions of exceeding Sorrow; and grievous Terror are to be
Shund; yea, the Mind is to be fenced, and confirmd, and governd against those
Injuries. Lastly, 3. Volatile, and especially Aromatic Salts are to be used
frequently; and that in a small quantity, to iv, v, or vi drops in a spoonful
of Wine; seeing that there is nothing hitherto, that I know of, As also his
Oily Volatile Salt, which he never prescribes in a Mixture because it was not
then exposd to public Sale.
does so potently, effectually, and speedily amend and correct a Tart Humor in
Man, as any Volatile, but chiefly Aromatic Salt, which I having exceeding many
times experienced happily do here testify and entirely commend to all Younger
Physicians that need my faithful Information.

34. If the Juice of the Pancreas be made ill-savourd by Matter in it mixed with
it an exact and long continued endeavor must be used, that the Ulcer left in
the Pancreas after an Aposteme may at length be wholly Cured, by taking daily
Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoard, or any other more effectual and fixed
Medicin made of Antimony; Whose Magisterie, Elixir, or Quint-essence if it
could be had, will do wonderful things, although they seem incredible to the
most of Men, not only in this dangerous, and hard to be cured Evil, but even
suchlike found sometimes in the other Bowels also.

35. The Color of the Juice of the Pancreas changed by Blood mixed with it may
be Cur d by the Consolidation of the Vessels of Blood corroded by a sharp acid
Humor by the fore-mentiond excellent Medicines that may be made especially of
Antimony; which also correct, and temper all Acrimony of Humors, and do much
more benefit, then the slothful company of those that Hate Chemistry can
conceive or admit in their Mind blinded with Prejudices. For whom let us
seriously pray, that at length they may have a sound Mind in a sound Body, so
long as at least that happens to be healthful to them.

36. If the Juice be bred more Glutinous in the Pancreas, that depravation may
be corrected by a continual and continued use of more sharp Aromatics, as also
of any Volatile Salts, and sometimes also of somwhat-Acid more Spiritous Salts,
or artificially prepared and elaborated with Spiritous Liquors, which also they
that hate Chemistry, being ignorant, do discommend. And because I have often
mentiond and described such before, I remit the diligent and worthy Students of
Physic thither.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas, and its Effervescency
with Choler depraved.
1. I Suppose the Juice of the Pancreas is continually separated in its
Glandul's from the Mass of Blood, and is farther elaborated, and perfected with
the Animal Spirits, and moves into the greater, and at length the middle
Passage, and hence into the Cavity of the small Gut.

2. This Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas through the less, greater, and
greatest Passage to the Cavity of the thin Gut may be depraved several ways,
and that sometimes according to the whole Mass of the Juice, sometimes according
to some part of it only: whilst there is either None, or it procedes more
slowly, and difficultly, or more speedily, because more easily.

3. I suppose the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas through its Passages to
the small Gut, is either seldom, or never wholly deficient: Which will only
come to pass, if it may happen, from an Obstruction of the greatest and middle
Passage by most glutinous Phlegm sticking, and in like manner coagulated and
fastened about its Orifice; which can scarce remain there for a space, but would
anon be loosend by the Juice perpetually coming, or the Sick be cast into
present danger of Life: to which unexpected Death may not often follow, what
prudent Man will deny, or by accurat observation in a Dead Body, and made
beforehand by this Passage will rashly affirm.

4. I indeed remember that I have sometimes seen glutinous, and plenteous Phlegm
sticking, and adhering in this Passage, and not easily giving place or to be
removed thence.

5. None who have red those things with an attentive Mind, which I concluded in
Chap. 30. Sect. 61, etc. of this Book according to Experience, and being to
make trial, shall recall the same things to experience by his own Senses can
well deny that some part of the Juice of the Pancreas is often hindered wholly, at
least for a season, in its Motion through the less, and side-Passages, to the
middle and greatest Passage, because of an Obstruction risen by Viscous Phlegm
growing together in them.

6. When the Juice of the Pancreas is stopped after the same manner in certain
Passages, then any may see it is all moved more sparingly to the small Gut.

7. The Juice of the Pancreas may be moved more difficultly, and therefore
slowly also through its Passages to the small Gut, as often as it is more
glutinous: of which we spoke in the former Chapter.

8. The same may be moved more easily, and so swiftly, when it is more Watery
and Fluid then is wont to be, a Cause of which may be much watery and diuretical
drink, such as Volatile Salts and many Mineral Waters, the Spaw, Swalbats, etc.
Whence a Looseness also so frequent, most commonly beneficial seldom hurtful to
the Sick, is perhaps to be deduced amongst other of their admirable effects; in
as much as they hasten not only through the Kidneys to the Bladder, but also
through the Pancreas to the small Gut; nor do they only render the Juice of the
Pancreas more fluid, but also make it less sour or tart, the most frequent
cause of a slow and costive Body; wherefore the Excrements are also easily
diluted, and Choler it self is hastened more then usual to its descent.

9. If at any time a Physician suspect that most plenteous glutinous Phlegm
does not only abound in the Body, but that much of the same is carried every
whither, and so to the Pancreas, so that there is fear that the middle and
common Passage of the Pancreas not only may be, but is obstructed wholly by it,
by reason of extreme Anguish suddenly affecting the Sick; I cannot then think
that an Acid Spirit, especially of Nitre, as the most piercing, but mixed with
strong Wine, or its Spirit will then be ill used to remove such an evil; whereby
the noted Obstruction may not only be Opend, but moreover the defect of the
Juice of the Pancreas may be supplied in perpetuating an Effervescency with
Choler.

10. I can easily admit that an Obstruction placed about the Orifice of the
Passage of the Pancreas opening into the small Gut, may be immediately removed
by reason of the commerce of an Acid Spirit with Phlegm, by the mentiond
Medicin taken in at the Mouth, and carried to the small Gut, (without farther
transmitting it through the Lacteal Veins, the Passage of the Thorax, the upper
Hollow Vein, the Right Ventricle of the Heart, the Artery and Vein of the
Lungs, hence through the Left Ventricle of the Heart the Great Artery to the
Pancreas) whilst this Phlegm is loosend and dissolvd by it piercing thither.

11. The more sparing Motion of the Melancholic Juice risen from an Obstruction
of the lesser Passages of the Pancreas, may be restored by Remedies proposed in
the forecited 30th Chap. Sect. 132, etc. as also in Chap. 50. Sect. 13, etc.

12. A more speedy Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas made by reason of its
Watriness and Volatility, perhaps proceeding either from Mineral Waters, or
Volatile Salts more abundantly taken may be allaid by abstaining from farther
use of them, and mean while using those things that may give it a greater
consistency, such as are sharp and tart things, often taken in a small quantity.

13. To the Motion of the Juice of the Pancreas vitiated follows also the
vicious Effervescency with Choler in the small Gut; of which because we have on
purpose treated in Chap. 11. of this Book, what is spoken there, may be
transferd hither in part, and so be red there.

CHAP. LV. Of the Separation of Urin in the Kindeys Depraved.
1. AS the best part of Food, and that which is useful to the Body is separated
from the Food taken in, and fermented in the Ventricle, being fluid, and of a
milky color, and carried under the name of Chyle through the Lacteal Veins
toward the Heart, whilst the unuseful and excrementitious parts go away by
Stool, keeping a thicker consistency; so again the serous superfluous part is
separated in the Kidneys out of the Chyle changed into Blood; which whilst the
principal part of Blood flows back to the rest of its Mass, it distills through
their capillar fleshy parts into its Funnel, and is sent hence through the
Ureters to the Urinar Bladder, so named from the mentiond Serous part then
constituting Urin; in which it is gatherd by little and little, till it be
afterward voided again.

2. The Glandulous fleshy parts are observd to be shut up in the substance of
the Kidneys, and stretchd forward into membranous Pipes joind to its Funnel,
and having peculiar Passages appropriated to the dropping of Urin.

3. This Vrin because it is observd Salt even in those, (in whom the Serous
Part of their Blood is found insipid) any may suspect and not without cause,
that the Matter of Vrin undergoes some singular Change in the Kidneys, while it
is streind through the mentiond fleshy Parts; although it seem to me at least
very probable that the Blood as well as Chyle is prepared in the Heart in its
Vital Effervescency for the Separation of the Urinar Serous Part, and that the
same is absolvd in the Kidneys; although I have not hitherto attaind the reason
of it, however I think it happens after the manner of Precipitation.

4. This Separation of Vrin is depraved; 1. When there is None. 2. When it is
more Sparing. 3. When more Plenteous. 4. When by reason of both the Liquor, and
what is Containd in it, it haps several ways vicious in Color, Odor, Savor,
Thickness, etc.

5. There happens No Separation of Vrin in the Kidneys often by the fault of the
fleshy parts Obstructed, or otherwise ill-affected; seldom perhaps by fault of
the Blood, or its serous part, to wit, unfit for its Separation, and that
because of a more entire mixing of the Heterogeneal Parts.

6. Those fleshy parts may be Obstructed by much and glutinous Phlegm any ways
loosend in the small Gut and confusd with the Blood, being afterward again
coagulated in the Kidneys, together vitiating their fleshy parts by an External
Cold imprudently receivd, and there severing from the Blood in part at least
with the Urinar Serous Part, and sticking in the fleshy parts, and by degrees
filling and obstructing their Passages.

7. The Harm com'd to the fleshy parts by external Cold, may perhaps be a
straitning and binding of their spongie parts, by reason of which the Phlegm
dissolvd by the Serous Liquor flowing through may the easier stick, and be
stopped in them, till at length filling their Passages it may hinder farther
passage of Urin through them.

8. The Heterogeneal parts of Blood are more entirely mixed, and so the same
becoms unfit for a Separation of its Serous part, as often as the Acidity of
Lympha is more sharp, so that the Universal Blood grows, too much together, its
alone fluidness remaining.

9. This Acidity of Lympha may become sharper, both in the Conglobated
Glandul's, and in the Conglomerated Glandul's of the Pancreas by an external
very sharp Cold, or a great and unexpected Sorrow or Terror of Mind, the
notable abuse of Acid things and thus far very sharp, first concurring and
preceding.

10. The Separation of Vrin becoms more Sparing, by reason of the same but
lighter Causes; as a Looseness, and chiefly Sweat plenteous.

11. The Separation of Vrin becoms more plenteous by reason of Drink taken in
and so accustomd (which is always to be observd) or by reason of the fleshy
parts of the Kidneys, if not, too open according to its Channels, so at least
constituted, that they may separate more of a Serous Liquor from the Blood then
ought, as happens in a Diabetes; or by reason of the Blood ill-affected for a
Separation and sending away of the Serous part more abundant then is wont; or
because of wonted Sweats, or a Serous Looseness suppresd.

12. The Blood is ill-affected to a more plenteous dismissing of it self by the
vital Effervescency after a certain manner vitiated by Volatile Salts and other
Diuretics plenteously taken at any time; whence the Blood is made not only more
fluid, but besides less thickened, and less united according to its serous parts
with the rest: wherefore Urin departs both more easily and abundantly from it in
the Kidneys.

13. Upon the account of the Liquor of Vrin it is observd vitiated; 1. In its
Color, when the same becoms Watery, that is endued with a consistencie and
watery color, which coms to pass by defect of its Salt and Choleric part making
it more or less of a color somewhat Yellow. For that is to be noted, that Urin
consists of two parts, both Watery and Salt, which being joind together make the
Liquor of Urin to have an Orange Color, and mean Consistency. Whence after
that much and especially piercing, and therefore Diuretical Drink, such as is
Water, but chiefly Mineral Waters, thin and Diuretical Wine, suchlike Beer,
etc. is taken in, the Urin that is wont to be first and a little after voided,
is observd Watery, and insipid, not only in Color, but also in Taste: as that
which coms away after the Fermentation of Food in the Stomach absolvd, is not
only of a more or less yellow Color, but moreover Salt.

14. And as this Watery Color follows the taking in of Drink chiefly
Diuretical, lately used in a notable quantity, and is Non-natural; so the like
is observd in the beginning of Continual Fevers, and of the Fits of
Intermitting Fevers, and it is then Praeter-natural, denoting a Crudity, that
is, a more entire mixing of the parts of Blood, and an hindered Separation or
the Salt Parts with the Urin; the Cause of which is a sharper Vital
Effervescency by reason of an exceeding Acrimony of the Humors flowing together,
and too much thickning all the parts of Blood, the Watery excepted. This is
evident chiefly by the Fits of Intermitting Fevers most commonly raisd with
troublesome Cold; And seeing that Cold is bred in our Body by an Acid Humor, the
same must of necessity be carried to the Heart to breed an Intermitting Fever,
and so trouble the Vital Effervescency there, so that the Pulse becoms not only
less, and weaker, (which depends on the Blood too much coagulated by an Acidity
exceeding) but all the parts of Blood are more entirely mixed together, and do
then only dismiss the watery part from themselves into the Kidneys, the other,
especially Salt parts, remaining in its Mass so long, till by little and little
at least in part the Acid Humor being overcomd, or the same flowing to the
Heart in less plenty, or more temperd the Vital Effervescency is restored, and
Choler more potent or plenteous overrules it; on which depends the more
loosend union of the Humors, and anon more easy and plenteous, yea sometimes
over-separation of those that are Salt like Pickle.

15. From which the Nature and true Cause of a so much mentiond Crudity in
Physic, yea Manner, whereby it is most commonly bred, becoms more manifest; and
moreover the Nature, true Cause, and Manner of a so much wanted Concoction, how
it is absolvd, is not a little illustrated: which I will endeavor now to
explain in a few words, this occasion being offered.

16. Physicians understand the Crudity and Concoction of Humors constituting
the Mass of Blood, or mixed with it, when concernd about them in the examining
and Curing of Acute Diseases especially, and that it may be to their wish, they
so greatly and deservedly desire the Concoction of the Humors. For when the
Blood is infected, and ill-affected immediately, or by Humors coming between
containd in the Body without the Mass of Blood, as Choler, the Juice of the
Pancreas, Lympha and Phlegm, then the vital Effervescency peculiar to it is
alterd likewise, and vitiated, and indeed so, that forthwith the natural and
loosend confusion of the Humors that continually flow together to the Heart
with the Blood is more or less troubled, whether they be more closly and
entirely, or more loosly and less entirely then joind to it.

17. But when the other Humors are more entirely and closly joind to the Blood
then is wont, then Vrin coms forth more Watery, and having less of Color and of
the other things Containd: which they call Crude, that is, testifiers of
Crudity.

18. And after the Vrin is again voided more Colored, and carrying in it more
of the things Containd, it is liked, and called Concocted, to wit, signifying
it more, or less begun, or promoted: which coms to pass when the noted Humors,
as excrementitious and first more closely, and entirely united to the Blood,
are again by degrees Separated from the same, and in part Voided together with
the Urin: which is good, and profitable to Man; as the other was evil and
hurtful. For according to Nature, and in an healthy State an Orange-colourd
Tincture at least is given to Urin * but no thing Containd is found in Urin,
unless some Error be committed in Diet, or the Constitution of the Party
decline more or less from the perfect state of Health.

19. If any weigh with an attentive mind all the Humors that are to be confused
with the Blood, as also the proper qualities of every one, he will comply, and
say with us that the more close Union of them with the Blood proc^des from an
Acid Humor, and therefore the Juice of the Pancreas or Lympha ill affected; on
the contrary their more loosend union with the Blood, and so solution of a more
close union is to be hoped for, and expected from a Lixivial and chiefly
Volatile, and so bitter Salt, and therefore Choler more potent, and bearing sway.

20. How true, yea most true are these things which I have now said, daily
Experience confirms, seeing any that searches may know those things that cast
Healthy People into several Diseases, and increase them, and on the contrary
restore lost Health to the Sick, that that Concoction in the Blood is hindered
by the force of Acid things, endu'd with an Acidity exceeding; and that the same
is promoted, and obtaind by help of Aromatics, and in special the Bitter, or of
Volatile Salts more temperd.

21. By reason of its Color Vrin is often observd; 2. Red, which if it be Thin
beside, arises from an exceeding heat that is in the Blood, a little, and only
the most Volatile part of Gall being mixed with the Vrin; the Separation of the
Salt and Excrementitious Parts of Blood, and the Excretion necessary to begin,
and absolv the fore-mentiond Concoction being hindered. For although then Choler
bear sway over the other Humors, which is evident by the exceeding Heat of the
Body, yet has it not a quiet, but turbulent rule, because a sharper and
preternatural Effervescency is stird up in the Heart, more entirely uniting the
flowing Humors together and with the Blood.

22. The same red Vrin, if also thick in Burning Fevers as well Continual, as
Intermitting, procedes from the more plenteous Separation of the Salt, or other
Excrementitious Parts, whether first Corrupted by the rest of the Mass of Blood
in a preternatural Effervescency, and from their Excretion with watery parts,
and so from a begun Concoction: which coms to pass, as often as what way soever
the somewhat contrary Humors, Sour, and Salt, or Bitter, that are wont to
produce a vital Effervescency in the Blood and Heart are contemperd at least in
part: whence the Effervescency which was before sharper, becoms now more mild;
and the Salt parts which were before more closely united to the Blood, do now
again by degrees depart from it; and they which are now Effervescent, are more
loosly united together and with the Blood; till at length the Universal Blood,
and all the Humors that are to arise from it, and to flow together again to it,
are restord by little to their former and laudable Constitution, and the lost
Health of Man may be repaird after a while.

23. Vrin of an obscure Red and somewhat thick, yet having no notable Heat
accompanying in the Body, is wont to denote the Jaundice, chiefly when a Cloth
dipped into it is made of a Saffron Color by it, unless it be by something taken
in.

24. Vrin of a Bloody Color may be easily known from what has been said
before, and chiefly if it have a filthy and somewhat black or grumous Settling;
which is a certain sign of Blood mixed with it.

25. Other singular and more rare Colors of Vrin as Green, Wan, Black, etc. as
for the most part they own singular and most grievous external or internal
Causes, so are they to be compared with Symptoms together concurring in the
Sick to know rightly the Diseases then selves and thence to form
Prognostication: all which to treat here were too long.

26. Urin varies not only by reason of a different Color but also in respect
of its Transparence and Darkness. For some is Transparent, commonly called
Clear; some Thick, commonly called Turbid or Troubled. Where note, that some is
made and remains clear, or Transparent; and on the contrary some is made or
remains Turbid or Thick: again, some is made Clear, and Transparent, and are
afterward Troubled and Thick, and such either remain, or become clear again: so
some is voided Turbid and Thick, and again grow Clear; which commonly coms to
pass by the falling of its Sediment.

27. The most Watery, as also Yellow, and Red Vrin is sent Clear and
Transparent: which Transparence the Watery most seldom, sometimes the Yellow, often
Red Vrin loses: which is most frequent in a stoppage of the Head, and Fevers
arising from such a like Cause, and called by many Catarrhals: And these sorts
of Urin thus Troubled do often again grow clear, the Sediment falling; sometimes
they remain Troubled, to wit, when the Stoppage in the Head is yet in its
increase, neither a Fever nor any other Disease accompanying coms to it in its
vigor.

28. Urin declines from its natural Odor, when it is without smell, or smells
Sweet, or is ill-smeld.

29. The most Crude, or Watery Vrin is without Smell, of which we spoke in Sect.
13, etc.

30. Vrin of a sweet Smell is seldom voided unless after certain things are
taken, as Turpentine, whence it smells like Violets: whether any such thing
happen at any time from Internal Causes, I now at least remember not.

31. Ill-smelling and stinking Vrin does likewise sometimes own an External
Cause, for example the use of Asparagus; but more frequently an Internal Cause,
to wit, a Corruption in the Blood, but such, by reason of which its parts
remain in a slack union, yea its fat parts corrupted being the primary Subject
of Odours, and therefore also of ill smells Separate with its Salt parts. Where
note, the ill smell of Urin does not so much reside in its Liquor, as in the
things therein Containd.

32. The Savor of Vrin naturally somewhat Salt is changed; 1. When it is voided
Insipid, which happens not only a little after Drink, and especially Diuretical
taken in plenteously, and such a change of Taste is Non-natural; but also, when
the Urin is preternatural and crude; of which see Sect. 13, etc.

33. 2. When Vrin coms away Bitter, which procedes from much Choler carried to
the Heart, and very slackly mixed with the Blood, yea infecting its Serous part,
and hence the Vrin with its bitterness.

34. 3. When Vrin is voided Sour; which sometimes befalls very sorrowful and
melancholic People, by reason of the Juice of the Pancreas; or Lympha more
Sour, and infecting the Serous part of Blood, and anon the Vrin also with its
Acidity.

35. Of the Thinness and Thickness of Vrin we have already spoken something in
Sect. 13, 21, etc. and the Cause of each there proposed.

36. The things Containd in Vrin are several, whereof some swim in its
Superficies, some fall to the Bottom, some are carried in its Liquor, and that
sometimes in its upper, sometimes in its middle, sometimes in its lower part;
lastly some adhere to the sides and bottom of the Vessel: none whereof is found
in Urin according to Nature.

37. There are in the Superficies of Urin Bubbles and Froath, Fat, and Gravel.

38. The ordinary Sediment, and more seldom mealy or Bran-like, as also little
Threads, Scales, Gravel, Stones, fleshy Parts, clots of Blood, Purulent Matter,
Worms settle to the Bottom.

39. There is carried to the upper part of Vrin a little Cloudiness in the
middle, that which seems to hang there called Euaeorema; in the lower part a
Settling, or Sediment: in which there is sometimes much, or little Gravel.

40. And this Triple Matter Containd, to wit, most frequent in the Urin of the
Sick, is considerd, 1. By its Quantity, and is little, or much.

41. 2. By its Color it is White, or Red or Black, or of another Color.

42. 3. By its Substance either Equal, when all the parts are equally thick and
thin; or unequal, when some parts are thinner, others thicker.

43. 4. By its Connection, either Continual, when all the parts are joind
together; or Separated, when some parts are disjoind from the rest.

44. I have most frequently observd Gravel every where in the Urin beheld by
Me, that arose from the Conglobated Glandul's harmd by external Cold: and
sometimes by long lying on the Back; because of which they sometimes grow
together into Stones, as well red friable and softer; as somewhat yellow or more
pale and of an ashie, most commonly harder and more solid.

45. Fat swimming in Vrin, unless it arises from Oil swallowd down, often
procedes from a Humor Salt like Pickle more sharp, separating the Oily part of
Blood beside Nature from the rest of the Mass, and transferring it imbibed in
the Serous part, and hence in the Vrin: whence it is observd so frequent in the
Vrin of Scorbutic People, and of others abounding with suchlike Salt Humors,
and by the fault of them sometimes Pining: (...) if Fevers be raisd or cherishd
by suchlike Humors, they are then called Wasting, because not so much the Fat
that is found without the Vessels is then consumed more then usual, as the Oily
part of Blood within the Vessels is corrupted by the noted Humor, and is partly
voided with the Urin, partly rendered unfit to repair any Fatness.

46. I deny not that the Original of Froath and Bubbles is causd by Wind;
although I have often observd that a Stoppage in the Head, and Catarrhs bred in
the Brain accompanies them.

47. Amongst the more rare Sediments, a Bran-like, mealy, scale-like, and
suchlike often occurring in Burning-Fevers are to be ascribed to an exceeding
Heat, because of which certain more earthy Particls of Blood are farther
scorchd, and therefore being severd from the rest of its Mass are voided
together with the Urin, and while it cools by little and little, they forsake
it and fall to the bottom.

48. Little Threads observd in Urin seem to own a Matter like to Hairs, to wit,
a Volatile and Oily Salt growing together into such long threads; which is not
unfrequent in Chemical Changes.

49. Gravel settling at the bottom of the Vrin is of all kinds, both little, and
greater; both that may be crumm'd and solid; both red, and yellow, or somewhat
ashie, and so coming nearer to the nature of Stones, yea for the most part
giving them their first rising, and daily cherishing and increasing them; for
the substance of Gravel growing together increases into Stones in hot Urin more
slowly and more straightly then in it being coold.

50. Wherein this force of growing together and of making Stones consists, is
not enough known; I will freely declare what I conjecture in this obscure
matter, whereby I may according to my power the more help others that are
Ingenious to search out this hidden Truth. All Stones, such at least as I have
hitherto seen are Dissolvd in the sour Spirit of Saltpeter, or Nitre; whence I
conclude that the Coagulation of Stones cannot be expected from an Acid Spirit,
as such; therefore from another somewhat contrary to it in part at least. If any
consider the several things, that promote a growing together of natural things,
he will find that that force is in Tart things; whence the Gluti^ousness and
Toughness of fluid things is wont to be ^roduc'd; to which if Earthy, and
Volatile Salt parts ^e joind, something breaks forth not much unlike ^tones. I
incline therefore to this Opinion, That an Earthy and Volatile Salt Matter joind
to a Glutinous thing Grows together in Stones by help of a Tart Humor. The
force of a Tart Humor coagulating is weakened by a sharp Acid, such as is found
in the Spirit of Nitre.

51. Fleshy parts found in Urin usually arise from ^n Ulcer in the Kidneys, and
their parts separated from the rest of the Body, and voided together with ^he
Urin.

52. Blood, and Clots of it occurring in the Urin testify some Vessel of Blood
in the Kidneys, Vreters, Bladder, or Vrethra burst, or corroded.

53. Purulent Matter for the most part follows an Abscess in the Kidneys,
Bladder or its Neck and Sphin^cter, or Vrethra burst; seldom arising from a
Pleurisy, or Peripneumonie, or such a like Inflammation turned into an Aposteme.

54. Worms in the Kidneys for the most part arise from Blood there corrupted,
and being driven down into the Bladder together with Urin are voided.

55. Among the more ordinary things Containd in Vrin, and taking their Original
from that part of Blood which is less apt to nourish the Body, and moreover not
departing from its laudable Constitution, a little Cloudiness consists of its
most fat, and least earthy, and so lighter part; a Sediment on the contrary, of
its least fat, and most earthy, and therefore heavier part; an Enaeorema lastly
of a mean part, that is, partaking of each. Whence as the Matter of every thing
Containd is more pure, so it will keep its place more accuratly; and according
as it is more impure, partaking more or less of any thing, so every one of them
does more or less decline from its place.

56. A greater quantity of the things Containd signifies much unuseful Matter
is in the Blood, and so to be separated; as a less quantity signifies there is
less of that Matter: if the other Signs agree.

57. These Containd things how much the whiter they be, are liked so much the
more, and they are the signs of a laudable Concoction, that is, desired
Alteration, or Correction, and hence Separation of the hurtful Humors in the
Blood: how much the more they decline from whiteness, such as are red, and
chiefly black, so much the more are they disliked, and they are signs of a
deficient Concoction, and so of greater danger.

58. So an Equality of the thing Containd, and not Severd gives the sign of
Concoction wanting, as the Unequal and Disjoind of a Concoction to be feared.

59. That we may now address our selves to the Cure of the noted Harms, the
Separation of Vrin deficient because of the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys
obstructed may be restored, by Medicines that cut, attenuate, and make Glutinous
Phlegm fluid; anon with Diuretics, and such things as send forward Urin.

60. The Medicines that cut and make Phlegm fluid, are already often before
mentiond, amongst which they here excel, which are also called Diuretics,
whereby they may use their force sooner, and more easily, such are the Roots of
Smallage, Fenel, Eringo, Parsley, etc. Leaves of Chervil, Rue, Nettle, Agrimony,
etc. Seeds of Hart-wort, Gromwel, Saxifrage, Parsley, Fenel, etc. Berries of
Juniper, Elder, Dwarf-Elder, etc. Peach-Kernels, Bitter-Almonds, etc. Spirit of
Salt, and Nitre, etc. any Volatile Salt, of which effectual Medicines may be
prepared and given in a different Form according to the pleasure of the Sick,
and his diverse Constitution.

61. For Example the following Decoction may be used sometimes a day to ii or
iii.. Smallage, Eringo-Roots, of each i. Leaves of Water-Agrimony, Chervil, ^f
each M. i. Juniper Berries, new and beaten ii. Boil them in pure Water, adding
to xx. of what is straind, Sir. of the Five Roots iii. Sp. of Nitre, or of
Salt, what suffices for a grateful Acidity. M.

62. They who esteem a Medicin to be taken in less quantity, may use the
following Mixture.. Parsley, Fenel-Water, of each ii. Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus,
or ^he Antinephritic Amsterdam Water i. Sp. of Salt Ammoniac xx drops. Oil of
Juniper Berries x drops. Sir. ^f the Five Roots i. M. Let the Sick take a
Spoon^ul often in a day; and if watchings, or pains molest, ^dd iii Gr. of
Laudanum to the Mixture.

63. By these Medicines will Glutinous Phlegm obstructing the Fleshy parts of
the Kidneys not only be cut, but by the same means it being again made Fluid,
will be mildly driven to their Funnel.

64. If the Voiding of Urin proceed more slowly, after either of the mentiond
Medicines has been taken for several hours, the Sick may commodiously drink a
good quantity of the Mineral Diuretic Waters, (such as are of the Spaw,
Sualbac, and others) whether they be used pure, or the 4th or 5th part of old
Wine and also Diuretical Or rather dropping a little of his Oily Volatile Salt
in the Waters.
be mixed with them.

65. When plenteous and glutinous Phlegm are together in the Body, then it
being so prepared and loosend with convenient Phlegmagogues, of which we often
made mention before, may be diminisht and carried out.

66. If external Cold ill affect the Region of the Loins, and therein the Fleshy
part of the Kidneys, their ill Constitution may be amended again by Aromatical
Sudorifics and Volatile Salts, but rather used at repeted times then together
and once only; for so Sudorifics do no^ only carry out the fluid Humors, but
besides alter, an^ amend the Containd Parts.

67. The Acidity of Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas howsoever encreasd
may be again corrected and diminishd by a frequent taking of Volatile Salt^
daily to be used in a small quantity.

68. But when this encreasd preternatural Acidity is occasiond by external
Cold, endeavor must be made again, that the Harm entered through the Pores of
the Skin into the next parts, and the Blood it self, and chiefly both Glandul's
be again allayd, or removd by the fore mentiond Sudorifics used prudently and
a^ times.

69. But when the same is done by great and unexpected Sorrow or Terror of
Mind, the Mind is to be freed from both Passions, and besides to be
corroborated and fenced against such assaults, and that by solid Reasons ruling
the Mind.

70. As often as the encreasd Acidity of Lympha, and the Juice of the Pancreas
follows the abuse of over-sowr Food, Sauces, or Medicines, so often they are to be
abstaind from, at least their use is to be much diminisht, and those things
that temper, dull, and allay, or weaken all Acidity are to be used, which we
have often proposed before.

71. A more sparing Separation of Vrin as it owns sometimes the same Causes that
its Defect owns but lighter; so it may be Cured by the same but likewise milder
Remedies to be used in less plenty, or in a shorter time.

72. But when the Separation of Vrin is more sparing because of a plenteous
Looseness, or Sweat, the same may be Cured either, or each of them being cured:
of which we spoke before, and shall speak more anon.

73. A more plenteous Separation of Vrin causd by ^he vicious Constitution of
the Fleshy parts of the Kid^eys according to their Channels, or Substance, may
be ^ur'd by Medicines that straiten the slackness of their ^hanels, and amend
the harm of the Substance of the ^leshy parts.

74. External things applied in the form of a Pla^er to the Region of the
Loins, where the Kidneys ^re, and made of more mild corroborating and
astrin^ent things will most opportunely straiten the slackness ^f the Channels
in the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys: By ^he help of which Medicines the harm of
those Fleshy ^arts may be corrected and amended.

75. The Blood more fluid by Volatile Salts and other Diuretics taken in too
great a measure, and being ill-affected to a more plenteous dismission of its
Serous part may be restored partly by abstaining from farther abuse of those
things noted, partly by using more temperd ^art Things. For Example;. Plantane
Water iii. Cinamon-Water i. Sp. of Alume xx drops. Sir. of Myrtle-Berries i. M.
Let the Sick take one Spoonful of this Mixture twice or thrice daily.

76. The wonted Sweats, or a Serous Looseness suppressed, may be sufferd, as long
as they do not harm the Sick, who suffer no inconveniency by a more sparing
voiding of Urin: Otherwise several Diuretics according to the diverse
Constitution of the Humors that are in the Body, whereby a greater plenty of the
Serous part may be reduced to the Kidneys, and other harms be shund.

77. A Watery Vrin made a little after Food, and chiefly after more plenteous
and Diuretical Drink taken in, seeing that for the most part it portends, or
breeds no harm, requires no Cure.

78. The Watery Vrin which is a sign of Crudity that is, of a Concoction
deficient in the Humors of the Blood, as often as that Voluntary Concoction is
expecte^ in vain, or coms too late by Nature, so often it is to b^ promoted by
Art, and that by Medicines mildly tempering all, and chiefly the Acid Acrimony
of the Humors, (whence coms to pass that more entire mixing of the Humors in
the Mass of Blood) and again loosening the close union of the Humors.

79. The fixed Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals exalted to their highest
perfection do before all others mildly temper all and even the Acid Acrimony of
the Humors: next to which Oily Volatile Salts come, and Aromatics next to these:
by the force of which predently used exceeding Man's capacity in many things not
only an Effervescency of somwhat-contrary Humors most agreeing to Man's Nature
is bred in the small Gut, and Heart; but the preternatural growing together,
and uniting of the more sharp Humors, but first moderated by them is again
dissolvd in the Blood. I speak these things of great moment in the Practice of
Physic by experience, and commend them to the truly Studious of Physic.

80. A red, and thin Vrin arising from Choler more volatile, and sharper, or
such a like external Cause may be corrected beside the shunning of external
Causes increasing heat in the Body, by Medicines that temper the Volatilness and
Acrimony encreasd of Choler; which all the somewhat Tart and more benign Acids
used often and for some time in a small quantity perform.

81. A red and thick Vrin befalling the Sick in Burning Fevers, as it signifies
a Concoction begun, so ought it not to be troubled or changed by Medicines; yea
rather, when this Work of Nature goes on slowly, it is to be helpd by the
Medicines mentiond in Sect. 79, to be selected according to the Diversity of the
Symptoms and Humors.

82. Vrin of a dark red and somewhat thick, denoting the Jaundice, is of its own
accord amended the Jaundice being Cured.

83. Bloody Vrin, testifying a Vessel of Blood harmd in the Kidneys, Urin, or
Bladder, or its Neck, or passage through may be amended, the wounded part being
heald and consolidated: To which end the following Mixture often taken by
Spoonfuls may avail.. Parsley, Plantane-waters, of each is. ss. Cinamon-water
ss. Dragons-Blood ss. Laudanum ii Gr. Sp. of Nitre dulcifi'd x drops, or
distild Vinegar ii. Sir. of Myrtle-Berries i. M.

84. Vrin Clear, and more or less Red, or becoming Turbid a little after, as it
certainly testifies a Stoppage in the Head, and a Catarrhal Fever, so requires
that the Cure of it be instituted, and that being absolvd is restord.

85. The Odor of Vrin variously changed by several things taken in, the same
being omitted it returns to its natural state.

86. Ill-smeld Urin by a corruption of the Blood communicated to it with
purulent Matter may be corrected, the corruption of Blood being corrected, and
the Ulcer breeding Purulent Matter being Cured.

87. Vrin Ins^^^d, when it is also Unconcocted, may be corrected the Crudity of
the Humors in the Blood being removed: of which see Sect. 78, 79.

88. Bitter Vrin may be corrected by more abundant deducing Choler by Stool
with Cholagogues: of which we have often spoken before.

89. Acid Vrin may be corrected by a moderat use of any Volatile and chiefly
Aromatic Salas continued for some time, being very conveniet for Melancholic
People.

90. Gravel everywhere occurring in Vrin, and testifying that the Conglobated
Glandul's are ill-affected by a frequent external Cold, or sour things taken
in, will disappear the Disease of the noted Glandul's being cured, and that by
more temperd Aromatics and Volatile Salts used long enough; seeing this Evil is
wont to be bred, and encreasd in length of time.

91. But when greater Gravel coms forth, falling to the bottom, and beginning
and cherishing the production of Stones, those things that dissolv Stones are
to be used, beside Oily Volatile Salts; amongst which we deservedly attribute
the first place to Spirit of Nitre, seeing Stones are so easily and manifestly
dissolvd and broken in two.

92. The Spirit of Nitre may commodiously be mixed in ordinary Drink, Beer,
Wine, Broths, etc. to a light acidity, and be long used; whose excellent Effect
all may admire.

93. Fat swimming on the Vrin, most commonly the individual Companion of a more
grievous Scurvy may be removed, the more sharp Humor Salt like pickle being
amended, by any Volatile, but chiefly Oily and Aromatic Salts to be taken at
Dinner, and Supper in a Glass of Wine to some drops.

94. Froth remaining in the Superficies of Vrin, when it arises from Wind,
which is evident besides by other signs of Wind, will depart, the Wind being
cured, of which before in Chap. 14. Sect. 56, etc. and elsewhere.

95. If Froath be a sign of Catarrhs in the Head, which also ought to be
concluded from other signs compared, the Cure must be directed to them, both by
things altering the Humor vicious in quality and strengthening the Head, and by
Hydragogues that remove and carry out the Humor peccant in place.

96. A Mealy, and Bran-like, or suchlike Sediment observd in Burning Fevers,
these being cured, will by little and little cease to come forth.

97. Little Threads voided with Urin will yield to Volatile Acids cautiously
used, such as are the Spirit of Nitre, of Salt, etc.

98. We said a little of the Cure of Gravel and Stones in Sect. 91, 92. which
may be seen there.

99. The Cure of Fleshy parts settling in Vrin depends on the Cure of an Ulcer
that is in the Kidneys; which may perhaps be more happily absolvd by daily
taking in Balsam of Sulphur made with the Oil of Amber, or of Juniper to iii or
iv drops, then by any other Medicin hitherto known.

100. We have already in Sect. 83. set down the Cure of Vrin Bloody, and having
Clots of Blood falling to its bottom.

101. Purulent Matter will cease to settle in Urin, the Ulcer wherever it is
being Cured; to which purpose the Balsam of Sulphur mentioned in Sect. 99. may
serve; till Oils prepared of the Sulphur of Antimony by distillation be exposed
to public Sale.

102. All things contrary to Corruption serve to Cure Worms, both Aromatics
chiefly the Bitter, and more mild Acids long used: among which they are here to
be preferred, which are also Diuretical.

103. Amongst the more ordinary things Containd, a plenteous Cloudiness and
inclining to redness or blackness; as it demonstrates the Excrementitious and
more fat Part of the Blood, so it requires Medicines that correct and diminish
it, to wit, somwhat-sowr Things and Diuretics, or more weak Sudorifies.

104. A Plenteous Enaeorema hanging in the middle of Urin, somewhat red, or
black, and Unequal, and Separated, teaching us that an excrementitious Humor of
a middle nature being begun either to abound, or to be con^^cted, yet more
slowly corrected, indicates its Alteration, and hence Separation, and Excretion
by Stool, Vrin, or Sweats: which may be done by somwhat-Acid things joind to
Volatile Salts, or more mild Aromatics, and hence by Purgers diversely mixed
according to the diversity of the Diseases and Symptoms, as Cholagogues,
Phlegmagogues, and Hydragogues; and also Diuretics, or Sudorifics likewise
mixed, or temperd.

105. Lastly, The Sediment falling to the bottom of Urin, and likewise
Plenteous, inclining to redness, or blackness, unequal and separated, as it
witnesses an Excrementitious Humor more earthy and glutinous, as well to
abound in the Blood, as to Depart more slowly from it; so it requires that the
same should be corrected by cutting and attenuating things, especially
Aromatics and Volatile Salts, seldom to be corrected by somewhat s^wr things, and
to be prepared for its Separation, yea afterward to be diminisht by
Phlegmagogues, and to be driven forth slowly, and mildly chiefly with Vrin,
sometimes by Diuretics, and Sudorifics, not by force, but taken at several times.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Descent of Urin from the Kidneys through the Ureters, and
Passage into the Bladder depraved.
1. THe Vrin Separated in the Fleshy parts of the Kidneys by the Blood
returning and straind into the Funnel descends naturally through the Vreters
into the Vrinar Bladder thence called.

2. This Descent and Passing of Vrin into its Bladder out of the Kidneys is
sometimes hindered, and chie^ly by a straitness in the Vreters, as well where the
Ureters are continued to the Funnel, as where they are implanted in the Bladder
between its double Coats.

3. A straitness hindering the passage of Urin through the Ureters is often an
Obstruction by a Stone sticking in the Funnel and stopping the entrance of the
Vreters; seldom by the same filling their joining with the Bladder: sometimes
Urin is stopped longer in the Ureters by one great Stone, or many mean ones
filling the Cavity of the Bladder; by which I have often seen the Ureters then by
degrees enlarged and distended, often admitting a thumb, and containing in them
Urin up to the Kidneys.

4. I scarce think this passage of Urin can ever be hindered, at least long by a
Stone sticking in the Vreters, seeing I have found sometimes in the middle of
the Ureter enlarged more there then elsewhere, a Stone near the bigness of a
Dovs Egg, by the sides of which Urin descended freely; which was thence
evident, because that no Urin was containd in the same Ureter, no where, unless
where the Stone stickd, was the Ureter distended.

5. This Passage of Urin may also be hinderd by any Tumor filling the place of
the Vreter with the Bladder, and more straitning its entrance there according
to Nature strait enough.

6. Seeing all this straitness proceeding both from a Stone and Tumor, cannot be
cured unless they be cured; its Cure must be expected from their Cure: although
all great Tumors there are more seldom cured, both because Men soon die the
Urin being suppressed on both sides, and because Medicines keeping their
efficaciousness cannot be directed thither without difficulty.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Retention of Urin in the Bladder, and its Excretion through
the Passage called Urethra depraved.
1. URin is for some time gatherd according to Nature in its Bladder, till
being grievous in plenty or quality it stir it up to unload it self through the
Passage.

2. The Sphincter Muscle placed round about the Orifice of the Bladder and
binding it servs for this voluntary Retention of Urin, as the Fibrous Coat of
the Bladder servs for its Excretion wrinkling its whole Substance and
straitning its Cavity, and so pressing forth the Urin containd in it through
the Passage.

3. This Retention of Vrin is depraved, when it flows out involuntarily in
Incontinence of Vrin; its Excretion is depraved, when, 1. it cannot be voided
although the Sick most endeavor it, in Ischuria and a Suppression of Urin; or
2. it is expeld plenteous enough not without great endeavor, heat and pain in
Dysuria and Heat of Vrin so called; or 3. though a continual provocation to
make Water does urge, yet coms Vrin away only by drops and by little and little
in the Dropping of Vrin, or Strangury; or 4. It is pourd sometimes into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, sometimes out of the Body, not through the Passage, but
another way, a Wound, or Ulcer being in the Bladder, or Passage.

4. An Involuntary Voiding of Vrin owns often for its Cause a Palsy, or great
Wound of the Sphincter; whence the Sphincter ceases to be contracted, and the
Orifice of the Bladder to be shut; wherefore Urin distills of its own accord, or
is driven forth by the Bladder contracted.

5. The same coms to pass sometimes in grievous Distempers, as the Epilepsie,
Apoplexy, Syncope, Astonishment, as also Drunkenness, in which all the Senses,
especially the Internal, are so troubled, or weakened, that no Animal Spirits,
or those only troubled are carried to the Sphincter of the Bladder and its
Fibrous Coat; wherefore Urin is either not retaind, or only confusedly and
inordinatly, and so involuntarily then retaind, and again voided.

6. Urin is wholly suppressed in Ischuria, 1. When the Orifice of the Bladder, or
Channel of the Passage is straightened by an Obstruction, Compression, or Growing
together.

7. Each is Obstructed often by a Stone sticking in it; seldom by Phlegm thickend
or Clots of Blood, or an excrescency of Flesh out of the bottom of the Bladder
through the Passage, and stopping it; (as several years ago I saw a stupendous
example of that thing at Amsterdam in a Woman at length miserably deceased of
this Disease by reason of a conjoind loss of Blood) often by a Fleshy part
growing in the Chanel of the Passage and filling it.

8. The Orifice of the Bladder or Chanel of the Passage is pressed by a Tumor,
and that chiefly hard next it, by an Inflammation, or Scirrhus, etc. as also by
bands binding the Yard more closely.

9. As well the Orifice of the Bladder, as Chanel of the Passage grow together,
where they have been wounded or fretted, both by more sharp Stones, and by more
sharp Humors.

10. 2. The Voiding of Vrin is Suppressed, when there can be no Contraction of
the Bladder, and because of the Palsy thereof, and because it is extremely
Filled and Distended by Vrin too long held in; which does not only happen to such
as Rave by Drunkenness, or a grievous Disease, but sometimes even to People of
Reason, or to an Infant for shame, and to its harm so long stopping Urin
preposterously, till the Bladder being too much distended by it, cannot be
further contracted to Expel the Urin.

11. In the Dysurie Urin is voided in a quantity large enough by a great
endeavor, but with heat and pain accompanying, by reason of the Orifice of the
Bladder, or the Vrinar way wounded, or ulcerated, but affected with burning
pain at the Outlet of Urin, and not letting it out unless with difficulty.

12. Those parts are wont to be Corroded or Vlcerated both by sharp Humors
joind to the Urin and corroding them, and by more great sharp Stones cutting it
in a difficult passage, and occasioning an Ulcer anon to follow of its own
accord.

13. In the Strangury there is a perpetual irritation to extrude Urin scarce
voided in the least quantity by the internal Superficies of the Bladder
corroded or ulcerated, and not enduring to be touchd of any thing coming to it
unless with an exceeding pain and notable trouble, yea continually stirring up,
and forcing the whole Body of the Bladder to contract it self, and anon expel
what is receivd in though never so little by drops and slowly.

14. The Internal Superficies of the Bladder is fretted, and Vlcerated by sharp
Humors carried thither, and by Stones, the sharp especially sticking there, and
by degrees cutting it upon a vehement motion, agitation and concussion of the
Body.

15. Uri^ flows out of its Bladder through unwonted ways, when it is either
burst asunder, or otherwise wounded, or perforated with an Ulcer.

16. It is easily burst asunder by Chance into the Belly, when the Bladder is
turgid with Urin.

17. The same is Wounded by accident, or endeavor and art. By Accident by a
Sword, Knife, Gun, etc. and that maliciously or by chance. By Endeavor by a
Lithotomists Knife.

18. Ulcers either succeed the preceding Wounds, or proceed from the corroding
Acrimony of the Humors, or a Stone cutting it, or an opend Inflammation.

19. As often as Wounds or Ulcers pierce through the Bladder, so often Urin flows
into the cavity of the Belly.

20. So often as Wounds or Ulcers are in the Neck of the Bladder, and they are
not open internally, but externally, so often the same Urin is effus'd without
the Body; as also when there is a Wound, or Ulcer in the Passage piercing
through it.

21. As for the Cure of the mentiond Evils, it shall be taught elsewhere, when
the Palsy, or a Wound of the Sphincter ought to be cured.

22. So also we will not in this place, but elsewhere set down the Cure of the
Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Syncope, Astonishment or Drunkenness.

23. Stones stopping the Orifice of the Bladder are either to be repeld with a
Squirt, if more great; or are to be expeld forth by Drink, and that Diuretical
being taken more freely.

24. The same sticking in the Passage, it being s ftned and enlarged by a
convenient Fomentation, they are to be moved forward by Diuretic Drink largely
taken; or if the Stone be more great, it is to be opend, and the Stone drawn
out, the Wound thence arising being consolidated.

25. Phlegm grown together and sticking to the Orifice of the Bladder ofter,
then to the Channel of the Passage, is to be cut and attenuated by a convenient
Liquor squirted in, whereby it may be the easier voided together with the Urin.

26. To this end Aromatics boild in Water or Wine may conduce; to which Volatile
Salts may commodiously be mixed.

27. Clots of Blood may be dissolvd by the same; if endeavor be together used,
that new Blood be not continually effus'd; which may be done by those Medicines
that hinder the efflux of Blood, and Consolidat Vessels harmd: such as we often
prescribd before, and in special in Chap. 55. Sect. 83.

28. An excrescency of Flesh out of the bottom of the Bladder is hard to be
Cured, unless by squirting a consolidating Decoction into the Bladder through a
Syringe.

29. A Compression as well of the Orifice of the Bladder, as of the Chanel of
the Vrethra by any Tumor will of its own accord be Cured the noted Tumor being
Cured: as also that compression made by bands, by untying them.

30. When the Chanel of the Passage called Vrethra, or the Orifice of the
Bladder is grown together, it must be bored, a fit Instrument being mildly
thrust in; and the same, if hollow, is to be left there so long coverd with a
Consolidating Ointment, or Plaster, till the fear of a new closing be removed.

31. The Palsy and slackness of the Substance of the Bladder may be cured by
Medicines to be prescribed in the following Book.

32. An extreme Distension of the Bladder by Vrin too long held in, may be
Cured by thrusting in a Wax Candle, being first oild, through the Vrethra to
its Cavity, and again anon by drawing, out the same; or if the Matter do not so
succeed, by thrusting into the Bladder a Silver, or Leather Squirt, or one made
of Whales Fins more truly to be called then Bones, and also oild, and letting
out the Urin through it.

33. In a Dysurie the Orifice of the Bladder, or Vrinar Passage fretted or
ulcerated, may be Cured as well internally by the Balsam of Sulphur with Oil of
Anise, Amber, or Juniper taken to 2 or 3 drops twice or thrice daily in a
convenient Liquor, Metheglin, Spanish Wine, or in a Vulnerary Decoction, as
externally the same being Syring'd in to several drops in such a like
Decoction, and for some time kept in the Bladder, or Passage harmd, the hand
being pressed abut the Nut of the Yard, and that often renewing it daily.

34. If the Humors corroding, and Acid or Salt like Pickle be still carried
down into the Bladder, they are to be Corrected with Crab's-eyes, Pearl, etc.
and chiefly with Volatile Salts often daily used in a small quantity in a
convenient Liquor.

35. The same in part at least temperd, if moreover they abound in the Body,
are to be diminisht, and evacuated with Hydragogues.

36. The Medicines before mentiond, may also conduce in the Cure of the
Strangury.

37. The Bladder burst asunder, or Wounded, or Vlcerated in its inner parts is
Incurable.

38. The Bladder Wounded, or Vlcerated from without, may be Cured by Medicines
appropriated to consolidat Wounds, and cleans Ulcers, to be proposed elsewhere.
Which is also to be understood of curing a Wound, or Ulcer of the Vretha.

CHAP. LVIII. Of a depraved Excretion of Sweat.
1. AS Vomiting, so also Sweating seems not to me a Natural Excretion, but
either Non-natural, or Preternatural, or Physical; and that either Artificial,
or Critical.

2. I do not judge Sweat to be a Natural Excretion, because in Healthy People
moderatly using the Non-natural things I have not hitherto observd any Sweat
breaking forth.

3. I judge the Excretion of Sweat to be Non-natural, as often as a Non-natural
thing exceeding the Golden Mediocrity mov's it, as hot or rainy Weather, much
Meat, or Drink, and chiefly hot; a more vehement Motion of Body, a great and
burning anxiety of Mind, etc. which ceasing Sweating ceases again.

4. I judge a Sweat Preter-natural, which is raisd by the Humors corrupted, or
by Poison taken in, weakening or killing a Man.

5. I call a Sweat Physical, which is either Critical driven forward for the
profit and health of the Sick of its own accord by the Humors that are in Man,
or Artificial by Art by Medicines taken within the Body or used outwardly as a
Bath, Rubbings, etc.

6. This Excretion of Sweat is to be thought depraved, 1. when a wonted and
neither troublesome nor hurtful Sweat to the Party is wholly, or in part hindered
whencesoever.

7. 2. When a Non-natural Sweat is suddenly stopped.

8. 3. When a Physical, or Critical, or Artificial Sweat is more, or less
hinderd.

9. 4. When some of these Sweats is so urged and encreasd, that a Man is worse
by it.

10. 5. When a Sweat breaks forth much weakening a Man with, or without a Fever.

11. 6. When an Insipid Sweat, which is wont to be most usual and not in the
least hurtful, breaks forth Salt, or Bitter, or Sow^.

12. A wonted Sweat not hurtful befalls a Man in a neutral state, and so to one
that is less healthy, and it follows (at least in my esteem) such a
Constitution of the somwhat-contrary Humors departing from a laudable
Mediocrity, by which an Effervescency producing a useful Sweat may be raisd,
and so preserving the Blood from a corruption that might breed a notable
Disease: seeing that it being hindered, or removed, the same Man is easily
overtaken by a grievous Disease: which is hindered wholly, or in part by more
grievous or lighter Causes to be proposed in the following Sect.

13. 2. A Non-natural Sweat is suddenly stopped both by the external Cold of Air,
Water, a Shirt, Bed, or other Coverings, or Clothes entering into the Body
running down of a Sweat, and every where open through the Pores, and not only
binding them, but moreover bringing a notable Change, to wit, a Coagulation, or
some other hurtful thing to all the Humors much moved every way through every
Vessel; and by the alone removing of Coverings, or Clothes and making the Body
naked; and by a sudden rest of the Body much moved before; and by an
unthought-of Terror stopping, or at least troubling any motion of the things
Containd.

14. 3. A Physical, and as well Critical, as Artificial Sweat is more, or less
hindered by the same external Cold imprudently receivd into the naked Body, or
by a grievous and unexpected Motion of Mind, chiefly by an astonishing Sorrow
or Terror.

15. 4. Any Sweat of it self hurtless or useful may be too much urged, and
encreasd by Air more hot by Nature, or Art; by Food, especially such as may be
drunk, taken plenteously, or hot; by a vehement motion of Body; by molesting
Anger and Care; by Clothes almost oppressing the Body, and by potent Sudorifies
imprudently used.

16. 5. A Sweat coming forth of its own accord with or without a Fever, and
weakening a Man, and therefore preternatural, seems to arise from a vicious
Effervescency of the Humors flowing together to the small Gut, and breeding a
dissolving, and cutting Liquor; by which carried to the Heart the universal
Mass of Blood is so changed, and dissolvd, that its Serous parts do easily
separate from the rest and break forth through the Pores of the Body in the
form of a Sweat.

17. I judge that this Liquor does most resemble a somwhat-Acid Volatile Salt,
seeing that Sweat is easily sent forth by one like it.

18. 6. A Salt (but like Pickle) Sweat breaks forth from such a like Serous
part being in the Blood: as a Bitter Sweat from Choler keeping its bitterness,
and mixed with the Serous part of Blood: but an Acid Sweat from Lympha, or the
Juice of the Pancreas more sour, and keeping its taste in the Serous part of
Blood.

19. A Diminisht, or Suppressed wholly harmless, or useful Sweat may be encreasd,
or restord, 1. By removing all its Causes. 2. By stirring up Heat in the Air.
3. By covering the Body with warmd and sufficient Clothes, or Coverings. 4. By
giving Food, and chiefly such as may be Drunk, both plenteous and hot, as
Broth, Wine, Beer, and suchlike. 5. By moving and stirring the Body again
(preposterously given to rest) as much as strength shall permit. 6. By driving
out of the Mind great Sorrow and Terror by effectual reasons. 7. By using
Sudorifies, especially the liquid, and spiritous. 8. By using a moist, or dry
Bath, when the Matter permits.

20. A Sweat too much encreasd, or of it self hurtful, and more and more
weakening a Man may be lessend, and at length removed, 1. By keeping the Body
meanly coverd, yet not naked; 2. By bewaring of the Volatile, and also Spiritous
Acid Salt; Yea, 3. By using those things that fix an Acid Salt, Chalk, Coral,
etc.

21. By this means I prescribed the following Conserv, or one like it oft-times
this year 1670. to several Sick cast by the Epidemic Fever so mortal to this
City the year before into a daily Sweat, and especially troublesome in the
Night, and daily more and more weakening them; by which taken twice, or thrice
a day to the quantity of a Nutmeg, they were by degrees freed as well of the
unseasonable Sweat, as of the Quartan Fever, and any other, if any remaind, and
so recoverd strength.. Conserv of Red Roses ii. Confection of Jacinth i.
Diascordium ii. Red Coral prepared ii. Sir. of Myrtle-Berries what suffices. M.
for a Conserv.

22. But instead of the commonly sold Diascordium called Fracastors, seeing it
is wont to be given to i. and iv. and is therefore loathed by several Sick
People, whilst I lay weak the former Winter, I invented another Preparation and
Form of Diascordium, and causd it to be made; the Dose of which, is from Gr.
xv. to i. and so much less then the Dose of Fracastors, but of much greater
efficacy and effect in all cases: as all that use both may experience with me.
Wherefore I freely add here for an Overplus the Description of Mine, (which is
commonly used both in Holland, and in the most noted Cities of England; as also
all his other Prescriptions in this Book.)

The Diascordium of Sylvius.
1.. Gentian-Root ss. Angelica-Root ii. dried Leaves of Scordium ii. of Carduus,
of Dittany of Crete, of each ss. best Saffron ii. the true Acacia i. ss. These
being cut and grossly bruisd, pour on them the rectified Spirit of Wine till it
be three or four fingers breadth above them. Let them stand 24 hours in a warm
place, then pour out the Tincture, and so often pour on, digest, and pour out
more Spirit of Wine, so often as need requires to extract all the Tincture and
Virtue. All the Tinctures being put together after the dregs have settled, if
there be any, may be pourd out slowly clear, and pure from them, and the Spirit
of Wine should be separated and drawn from it again in a B.M. to the
consistence of a more liquid Extract or Julap. Which may serve for the like
use, or be happily mixed with other Medicines instead of an Aromatic Spirit.

2.. Opium of Thebes as much as you please; to this mildly dried pour on
distild Vinegar till it be four fingers breadth deep. Let it stand in a warm
place so long, till a red Tincture be drawn; which is to be pourd out, and kept
apart, till in like manner the rest of the Tincture be extracted out of the
rest of Opium. Let all the Tinctures growing clear after a settling be pourd out
from the Dregs settling, and be likewise deduced with a slow Fire to the
consistence of a more soft Extract, or more fluid Syrup.

3.. Masterwort-Root i. Cassia Lignea* best Cinnamon, of each ss. Nutmegs iii.
M. to be a most thin Powder.

4.. True Bole Ammoniac i. ss. beat it alone and sift it, then smooth it into a
fine Powder on a Marble Stone.

5.. Gum Arabic wrinkled like a Worm ss. Dissolv it in Fenel Water i. or i. ss.

6.. All the first Extract. Of the Extract of Opium ii. Both Pouders. Mix these
together, adding by degrees the Gum Arabic dissolvd. Beat them well together,
and if its Consistencie seem too solid, add Sir. of Myrtle-Berries as much as
sufficieth. M. to be an Opiat according to Art.

23. If any please, they may reduce part of this Opiat with a most gentle Fire
in a Tin or Glass-Vessel to the Consistencie of Pills, and keep it apart so
prepared, whereby three or more Pills may be made of xv Gr. or there-about to be
swallowd; which many greatly desire in moving a Sweat.

24. But any prudent Physician may easily reduce the Opiat it self tough enough
into Pills, some Grains of Mineral Bezoard, Diaphoretic Antimony, or of any
other Sudorific Powder being added, and so give them to their Patients.

25. A Sweat salt like pickle breaking forth may thus far be amended by
Medicines that Correct the Salt like Pickle, often proposed before, and sometimes
by such as will Carry it out by Stool.

26. A Bitter Sweat requires that Choler should be Diminisht by Cholagogues often
mentiond.

27. The Matter of a Sour Sweat may be Concentrated or Temperd by Coral, Chalk,
Crab's-eyes, and suchlike, and after that be Carried out and Lessend by
Hydragogues downward by Stool.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
HAving experienced the Authors so frequently extold Oily Volatile Salt, how
efficacious it has proved in several Desperate and Chronic Diseases; I thought
it convenient to signify to the Reader, that the Author, beside what he says
of it in this Book, commended it in his public Readings in Curing the Small
Pox, King's Evil, Palsy, Apoplexy, Convulsive-Fits, Falling Sickness, Worms,
Green Sickness, Difficult Travel, etc. in which two last I have experienced it
stupendous; which may also be farther confirmd by several other Physicians in
London that buy this medicin of me. I have exposed it to Sale at Mr. Brabazon
Aylmer, Bookseller, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, and at Mr. Thomas Burrel
at the Golden Ball under St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet, in Ounce and
Half-ounce Bottles, the Ounce at 6 s. the half at 3 s. Sealed with a Lion
Rampant, and no where else in London.


