SOME LATE EPISTLES To the BODY; Writ from time to time, as the Spirit gave
utterance; Now published in the same.
WITH A LAMNETATION in the Life, over all who have shrunk, or may shrink in
this day and hour of great Trial and Tribulation, Inward and Outward, that is,
and is to be.
EPISTLE I.
DEar Friends,
all who are of the Seed and Birth Immortal, know ye, remember ye that, know
it, that this is, has been, a winnowing hour, an hour of great darkness and
temptation upon all, an hour of great rebuke: Dear Loves, all in the Love and
Bowels of my Father I exhort, I charge, I beseech you all and every one of you,
to sink down and be low and lowly, and meek and compassionate of heart, toward
all the sons and daughters of men, even toward all, especially the household of
Faith, most especially such as have been overtaken with any infirmity; in
meekness and fear walk toward such, that they may be restored, recovered, not
driven further off, remembering the Bowels, and Compassions, and tender Heart
of Him toward all and every one of you, who has not taken occasion against
you, but has watched to be gracious, and to overcome the Evil with the Good.
Dear Loves, be like-minded, that in your Fathers Spirit you may be found
healers, restorers of breaches of Paths to dwell in. Remembering also, that it
is the heart, the mind joined to iniquity, against which the controversy, the
indignation of the Almighty God is; and that he makes not an offender for a
word, an action, where the mind is not joined to iniquity.

15th 1st. Month, 1663. J. S.

EPISTLE II.
LEt none be discouraged, let none be discouraged, Dear Loves let none be
discouraged that sit not down by the way, making covenants, that wait to be
delivered from, to be relieved from all yoaks and bonds, whom nothing can
satisfy but to be free indeed; Let none such be discouraged, for He will
appear to your abundant consolation, will break through all the Clouds, rend all
the Vailes, break all the Fetters and Bonds, not a hoof spared. Oh! Oh! Oh! the
Day, the Day that hastens is at hand, even at the door, of joy and consolation,
peace and gladness, quietness and confidence, the mouths of all gainsayers
stopped, to the sincere, single in heart; and the woe, and misery, the
desolation, and anguish to the hollow-hearted Hypocrite.

J. S.

EPISTLE III.
I Have seen, I have seen, that it is not words, notions, definitions,
comprehensions, opinions, that saves or damns; wherein is the acceptance, the
reprobation, the justification, the condemnation, but in the right or wrong
Spirit, the mind joined in Love with subject thereunto? I have also seen, That
the mind joined to the wrong Spirit, may own a found Form of Words: and also
the mind joined to the right, may be under some Darkness, and misunderstanding
in some things. This is felt and witnessed in this day; and this is also
plainly traiceable in the Scriptures of Truth: So the sum, the main of all to
be minded, is, What spirit thou art born off, led by, possessed with, joined
to: for who are born of the Spirit, are led by the Spirit; and who are joined
to the Lord, are one Spirit. So all know what spirit you are of; for this is
the trial of this day, to try what spirit any are of: and this shall abundantly
be manifested before this day be over; yea, every one are to mind, yea, all and
every one, without exception of any, are to mind it; not so much what words,
practices, they own, or have owned, as what spirit they are possessed with,
joined to, led by; I say, are presently possessed with; for what was yesterday,
will not serve turn: and it is he or they, who endures to the end, receive the
Crown; the things behind, are to be left behind: It is what spirit is presently
in the dominion, is to be minded, to be eternally joined to, not to go a
whoring from the right Spirit. You are to have the right Spirit; and who have
not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; are possessed with the wrong spirit,
are in the reprobate spirit, in the reprobation, in the rejected spirit,
reprobated from the Life, the Spirit that makes all things manifest, and from
which nothing, nor no spirit can be hid; and so brings the mind into openness,
singleness, to stand in the presence, to be covered with the Life, the
Justification, where the deeds are wrought in God, where there is no
condemnation in Christ Jesus; in Christ Jesus, in him covered with the Savior,
the Anointed one, the Anointing of God in Him, one Spirit with him, in him, in
the justification of the Life, and so out of the condemnation, the reprobation;
and such walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and there is no
condemnation to such.

J. S.

EPISTLE IV.
DEar Friends all,
remember, in the lowly, sober, meek, and humble mind, that Moses, even Moses,
the chosen of God, with whom God spoke face to face, the meekest man upon the
earth, fell; and where? at the waters of strife. Oh dear Lambs all! what have
been my burdens, my lamentations, for these waters of strife? depth! depth!
depth have been the provocations! I charge no man, I leave each to their own,
only here, and fear, and consider; That Moses, even Moses the meekest man in
his day upon the earth, fell, at the waters of strife, and so could not enter
into the Land of rest, the promised Land, only saw it afar off.

26th 4th Month, 63. J. S.

EPISTLE V.
OH Lambs and little Ones, blessed Flock of my Fathers fold!
sing and rejoice, and shout, shout for joy and gladness of heart, for the hour
of your redemption; yea, the hour of your redemption is come; yea, the blessed
hour of your redemption is come, in a way wonderful and glorious, beyond all
that ever ye could have thought of, or conceived: Oh! eternal eternal, living
Acknowledgements to the Life, the Power, the Redemption, the Redeemer, that
has done, and will do wonderfully, beyond all can be thought or conceived, in
the behalf of his simple, single, harmless People, that have no help in the
earth, but himself alone; therefore he is their Savior and their Salvation,
their Redeemer, and their Redemption, in Him they have no lack. Oh! the blessed
day of God, who can declare it, who can witness it, who can sing forth his
Praises, who can declare his Name sufficiently? He, even he alone, is all the
Salvation and desire of his People. This is the Day of God, he is come, and his
reward is with him; and all the Lambs and little Ones, are abundantly satisfied
in him, in looking to him alone.

17th 5th Month, 63. J. S.

EPISTLE VI.
THe Lord, the Lord, the God of Jacob lives and reigns; therefore fear you not,
nor be discouraged you Lambs and little Ones, your Father lives and reigns, and
does in Heaven and Earth what he will: this is Salvation enough, this is
deliverance enough to the single-heart. Oh dear Lambs, here dwell, here abide,
look not out; let your mind be stayed singly, stayed upon your Rock, and, What
can aile you, what can harm you? what can you want while you are preserved
faithful, obedient to, laid down in the Will? Dear Lambs, look not out: that
which looks out, is not to be delivered, is not to be preserved, is to dye,

And thus says the Lord my God in me, I will arise, I will arise as in Mount
Perazim; I will be wroth as in the Valley of Megiddon, I will bring forth my
Work, my strange Work, and who shall let it? I will work wonders, I will work
wonders, I will work wonders in the behalf of my Lambs and People. I will
deliver them, I will deliver them, I will deliver them, the whole, the whole
Earth shall not hinder the deliverance: I will bring forth in behalf of my
People whom I have chosen to magnify my Name, in and by; and will be avenged
upon their Enemies with a sudden and a sore destruction; their destruction
comes as a whirlwind. The day, the hour, is at hand, wherein I will be
magnified upon, over the Heathen that know not God.

26th 5th Month, 63. J. S.

EPISTLE VII.
DEar and tenderly beloved Friends all, of the Seed and Birth Immortal,
how do I travel, labor, travel in spirit under much heaviness, bowed down
under the sight and feeling of what is, and is to come; of which I have not
been silent, the Life through me has not: for what am I, but the poor
contemptible vessel (and let me be so for ever says my soul) through which it
has conveyed? Oh! Oh Friends! the safety, the only safety, is each to their
own, sink down there, still, still, out of all things, all appearances, all
words, all considerations, all observations, covered with the Substance, with
the patient, innocent, loving, tender, forbearing Life and Nature, the Trial,
the Trial, the Trial of this day, Inward and Outward; Inward, Inward, is to
bring all to this, to live In, and to the proper measure only, to know no man,
nor nothing, but in this. Oh dear Loves! I am to remember you of it, you know
it (though the simplicity has received a bruise in many) this is the Unity,
the bond of Peace, the Preservation, the Strength, the All, the Sum of all,
each to be found in, to abide in their own; and the Ministration of all is to
testify to this, to minister to this, to witness to this, to lead to this, and
not from it; else their ministration is the ministration of Death, in so far:
And therefore it deeply, greatly concerns all, in the dread and fear of the
living God, to watch, and be sober, and forbearing, in what they say or write,
that in the measure of the Manifestation only, they do speak or write; wherein
their safety also, will be to exercise forbearance, till they may not forbear:
For Friends all, ye know it all of you, that are of the Seed and Birth
Immortal, that there is a tendency in all words (in all manner of words, yea,
in words as well spoken within as without, even spoken in the Eternal) to lead
out. Therefore hear, and fear, and consider, and be low and lowly, and meek,
and sober, is the Exhortation of the Life through me, to all of you, to sink
down, and answer the Call, the Trial, the Redemption, the Salvation, the
glorious living Salvation of this day, wherein the blessing, and the glory of
it lies (how bitter soever the appearance of it may be for the time) even that
every one must come to their own, must stand in their own, to their own, the
un-erring, certain, steady Path, each in their own particulars, here to dwell,
here to abide for ever: here is the Unity, the Bond of Peace, here is stability
and safety, yea, here, and here only.

J. S.

EPISTLE VIII.
DEar Lambs all,
the glory, the wonder of the deliverance of this day and hour, the wonderful
and glorious deliverance of this day is hid, hid, shut up from the mind that
looks out, it is the mind in union with the will, laid down therein, passing
through the sufferings Inward, Inward, and Outward, not enquiring, considering,
or looking out, that has, that has the deliverance, that is in the
deliverance, in the wonderful and glorious deliverance, that is out of all
appearances, comes not with observation, to the eye that is abroad, looks out.
Dear Loves all, sink down and be still, and who do so, possess, witness, see
the glorious, the wonderful deliverance of this day and hour, that is hid from
the eye of all living in observations abroad in the many things, gazing and
wondering, and hastening, and fretting, and vexing, disappointing, and
disappointed, and perishing, despising the day of small things, even the
Salvation that is in, and through the contemptible little small Seed, to all
that are in union therewith, subject thereunto, every one in their particular
measure, weaned, weaned, from all things else, neither ascending, nor
descending; he who has little, has no lack, and he that has most, nothing
over; here is the preservation, here is the dominion, the redemption, the
deliverance in this hour to be preserved sober, and single here, chaste to the
measure of the Manifestation, of the Life in the particular; here to be
preserved for ever, is deliverance, is Salvation enough to the single heart, as
to their own particular: And in the behalf of all, that all may be brought
hither, kept here, in the Unity, the Bond of Peace, the order preserved, every
one standing and falling to his own Master, the Life, and the Life only in
dominion, in and over all, Amen. Halelujah.

10th 6th Month, 63. J. S.

A LAMENTATION in the Life, over all who have shrunk, or may shrink in this day
and hour of great Trial and Tribulation, Inward and Outward, that is, and is to
be.
OH Friends!
what can preserve you, relieve you, restore you, but the Rock of Ages? what
has hindered, does weaken, and brings you under, and will, but unbelief, and
unfaithfulness there-through; your not giving up singly, your looking out, and
letting in the reasoner, your not cleaving to the living God, the Measure of
him manifested in you, sinking down to that, dying to, ceasing from all things
else, looking to God alone, laying your account, reckoning no less than all to
be given up, life and all, as it is, shall be called for, without reserving
more or less; minding nor mattering no preservation, but to be preserved
faithful, single, obedient in all things, to the end; faithful to the Light,
the Measure, watching to and in that, and so preserved out of the backwardness,
and out of the forwardness, led by the Spirit in all things; and who are not,
shall not be; What can they do in this day and hour especially, but stumble and
fall, be offended, be an offense? So there is no safety, there can be no safety
out of the Path, the unerring certain Path, which is the Cross to the wisdom,
willings, runnings, and spirit of this World, which is a Path beyond, out of
the view of all appearances, reasonings, considerations, the vultrous eye
reaches not, and yet the least of the Kingdom know it, who are born of the
Spirit, walk after, are led by the Spirit. Oh my burdens, my lamentations, my
complaints, the floods of sorrows, that have passed over me upon this account,
that this which is the one thing necessary, has been, and is so little minded
by many, I say, minded in power, singleness, simplicity, and truth, minded as
the sum of all, to be chaste to the leadings, movings, openings, drawings of
the Light, the particular Measure, to watch to this continually, not to fall
short of it, not to outrun it. What makes so unequal, unsteady, uncertain
stepts but this? forwardness to do things that may be forborne, and gender into
weakness and confusion; and backwardness to do these things, cannot be forborne
without offense, at home and abroad.

11th 5th Month, 1663. J. SUINTOUN.

THE END.

