TO ALL THE Friends to Truth in the Nations.
DEar Friends, I am Commanded of the Lord God to lay a few things before yon,
charging you in his Fear and Dread to weigh and consider them.

THis is an Hour and Power of Darkness, of Trial upon all, and is not a Time
for any to be looking abroad; It is high time for the strength of every
Individual to be gathered Inward; Stayed minds will now be found more needful
than ever.

The Grand Design of the Enemy is, To draw you out; and does suit his several
Baits accordingly; Knowing assuredly, that your Strength, your Peace, your
Safety, your Redemption, indeed your All lies in your single being stayed in
your Minds in the Light, and in your Real and Sincere Obedience and Subjection
to the Leading of That, to the proper measure of that in every Individual or
Particular Vessel; If he can but lead you out from That in more or less, in so
fat he gains his point, and you so far strengthen the hands of the Enemy, and
you are struck in your very Vital parts, especially if in any measure your
Minds be joined to that Thing, whatever it be you have set up an Idol of
Jealousy.

Therefore all dear hearts, in the LIGHT watch over the hollow-nature, over
your Thoughts, Words and Actions; every one keeping in their proper Sphere,
singly given up in all things INWARD and OVTWARD, Fearing and Trembling,
especially in this Day to admit of a Thought, a Word or Action to pass you
withont examining in the Light, how far it is owned by the Infallible Witness;
and if it will not stand there shut it out, and let it alone, if there be any
Doubt concerning it.

Dear hearts, I have in the Eternal seen, that the Enemy has much entered, in
the Ordinary Application of that which goes under the name of our own Freedom.

I say again, this is an Hour and Power of Darkness, and the Enemy has entered;
And I say ( in the Dread and Authority and Power of the living God) has
leavened many; and the Seed has been and is burdened in many Particulars, and
in one another; The World has entered, Self has entered, the High-mind has
entered: Singleness, Love, Integrity, Tenderness, Bowels, have been eaten out.
Judgings, Evil-Surmisings, Enterfearings with one another work; so that even
Divisions with an Open Face has entered as it were; Yea, and the Servants of
the Lord God have been discouraged, and their hands weakened, in that which they
have been particularly employed in from the Lord God.

I speak what in the Infallible I see and know, I Judge no man; All Judgment
is committed to the Son; every Individual is to stand-fast in that Liberty, to
admit of no Judgment but what is from the true Judge: To shut out the Accuser,
any thing that would take that Office; And indeed the Work of that is to
justify the Guilty, and condemn the Innocent, both at Home and Abroad (feel
me) And therefore I do in the Name and Authority of the Lord God Charge every
Individual, shutting out all Reasonings, Consulations, Justifications,
Accusations, that they may come under the Single View of the True and
Insallible Judge, the LIGHT in the Conscience; that every One may in that see,
how far the Execrable thing has entered any of you, in any of the
aforementioned Evils: For I do say, In the Fear and Dread of the Almighty,
that I have seen his Fury ready to break forth for these things; Yea, his
Jealousy that burns like Fire.

And therefore let none be stout-hearted, let all sink down to the Witness; for
whatever ye be, it is your station to dwell there, and not to look out; and in
that you shall see the Innocent Cleared, Justified, and Judgment brought upon
the head of the Transgressor, that in every Vessel the Transgressor may be
Sacrificed; there may be nothing preserved that must be broken down and shut
out, that the Oppressed may be delivered, the Dear and Precious Union of
Friends preserved, the Reproach of Truth taken away, and who have been
overtaken in an Infirmity ( through the Deceit or Violence of the Enemy) may be
restored with the Spirit of Meekness, Love and Tenderness.

For Friends, Know that the Weight of these things have been upon me, and I
have been pressed under them. I am even bowed down.

J.S.


