THE Complete Method OF CURING Almost all DISEASES.

To which is added, An Exact Description Of their several SYMPTOMS.

Written in Latin, by Dr. Thomas Sydenham, And now faithfully Englished.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1694.

The Translators PREFACE.
THough Custom, and the Quality that I have assumed, of a Translator, seem to
require, and the Reader will probably expect, that the Business of this Preface
should be to praise my Author, and recommend his Book to the Public, and though
perhaps never any had two more alluring Subjects to enlarge upon, yet I am
resolved to say nothing, or, at least, very little on either of 'em. They are
best able to do these Offices to one another; and I dare neither attempt to
write Dr. Sydenham's Elogy, nor give a Character of any of his Works. And
though I were so much a Friend to the Bookseller, as to run the hazard of the
Reader's Censure for his sake, and endeavor to promote the Sale of the Book,
by showing how much it is the Interest of all those who have any Concern for
the Recovery or Preservation of their Health, to buy and peruse it; I do not
think that I could thereby do him any considerable Service. For the Care and
Skill of the Printer and Book-binder does much more effectually recommend a
Book to the Generality of Buyers, than the Commendatory Preface of a Translator.

I shall content my self, therefore, with assuring the Reader in general, that
he will find all that is promised in the Title Page, abundantly made good in
the Book: In which, besides a complete Method of Cure, he will meet with short
and clear Accounts of the Symptoms of most Diseases incident to Mankind, with
succinct Histories of the Progress and Periods of many of 'em; which as it is
perhaps one of the most useful, and yet hitherto most neglected parts of
Physic, our Author labored with incredible Industry to cultivate; and the
happy Success of his Endeavors herein, seems to be chiefly owing to that
uncommon Sagacity of which he was Master, and which was peculiar to him. It may
not be unfit also to advertise the Reader, that the Medicines here commended
are all of 'em very safe, and for the most part easy to be had, and at low
Rates. As for their Fitness for the Uses to which they are adapted, I leave it
to be guessed from the Author's extraordinary Success in the Practice of
Physic, which I have heard even some of his greatest Enemies acknowledge with
Admiration. And in Cases of this Nature, it is not ill Logic to make use of the
Happiness of the Event, for an Argument to prove the Fitness and Excellency of
the Means. In a word, the Reader will find in this Book all that made Dr.
Sydenham so deservedly famous, that Method and those Medicines with which he
saved so many Lives, and perhaps more than was ever before published in so
small a Volume, in any Language whatsoever. Not a few General Precepts and
Aphorisms, or a paultry Collection of Receipts, but a Methodical and almost
complete Body of Physic, in a few Sheets. And I know not whether this be not
the only Book, at least on this subject, of which it may be said justly and
without a Bull, that it affords Matter of Study for as many Years, as it may be
read, and understood too, in Hours, by any intelligent Person.

As for what concerns my self, and my Performance in the Translation, it will,
I think, be sufficient to declare, that I have done all that I designed to do,
which was to render the Book into English, with all possible Fidelity, and the
greatest Exactness I could. And as this did neither cost me much Time nor
Trouble, so I am very willing to acknowledge, that the Public has no great
Obligation to me for it, nor do I pretend to any right to their Thanks for my
Pains.

I am satisfied that my Design was innocent and good, and that it does not at
all require any Apology to be made for it; nor am I so fond of that Employment,
as to undertake it without Necessity. But there is an Objection against all
Works of this nature, that is too commonly urged, and with too great Appearance
of Reason to be neglected. All Translations of Medicinal Books are by many
judged to be not only useless but pernicious; and such as procure 'em to be
published in the Vulgar Languages, are accused of no less a Crime, than of
doing all they can to furnish Madmen with Weapons to murder themselves, and to
expose the Lives of Men to the Mercy of Fools and Knaves. I acknowledge indeed,
that the World, and perhaps this Nation more than any other part of it, is
exceedingly pestered with Quacks. I am, both by Inclination and Interest, very
much their Enemy, and I believe themselves to be far greater Plagues than the
Diseases they pretend to cure. There is hardly any thing that I could not more
patiently bear to be accused of, than of contributing in the least to augment
their Numbers of Credit. And as my Conscience bears me Witness, that I was not
guilty of any kind Design to them, when I began this Translation, so I am
abundantly satisfied that they will not be able to draw any considerable
Advantage from it, now that it is finished. The utter Abhorrence I have of them
and their pernicious Practices, makes me hate most Pretensions to Secrets in
Physic, for their sakes. And I verily believe, that there is nothing that has
done greater disservice to the Honor and Interest of Physicians, than their
over-carefulness to conceal the Knowledge of the Art which they profess* from
the Public. I will not deny, but that there are some things that may and ought
to be kept secret, and perhaps might have been better delivered by way of
Cabala, than published in any Language whatsoever. But to endeavor to make a
Mystery of all, is not only contrary to nhe Practice of the Professors of all
other Arts and Sciences, but also, as I hinted before, of very bad consequence
to Physicians themselves. For Men will be apt to suspect, and think too that
they have reason to do so, that there must be a great deal of Mischief, or very
little true Worth in that which is hid with so much care, and that they are
either afraid or ashamed to expose it to light. Few would be willing to trust
themselves to the Conduct o^ a Guide, who would not suffer them to see where he
led them; and the generality of People dislike Implicit Obedience, in what
concerns the Body, as much, if not more than in those things that relate to the
Soul Men are indeed by this means kept in Ignorance, and consequently are
Intractable, Superstitious and Fanciful, which whether they be desirable
Qualifications in a Patient, let any reasonable Person determine. Their Want of
Knowledge does also expose them to the Impostures of Empiries, who, like all
other Juglers, love to play in the Dark. Thus we see that the Ignorant are the
Quacks best Customers, and who is there that has read the Works of but one
Learned Physician, that would not tremble to put his Life into the Hands of a
Mountebank.

These and diverse other Considerations make me very inclinable to believe, that
if the greatest, or, at least, the best part of Physical Books, were put into
such Languages as are commonly understood, whatever particular and accidental
Inconveniences might possibly follow thereupon, yet in the general, both the
Number and Credit of Quacks would be exceedingly diminished. They would then be
more easily discovered, nor would they find so many Cullies. Men would not
fancy themselves able enough to be their own Physicians, much less would they
suffer themselves to be fooled by the Impudence of an Ignorant Impostor. And,
of all the Books in the World, this, that I have taught to speak its Author's
native Language, seems to be one of the least dangerous to be read and
understood by the Unlearned. It Is true indeed, that any Person that is Master
of a tolerable Judgment and Capacity, and shall read with Application any one
Chapter of this Book, especially of such as treat of Internal Diseases, which
are the Physicians peculiar Province, will certainly be thereby very much
improved in so important a Part of Knowledge. But it is no less certain, that
this Improvement of his Knowledge will be, equally for the Advantage of the
Learned Physician, and the Empiric' Confusion; as that which will enable him to
discern the Skill and Sagacity of the Former, and the Rashness and Ignorance of
the Latter, and consequently make him Love and Esteem the one, as much as he
will Detest and Contemn the other.

After all, as I am confident, that a honest and judicious Persons, whether
Phy^cians or others, will ever Honor the Illustrio^ Memory of my Author; so
neither am I altogether without Hopes, that they will Excuse, and perhaps also
(which is more than I either desire, or pretend to deserve) Thank

The Translator.

The common Purging Potion.
TAke half an ounce of Tamarinds, two drams of Sena Leaves, one dram and a half
of Rhubarb; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water to three ounces:
Then strain them, and dissolve in the liquor, Manna and solutive Syrup of
Roses, of each one ounce Mix them for a Potion.

The Common Vomit.
Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus two ounces, the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum one ounce, Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers half an ounce; mix them for a
Vomit, which is to be taken about four a Clock in the Afternoon, drinking a
large draught of Posset after every vomiting.

The Pearl Julep.
Take Black-cherry water, Milk-water, of each three ounces; Barley,
Cinnamon Water, ^e ounce, Prepared Pearl a dram and an half, ^ugar-candy as
much as is sufficient; add Da^ask-rose-water half a dram. Mix them for a Julep.
Dose four or five spoonfuls in sickness, for fainting fits.

The Cordial Julep.
Take Milk water, Black-cherry water, of each three ounces; Plague water, Syrup
of Clove Gilliflowers, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, of each half an ounce.
Mix them, and make a Julep, which is to be taken frequently.

The Decoction for a Diet-drink.
Take Roots of Sarsaparilla, six ounces; Sassafras and China, of each two
ounces; Liquor ish, one ounce; boil them in two Gallons of Spring water for the
space of half an hour after which let them stand in a close Vessel of hot ashes
twelve hours; then boil them again to the consumption of a third part of the
water; and as soon as you take the liquor from the fire, infuse into it half an
ounce of Anise seeds: after it has stood two hours more stra^ it, and let it
stand till it grow clear, then po^^ off the liquor into Glass-bottles well
stopp^^ and reserve it for use. This is to be used f^^ ordinary drink and
continued thirty days.

The Opening and Antiscorbutic Apozem.
Take the Roots of Grass, Cichory, Fen^^^ and Asparagus, of each one ounce;
Currants a^^ Raisins stoned, of each two ounces; Leaves (...) Liverwort, Hearts
tongue and Maidenhair, (...) each one handful; Leaves of Brook-lime (^ded
toward the end) two handfuls; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring
water to two pounds (or a quart) to which toward the end add half a pint of
Rhenish Wine. Then strain them, and while the liquor is yet hot, infuse in it
for two hours in a close Vessel one handful of the Leaves of Garden
Scurvygrass. After which strain again, and add Syrup of the five Roots, Syrup
of Orange juice, of each two ounces; Barley, Cinnamon water, one ounce. Mix
them and make an Apozem, the Dose of which is half a pint, every morning and at
5 in the afternoon for fourteen days together.

The thickening Eclegma (or licking Medicine) for a Cough.
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, one ounce; Syrups of Red Poppy, of Purslain and of
Ju^ubes, and (the licking Medicine called) Lohor ^anum, of each half an ounce;
Sugar Candy a sufficient quantity. Mix them in a Marble Mortar for the space of
an hour, and make a perfectly mixed Licking Medicine, which is to be kept in a
Galley-pot for use. It is to be taken frequently, licking it off of a Liquorish
stick.

An Eclegma that thickens more powerfully.
Take Conserve of Red Roses, Syrup of Violets and of Meconium, of each one
ounce; White Poppy Seeds, three drams. Beat them together, and strain them
through a Hair Sieve, then add expressed Oil of Nutmeg, six grains. Make an
Eclegma.

In a thin Defluxion.
Take Conserve of Red Roses, two ounces; Syrup of Meconium and of Jujubes, of
each one ounce; Olibanum, Mastick and Amber, of each one dram; expressed Oil of
Nutmegs, six grains. Mix them and make a Lohoch, which is to be licked often.
You may take twice every day a spoonful of this Eclegma, pouring into it Balsam
of Sulphurs anisated from eight to twelve drops.

Purging Ale.
Take Polypody of the Oak, one pound; Roots of Monks Rheubarb, Sena Leaves, and
stoned Raisins, of each half a pound; Rheubarb sliced and Horse Radish Roots,
of each three ounces; Leaves of Garden Scurvy Grass and Sage, of each four
handfuls; four Orenges sliced. Infuse them in five or six gallons of Ale not
hopped, while it is fermenting; and when it is ripened, use it instead of your
ordinary drink for fourteen or one and twenty days, especially drink a draught
of it every morning.

The Hysterical Plaster.
Take Galbanum dissolved in Tincture of Castoreum and strained, three drams;
Taramahac, two drams. Make a Plaster for the Navel.

A Purging Medicine for young Infants.
Take one small spoonful of Syrup of Cichory with Rheubarb.

The bitter Purging Decoction.
Take of the bitter Decoction prepared with a double quantity of Sena, four
ounces; Syrup of Buckthorn, one ounce; Electuary of the juice of Roses, two
drams. Mix them for a Potion.

Of the Disease called in Women, the Hysterical; in Men the Hypochondraical
Passion.
When by any grievous accident the Soul is troubled, the animal Spirits run
into disorderly motions; the Urine appears sometimes limpid, and in great
quantity; the sick persons cast off all hope of recovery; and portend the most
dismal things to themselves. Whatsoever part of the body the Disease does
affect (and it affects many) immediately the symptoms that are proper to that
part appear; in the Head, the Apoplexy, which ends in a Palsy of one half of
the body, comes presently after Childbearing; sometimes they are seized with
Convulsions, that very much resemble the Epilepsy, and are commonly called the
Suffocation of the womb, in which the Belly and Entrails rise upwards toward
the Throat: At other times they are miserably tormented with the Hysterical
Clavus, in which there is a most vehement pain in the head, which you may cover
with your thumb, the sick person in the mean time vomiting up green Matter like
to that sort of Choler that has its name from Leeks. The Paroxysm does also
counterfeit the Palpitation of the Heart, the Cough, the Colic and Iliac
Passions, the Stone and Suppression of Urine: it is attended with prodigious
vomitings, and sometimes with a Diarrhaea; outwardly in the musculous Flesh it
causes sometimes Pains, and sometimes swellings. In the Legs it is like a
Dropsy, nor (which is wonderful) does it leave the Teeth untouched. The Back
is often cruelly pained; and almost always the external parts are so cold that
a dead body is not more. The sick persons break out ridiculously into excessive
Laughter and Tears without any cause; and are some times troubled with spitting
to such a degree, as were enough to make one believe that they had been
anointed with Mercury. Hysterical Pains whatsoever part they affect, leave a
Tenderness behind them that cannot endure to be touched, as if the Flesh had
been beaten.

Let Blood be taken away to the quantity of eight ounces.

Apply the Plaster of Galbanum to the Navel: And next morning let the sick
person begin to use the following Pills.

Take of the Pills called Cochiae the greate^ two drams; Castoreum powdered,
two grains Balsam of Peru, three drops: Make twelve Pills; of which take four
every morning, of every second day, according to your strength, about four or
five of the clock, sleeping after them.

Take Rue water four ounces, compound Briony water two ounces, Castoreum tied
in a knot, and hung in the Glass, half a dram; Sugar Candy a sufficient
quantity. Of this take four or five spoonfuls in every Fit. After the Pills
take what follows.

Take Filings of Steel eight grains, and with a sufficient quantity of Extract
of Wormwood, make three Pills; which must be taken early in the morning, and
repeated at five in the afternoon, for thirty days, drinking after them a
draught of Wormwood Wine.

If the form of a Bolus be more grateful,

Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and Conserve of the yellow part of Orenges,
of each one ounce; preserved Angelica, Nutmeg preserved, Treacle of
Andromochas, of each half an ounce; compound Powder of Aron three drams,
preserved Ginger two drams, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the
juice of Citrons, or (in want of that) Syrup of Orenges, make an Electuary.

Take of this Electuary two drams, Filings of Steel eight grains, and with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Orenges make a Bolus, which is to be taken
morning and evening, drinking after it a draught of Wormwood Wine, or six
spoonfuls of the following Infusion.

Take Roots of Angelica, Elicampane, and Masterwort, of each one ounce; Leaves
of common Wormwood, lesser Centory, white Horehound and Germainder, of each one
handful: the Barks of two Orenges sliced; pour upon them so much Spanish Wine
as will rise two inches above them, and strain it at the time of using it. Or,

To delicate persons the Steel may be given in the form of a Powder, as follows.

Take Filings of Steel finely powdered one ounce, compound Powder of Aron six
drams, Coriander seed prepared, seeds of Anise and sweet Fennel, of each half
an ounce; the best Cinnamon, red Coral prepared, of each three drams; Nutmeg
two drams: Beat them all into a very fine Powder, to which add of the best
white Sugar to the weight of all the rest. Take half a dram of this Powder in a
Spoon, twice a day, four days together, and afterward a whole dram twice every
day for forty days, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the following Julep, or
of Wormwood and Wine.

Take Milk water twelve ounces, compound Gentian water four ounces, Wormwood
water of the greater composition two ounces; White Sugar a sufficient quantity:
Make a Julep. Or,

Take half a pint of Rhenish Wine prepared with Wormwood, compound Gentian
water two ounces, Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers one ounce: Make a Julep.

Take choice Myrrh, Galbanum, and Assa foetida, of each one dram; Castoreum
half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Balsam of Peru, make them up
into Pills, twelve out of each dram; of which take three every night, drinking
after them three or four spoonfuls of compound Bryony water, during the whole
process of the Cure.

If these Pills move the Belly, use these that follow.

Take Castoreum, one dram; volatile salt of Amber, half a dram; with a
sufficient quantity of extract of Rue, make four and twenty Pills; of which
take three every night, drinking after them three or four spoonfuls of the
Hysterical Julep.

Spirit of Hartshorn exhibited frequently to sixteen or eighteen drops, is of
excellent use.

But if the Disease does not yield to these remedies, then take the following
Pills.

Take Troches of Myrrh powdered, one scruple, Balsom of Sulphur terebinthinated
four drops; with a sufficient quantity of Gum Ammoniac disolv'd make four
Pills; which must be taken morning and evening, drinking after them four or
five spoonfuls of the Hysterical Julep, with twelve drops of Spirit of
Hartshorn.

The Antiscorbutic Electuary, with the Water there described, is good also in
this Disease, and likewise the corroborating Electuary, with the addition of
Conserve of Garden Scurvy Grass, one ounce; compound powder of Aron, six drams,
drinking after it the forementioned Water.

But if all these Remedies prove ineffectual, you must have recourse to the
waters that partake of Iron; and if these also do no good, to those that are
sulphurous, such as are the Bath waters.

Concerning the use of the Mineral waters these things are to be observed. If
any bad symptom appear, which may be ascribed to the drinking of the water, in
such a case you must abstain from them, till the symptom disappear. Continue
the use of them for six weeks at least, rather two months. Eat now and then
preserved Ginger, or Caraway seeds confected to warm the stomach. You may also
take three of the Hysterical Pills the first ten nights, drinking after them
four or five spoonfuls of the Hysterical Julep.

As for the Bath waters, you must dsink them two days, and bath in them the
third, proceeding thus alternately six weeks or two months.

If the Steel heat the body too much, then during the use of it drink every
fourth morning four pints of Mineral purging waters: Which though they move the
belly, yet cause no agitation, as the purging medicines of the shop^ usually do.

Of the Depuratory, or cleansing Fever of the Years 1661, 62, 63, 64.
If the sick person be young he must be le^ blood in the arm, and the same day
some hours after, or the next day, two hours after a light dinner let him take
a Vomit of the infusion o^ Crocus Metallorum, and after that has done working,
drink a Pacific Draught, such as that which follows.

Take Black-Cherry water one ounce and half, Plague water half an ounce, liquid
Laudanum sixteen drops: Mix them for a Draught

From this to the eleventh or twelfth day, the following Clyster is to be
injected every morning

Take of the common Decoction for a Clyste^ one pound (or the like quantity of
Cows milk Brown Sugar and Syrup of Violets, of each two ounces. Make a Clyster.

After that day suffer his Belly to be constipted, that so the Febrile Matter
may the soon be concocted, to which purpose also modera^^ Cordials exhibited
during these last days, are very useful; as,

Take Powder of Crabs claws compound fourteen grains, Electuary de Ovo half a
scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers make a
Bolus, which may be taken every eight hours, drinking after it five or six
spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take Milk water, Black-Cherry water, of each three ounces; Plague water and
Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, of each one ounce: mix them and make a Julep, or
such like.

If you diligently observe this method, you will usually about the fifteenth
day perceive (both by the laudable breaking of the Urine, and the manifest
remission of all the Symptoms) that it is time to exhibit the common purging
Potion.

Of the Pestilential Fever of the Years, 1665, 66.
After the sick person has been let blood in his Bed, let him be covered all
over with Cloths, and his Forehead bound about with a piece of Woollen Cloth:
and then if he does not vomit, let some Medicine to procure Sweat be exhibited
to him; as

Take Treacle of Andromachus half a dram, Electuary de Ovo one scruple, Powder
of Crabs-claws compound twelve grains, Cochinel eight grains, Saffron four
grains, with a sufficient quantity of the juice of Kermes make a Bolus, which
must be repeated every sixth hour, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the
following Julep.

Take Carduus Benedictus water, and compound Scordium water, of each four
ounces; d^ stilled Treacle water, two ounces; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, one
ounce: mix them for a Julep.

But if he be troubled with a vomiting, the Sudorific ought not to be given
till the weight of the Cloths alone make the Sweat begin to appear, his Face
being in the mean while covered with part of the Sheets:

The Sweat thus begun must be promoted with repeated draughts of Sage Posset,
or Bee^ boiled with a little Mace, and continued in this manner the space of a
natural day, or 24 hours during which time he may be allowed some dcomfortable
Broths for his refreshment.

After the breaking forth of a Swelling, (...) durst not open a Vein. Let the
sick person keep his Bed four and twenty hours after the Sweating is over, and
diligently avoid all manner of Cold, suffering his Shirt to dry of it self upon
his body. Let him drink nothing but what is hot, and still persist in the use
of Sage Posset Next morning let him take the common purging Potion.

The Years 1667, 1668, produced the Small Pox, and a Fever partaking of their
nature.

In the Years 1669, 70, 71, 72. A Dysenterical Fever reigned.

And the Years 1673, 74, 75, were infeste with a Comaton or Sleepy Fever.

I do not insist upon the cure of these Fevers because I am of opinion that
they might have been cured by the method described in the account of the Fever
of the Years, 1685, etc.

Of Intermitting Fevers.
They begin with Cold and Shivering, which is immediately followed with Heat,
and that with Sweating, after which the Fever disappears, though during the
first days of the Disease, especially in Autumn, there sometimes happens a
Remission, rather than a proper Intermission of the Fever. Both the cold and
hot fit are for the most part attended with an inclination to vomit, vehement
sickness, thirst and dryness of the Tongue. The swelling of the Abdomen in
Children, and of the Feet in Men, signify the solution of the Fever: The Pain
in the Jaws, Hoarseness, Hollow Eyes, and a ghastly Countenance portend Death.

Take of the Peruvian Bark finely powdered, one ounce, and with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, or of dried Roses, make an Electuary,
to be divided into twelve Doses, of which one is to be taken every four hours,
drinking after it a draught of any sort of Wine, beginning immediately after
the Fit.

But if these Bolus's move the Belly, pour ten drops of liquid Laudanum into
the draught of Wine after every second Dose, as you see occasion.

To prevent Relapses (especially of Quartans) the foregoing process must be
thrice repeated in the three following weeks.

If the form of Pills be more grateful,

Take the Peruvian Bark powdered, one ounce; and with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers make Pills of a moderate bigness; of which take six
every fourth hour.

Take of the Peruvian Bark powdered, two ounces, Rhenish wine two pounds (or a
quart) Let them stand together in a cold Infusion, and strain them through a
Woollen Cloth. Dose three ounces every fourth hour.

Another method of curing Tertians.
Take Virginian Snakeweed finely powdered fifteen grains, White Wind three
ounces: Give it to the sick person two hours before the Fit and covering him
with clothes let him sweat three or four hours: Repeat the same Doses the two
following Fit-days in the same manner.

Of Intermitting Fevers in Children.
Take Black-Cherry water, and Rhenish wine of each two ounces; the Peruvian
Bark in fine powder, three drams; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers one ounce: Mix
them, and make a Julep Dose, a spoonful or two, according to the Child Age,
every fourth hour, till the Fits return no more; pouring into every second
Dose, if there be a Diarrhaea, one or two drops of liquid La^danum.

Of the present Fever from the year 1685 to 90.
The signs are Heat and Cold coming by turn^ Pain in the Head and Limbs, the
Pulse in the mean time almost well, sometimes a Cough, a Pain about the Neck
and Jaws, the exacerbation of the Fever toward night, unquietness, thirst, the
Tongue either moist and covered all over with a white and rough film, or dry
and of a dark color in the middle, which is compast about with a whitish
border. They that constantly keep their Beds are thereby exposed to Coma's and
Phrensies; and Spots, Purple Specks, Miliar Eruptions (as they are called)
which are redder than Measles, irregularity of the Pulse, starting of the
Tendons, and at last Death are the effects of a hot Regimen. In the beginning
Symptomatical Sweats appear, which if provoked by art, break forth clammy in
the Head, and translate the morbific matter to the Head or Limbs.

Let the sick person be let blood in the Arm, and ten ounces of Blood taken
from him; which must be repeated, if difficulty of Breathing, a rending Pain in
the Head, with a Cough, and other signs of a bastard Peripneumonia appear. For
in this case both the letting of Blood and Purging must be constantly repeated
till the sick person recover.

At night let a Blistering Plaster be applied, and the next morning a Lenitive
Potion prescribed, which must be thrice repeated every second day; and always
after Purging a composing Draught is to be taken at night.

Take Cowslip water three ounces, Syrup of Meconium one ounce, juice of Limons
newly pressed out, two spoonfuls: Mix them for a Draught.

Blisters in the Mouth and Throat, as also the Hickup do sometimes come of
themselves after the Fever is cured, and usually go away of themselves quickly
after. But if they stay long, they may be easily driven away by one ounce of
the Peruvian Bark, reduced into an Electuary or Pills with the Syrup of Red
Poppies, drinking after every dose a draught of Whey. This Remedy will most
certainly prove effectual, if its virtue be not eluded by constant lying in a
Bed.

In those days that are free from Purgation the following things are to be
prescribed.

Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel, of Sweet-briar, of each one ounce; Conserve of
Barberies half an ounce, Cream of Tartar one dram; with a sufficient quantity
of Syrup of Limons make an Electuary; of which take about the bigness of a
Nutmeg thrice in the day, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the following
Julep.

Take Water of Purslain, of Lettuce and of Cows^ips, of each three ounces;
Syrup of Limons one ounce and a half, Syrup of Violets one ounce: Mix them and
make a Julep.

If the Stomach be so disordered by the Fever, that it cannot retain a Potion,
prescribe the Pills Cochiae the greater, two scruples for a dose, and also a
Medicine to procure Sleep; for example, one grain and a half of London
Laudanum, with the like quantity of Mastick, or eighteen drops of liquid
Laudanum in one ounce of Barley Cinnamon water.

Let the sick person drink the white Decoction, and Small Beer also at his
pleasure.

Of the Fever of the present Constitution in Children.
Let two Leeches be applied, one behind each Ear, and a Blistering Plaster to
the hinder part of the Neck.

Let them be purged with the Infusion of Rheubarb in Beer.

If after Purgation the Fever seem to intermit, give them the Julep with the
Peruvian Bark, described in the Chapter of Intermitting Fevers in Children.

Of the Scarlet Fever.
Children are chiefly infested with it about the latter end of Summer. At the
first they are seized with a coldness and shivering, yet are not they very
sick. The whole Skin is spotted with little red specks, that are thicker,
broader, and of a redder color than in the Measles. They continue two or three
days, and then disappear, and the upmost Skin falling off, that which is under
it appears stained with Measly Scales.

Take burnt Hartshorn and compound Powder of Crabs claws, of each half a dram;
Cochinel two grains, Sugar Candy one dram: mix them, and beat them to a very
fine Powder, to be divided into twelve Papers, of which one is to be taken
every sixth hour, drinking after them two or three spoonfuls of the following
Julep.

Take Black Cherry water, Milk-water, of each three ounces; Syrup of the juice
of Citrons one ounce: Mix them and make a Julep.

Let a blistering Plaster be also applied to the hinder part of the Neck, and
every night exhibit a composing Draught of Syrup of Meconium; and, the Symptoms
ceasing, prescribe a Purging Medicine.

Of the Pleurisy.
It reigns between the Spring and Summer. It begins with Coldness and
Shivering, which are quickly accompanied with Heat, Thirst, Unquietness and the
other symptoms of a Fever. After a few hours a pricking pain is felt in one of
the Sides, about the Ribs, which sometimes stretches it self toward the
Shoulder-blades, sometimes to the Back, and sometimes toward the Breast. The
matter that is ejected with the Spittle in the beginning of the Disease appears
thin and in little quantity, and is often mixed with particles of blood; but
afterward it is raised more copiously, is better concocted, and still appears
mixed with blood. The Fever holds pace with the Cough, spitting of blood and
pain, and, according as the expectoration is more or less free, abates by
degrees. The Belly is sometimes constipated, and sometimes too loose. The Blood
of Pleuritie Persons resembles melted Tallow, when it is cooled.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm of the affected Side, and ten ounces of Blood
extracted.

Take Red Poppy water four ounces, Sal Prunellae one dram, Syrup of Violets one
ounce: Mix them for a Draught to be taken immediately after the first
Blood-letting.

Take five Almonds peeled, Seeds of Melons and Pompions, of each half an ounce;
White Poppy Seeds three drams, Barley water one pound [pint] and an half; Rose
water two drams, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar Candy make an Emulsion
according to art. Dose four ounces every four hours.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction two pounds, Syrup of Violets, and of
Maidenhair, of each one ounce and a half; mix them and make an Apozem: Dose
half a pound thrice in the day.

Take Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces, Syrup of Violets and of Maidenhair, of
each one ounce; Sugar Candy as much as is sufficient: Mix them, and make an
Eclegma or licking Medicine to be frequently used.

Oil of Sweet Almonds by it self, or Linseed Oil may also be exhibited.

Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, of Lillies, and the Ointment Dialtheae, of each one
ounce; mix and make a Linement, wherewith the affected Side may be anointed
morning and evening, laying over it a Cabbage Leaf.

The Letting of Blood must be repeated yet three times more, extracting still
the same quantity of Blood for four days together; if the pain and difficulty
of breathing seem to require it.

Of the Bastard Peripneumonia.
It begins to appear upon the approach of Winter, and oftentimes toward the
end thereof. At the first the sick person is hot and cold by turns, he cannot
stir without being troubled with dizziness or swimming of the head; his Cheeks
or Eyes are red and inflamed; he coughs, and in coughing is tormented with a
rending pain in the Head; he vomits up liquid things; his Urine is thick, and
very red, his Blood resembles that of a Pleuritic Person; he breathes thick and
short, with a pain in his Breast. This Disease is plainly distinguished from a
dry Aschma, in which no signs of a Fever appear, but in this are manifestly
discovered, though they are much more obscure and less violent than in a true
Peripneumonia.

Let the sick person be let blood in the right Arm to the quantity of ten
ounces, and the next day take this Potion.

Take extracted Cassia one ounce, Liquorish two drams, four fat Figs, Leaves of
Sena two drams and a half, Troches of Agaric one dram: Boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to four ounces; then strain, and dissolve in the
liquor Manna one ounce, solutive Syrup of Roses half an ounce.

But if he cannot take a Potion, let him take two scruples of the Pills Cochiae
the greater, at four in the morning.

The day following let a Vein be opened again, and the same quantity of Blood
extracted as formerly, and the day after let the purging Medicine be again
exhibited, and afterward repeated once in three days. if the consideration of
his strength do not require longer Intervals to be allowed him. Moreover, if
the Symptoms still continue, he must be again let blood once, twice; or oftener,
interposing always some days, as you see occasion; but for the most part the
second Letting of Blood will be sufficient. In the mean time, while this method
is prosecuted, let him use the Pectoral Decoction, Eclegma and Oil of Sweet
Almonds, prescribed in the foregoing Chapter, especially in the days that are
free from Purgation.

Of the Rheumatism.
In this Disease they are first taken with coldness and shivering, and the
other symptoms of a Fever; and after a day or two (sometimes sooner) they are
seized with a most sharp pain, sometimes in one part and sometimes in another,
but especially in the Wrists, Shoulders and Knees, which it leaves and assaults
by turns, the part last affected remaining for some time after red and swollen.
The Fever wears off by degrees, the pain still continuing, yea and sometimes
raging more cruelly than before. In Rheumatic Aches of the Loins, there is a
most violent pain that remains fixed about the region of the Loins, and
counterfeits the Stone; only the sick person is not troubled with a desire to
vomit. He cannot lie in his Bed, but either leaps out of it, or sits upright in
it, perpetually tossing his body backwards and forwards. The Blood is like that
in a Pleurisy.

Let ten ounces of Blood be taken from the Arm, of the side affected.

Take Water of Lettuce, Purslain and Water Lillies, of each four ounces; Syrup
of Limons one ounce and a half, Syrup of Violets one ounce: Mix and make a
Julep to be drunk at pleasure.

Prescribe an Emulsion of the four greater cold seeds; and a Cataplasm of the
Crumbs of white Bread and Milk, tinged with Saffron, to be applied to the part
affected.

The day after let the same quantity of Blood be taken away as before, which
must be repeated after a day or two, and the same operation must be reiterated
four times, or oftener, if need require: Observing that after the second time
there must still be greater intervals interposed.

In the days that are free from Phlebotomy, let a Clyster of Sugared Milk be
now and then injected, or that which follows.

Take of the common Decoction for a Clyster one pound, Syrup of Violets, and
Brown Sugar, of each two ounces; Mix them for a Clyster.

If the Patients Weakness will not permit the repeated taking away of his
blood, then after the second or third time, the Cure is to be thus attempted.

Let him take the common Purging Potion every second day, while his illness
continues, and the same nights a composing Draught of the Syrup of Meconium.

But if these Remedies prove ineffectual, and the Feebleness of the Patient be
such, that he cannot bear any Evacuations, let him use the Antiscorbutic
Electuary and Water described in the Chapter of the Scurvy, which are also
useful in the Scorbutic Rheumatism.

In young persons, and such who are not much addicted to Wine, the Rheumatism
may be as happily cured by a very cooling and indifferently nourishing Diet, as
by repeated letting of blood, which they cannot so well bear. For example,

Let the Patient live only upon Whey four days together; and afterward besides
his Whey, he may, once in the day, instead of a Dinner, eat a little Bread made
of fine Flower, till he perfectly recover: Only during the last days of his
Illness, he may be allowed to eat another piece of Bread for his Supper. After
the ceasing of the Symptoms, he may eat boiled Chickens, and other Meats of
easy digestion, observing every third day to feed only upon Whey, till he be
perfectly restored to his former Health.

Of the Erysipelatous Fever.
All the parts of the Body, especially the Face, are swollen, red and full of
pain. The Face and Head are overspread with little, thick Pimples, which
sometimes rise into Blisters, the Eyes are hid under the Swelling; Coldness,
Shivering and other signs of a Fever do also appear. There is another species
of this Disease, caused by the drinking of attenuating Liquors, in which there
is a slight Fever, accompanied with Wheals, like the pushes that are caused by
the pricking of Nettles, which sometimes rise up into Blisters, then
immediately vanish, and lurking under the skin, where they occasion a very
troublesome itching, after scratching they appear again. There is also another
kind of Eruption, which usually breaks out in the Breast; and is a broad spot
that hardly rises above the skin, being scurfy and full of yellow Scales. The
Person affected with it is well so long as it continues, but after its
disappearing there follows a slight sickness, and the Urine looks troubled and
yellow. It is cured with the same Remedies that are prescribed for a confirmed
Itch. Let the Patient drink Wine, and feed upon Meats of easy digestion.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm, and nine or ten ounces of blood taken away.
The next day let the common purging Potion be exhibited.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, of each one ounce; Leaves of
Mallows, Elder, and Base Mullein, Flowers of Cammomil, and Melilot, Tops of St.
John's Wort and Lesser Centory, of each one handful; Lin-seed, Fennyreek seed,
of each half an ounce. Boil them in a convenient quantity of water to three
pounds; strain out the Liquor, and when you use it add to every pound two
ounces of Spirit of Wine. Dip pieces of Woollen Cloth in this Decoction, and
having squeezed them, apply them hot twice every day, anointing the part
affected after fomentation, with the following mixture.

Take half a pound of Spirit of Wine; Treacle of Andromachus two ounces, powder
of Long Pepper and Cloves, of each two drams. Make a Mixture, in which dip a
piece of Brown Paper and wrap about the part affected.

If the first Letting of Blood be not sufficient, let it be repeated; and if
the Disease still continue, the same must be reiterated yet once and again,
interposing always one day.

In the days that are free from letting of blood, prescribe a Clyster of Milk
with Syrup of Violets, and cooling Emulsions and Juleps.

Of the raging Itch and other inveterate Diseases of the Skin, which are not
curable by Letting of Blood and Purging.
Take Treacle of Andromachus half a dram, the Electuary de Ovo one scruple, the
Root of Virginian Snakeweek in fine powder, fifteen grains; Oriential Bezoar,
five grains: with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Citron pickle, make a
Bolus, to be taken at the time of going to bed one and twenty days together,
drinking after it six spoonfuls of this Julep.

Take of Carduus Benedictus water, six ounces, distilled Treacle water, Plague
water, of each two ounces; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, one ounce: mix and make
a Julep.

Let the Patient drink every morning half a pint of warm Posset, and sweat an
hour after it.

This course being ended, if the Pimples still remain, let the parts affected
be anointed with the following Liniment.

Take of the Ointment of sharp-pointed dock, two ounces; Pomate, one ounce;
Flowers of Brimstone, three drams; Oleum Rhodij, half a scruple: make a
Liniment.

But these Remedies ought not to be used, till the Patients Body has been
first duly prepared by letting of Blood and Purging.

Of the Quinsy.
The Quinsy does most frequently occur betwixt the Spring and Summer. The first
assault of the Fever is seconded by a pain and inflammation of the Jaws; which
together with the swelling of the Uvula, Tonsils and Laryux, renders the sick
person unable either to swallow or breath.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm, and a great quantity of Blood taken away. Let
the inflamed parts be touched with Honey of Roses, impregnated to a very high
degree of acidity with Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur, or with Spirit of
Vitriol alone. Presently after let the following Gargarism be prescribed, to be
used, not after the usual manner, but held in the mouth, without any agitation,
till it grow hot, and then spit out, and ever and anon repeated.

Take Plantain water, Rose water, and Frogs Sperm water, of each four ounces;
the Whites of three Eggs, by shaking reduced into water; Sugar Candy three
drams: Mix and make a Gargarism.

Let the cooling Emulsion prescribed for the Pleurisy be daily used.

Next morning, unless the Fever and Difficulty of Swallowing be abated, the
Letting of Blood must be repeated, and the Purgation delayed till the day
after, which otherwise ought to have been attempted with some lenitive Medicine.

If after all the Disease does continue (which happens very rarely) both the
Letting of Blood and Purging must be reiterated. Let a large and sharp
Blistering Plaster be applied to the hinder part of the Neck after the first
Letting of Blood.

Every day that is free from Purging, let a cooling and softning Clyster be
injected in the morning. Let the Patient use a thin Diet, and abstain from his
Bed every day for some hours.

In all these Fevers which I call intercurrent, as also in that of the present
constitution, it is diligently to be observed, that the sick person must
abstain from his Bed a great part of the day, and that he must feed upon Barley
or Oat-meal Broths, and such like things, and use small Beer hopp'd, and Milk
and Water for his ordinary Drink.

Of the Measles.
They chiefly invade Children. The first day they are taken with a chilness and
shivering, and grow hot and cold by turns. The second day the Fever is
perfected, and the following Symptoms appear. Vehement Sickness, Thirst, want
of Appetite, the Tongue is white (but not dry) a little Cough, heaviness of the
Head and Eyes, and an inclination to sleep, a humor perpetually dropping from
the Nose and Eyes, which tears are a most certain sign of the Measles. As also
sneezing, swelling of the Eyelids a little before the Eruption, Vomiting, a
Diarrhaea or Looseness, Greenness of the Excrements, especially in Children that
are breeding Teeth. The Symptoms increase till the fourth day, in which (and
sometimes in the fifth) the Forehead and Face begin to be marked with little
red specks, not unlike to Flea-bitings, which being afterward augmented both
in bigness and number, run together in clusters, and stain the face with great
red spots, that are made up of small pushes raised, so little above the Skin,
that you can hardly perceive the protuberancy of them with your Eye, though you
may feel it by slightly touching them with your Fingers.

From the Face, where at the first they only appear, they spread themselves
over the Breast, Belly, and last of all the Legs, in which parts they are broad
and red, and rise not above the surface of the skin. After the Eruption of the
Measles the symptoms are not mitigated, as in the Smallpox. The Vomiting
indeed ceases, but the Fever, Cough and Difficulty of Breathing are increased,
and the defluction upon the Eyes, the drowsiness and dejection of Appetite
still continue. On the sixth day or thereabout, the Forehead and Face grow
rough, the wheals dying away, and the upmost skin being broken, in the rest of
the Body the spots appear very broad and red. About the eighth day these in the
Face vanish, and scarcely are there any to be seen in the rest of the Body. The
day following they disappear entirely, leaving behind them certain mealy scales
in the Face and Limbs, and sometimes over all the Body; and at this time the
Fever, Cough, and difficulty of Breathing increase. In adult persons that are
kept hot, the spots grow first livid and then black.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction, a pound and a half; Syrup of Violets,, and of
Maidenhair, of each an ounce and a half: mix and make an Apozem. Dose three or
four ounces, three or four times in the day.

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, two ounces; Syrup of Violets, and of
Maidenhair, of each an ounce; White Sugar Candy, as much as suffices: mix and
make an Eclegma, to be taken often licking, especially when the Cough is
troublesome.

Take of Black, Cherry water, three ounces; Syrup of Meconium, one ounce: mix
them for a Draught, which is to be taken every night, from the beginning to the
end of the Disease, augmenting or lessening the Dose according to the Age of
the Patient.

Let the sick persons keep their Beds two days, after the first Eruption of the
spots.

If after the disappearing of the Measles, they be succeeded by a Fever,
difficulty of Breathing and other Symptoms counterfeiting a Peripneumonia, in
such a case a Vein in the Arm is to be opened and a great quantity of Blood
taken away, once, twice or thrice, as the occasion shall require, interposing
always a convenient space of time betwixt. Let the Patient also continue the
use of the Pectoral Decoction above described as also of the Lohoth, or Oil of
Sweet Almonds by it self. And about the twelfth day from the first beginning of
the Disease, let him be purged with a Lenitive Medicine.

The Diarrhaea or Looseness, that comes after the Measles, is cured by letting
of Blood.

Of the Small Pox.
They are of two kinds, the Distinct and Running Pox. The first at the
beginning are attended with Chilness and Shivering, intense Heat, vehement pain
of the Head and Back, disposition to Vomit; in Adult persons, with a great
propension to Sweat (from whence you may gather that they will not run
together), a pain under the hollow part of the Breast, if it be pressed with the
Hand, Dullness and Sleepiness, and sometimes Epileptic Fits (especially in
Children) which if they come after the breeding of Teeth is over, you may
foretell that the Small Pox is at hand; insomuch that if the Epileptic Fit
happens over night, the Pocks will show themselves next morning, and are for
the most part of a mild sort, and very rarely run together. On the fourth day
inclusively from the beginning, and sometimes later, but rarely sooner, the
Pocks break out, at which time the symptoms either abate, or entirely
disappear. At the first, Reddish Pushes appear scattered over the Face, Neck,
Breast and the whole Body; then comes a Pain in the Jaws, which increases as
the Pocks rise higher. About the eighth day from the first invasion of the
Disease, the intervals between the Pimples, which were hitherto white, begin to
be red and swollen, and affected with a distending Pain; the Eyelids swell, and
like blown Bladders cover the Eyes. Next after the Face the Hands swell, and
the Fingers are distended; the Pocks in the Face which before were smooth and
red, now appear rough (which is the first sign of maturation) and whitish:
Moreover they cast forth a yellowish Juice, in color not unlike a Honeycomb.
The Inflammation of the Face and Hands being now at the height, the intervals
between the Pimples appear of a florid color, like that of Damask Roses, and
the more benign the Pocks are, so much the more lively do both they, and the
skin between them express that color. The Pimples in the Face grow still
rougher nnd yellower as they grow riper; but in the Hands and the rest of the
Body, they daily grow whiter and less rough. The eleventh day the Swelling and
Inflammation abates, and the Pocks being arrived at their due maturity and
bigness (which equals that of the greater sort of Pease) wither and fall off.
On the fourteenth or fifteenth they perish entirely; but they in the Hands are
of a more obstinate nature; and being still white and fresh they continue a day
or two longer, after which they break; whilst these that are in the Face and
the rest of the Body fall off in Scales, which in the Face are succeeded by
Holes or Pits. During the whole course of the Disease, the Belly is either
quite constipated, or very rarely performs its Office. The greatest part of
those to whom this Disease proves mortal, die on the eighth day in the
Distinct, and on the eleventh in the Running Kind. For when, in the first sort
of Pocks, Sweating is promoted with Cordials or a hot Regimen, on the
forementioned day, the Face, which should be swollen and inflamed in the
distances between the Pimples, on the contrary appears flaccid and whitish;
whilst in the mean time the Pocks are red and high, and even continue to be so
after Death: That Sweat also, which had hitherto flowed abundantly, suddenly
disappears: The Sick Person becomes lightheaded, vehemently sick and anxious,
tosseth his Body, pisseth little and often, and within a few hours expires.

In the Running kind the Symptoms are the same, but more violent: The Fever
(for example) Anxiety, Sickness, Disposition to vomit, etc. do more cruelly
torment the diseased Person; but there is not the same propension to sweat, as
in the other kind. A Looseness sometimes comes before the Eruption of the
Pocks, and continues a day or two after, which scarce ever happens in the
Distinct sort. On the third day, or sooner, rarely later, they break out, and
the sooner they appear, the more they run together. Sometimss their Eruption is
retarded till the fourth or fifth day, by the violence of some Symptom, such as
(for example) a Pain in the Loins, Side or Limbs, counterfeiting the Stone,
Pleurisy or Rheumatism, or in the Stomach with vehement Sickness and Vomiting.
The Symptoms abate not immediately after the coming out of the Pocks, as they
do in the other kind; but the Fever and the rest also continue to afflict the
sick person many days afterward. Sometimes they break forth after the manner
of Erysipelas, and sometimes like the Measles, but are plainly distinguished by
the time of the Eruption. During the progress of the Disease, they do not rise
to any considerable height, but being entangled together in the Face, like red
Blisters, they cover the whole Countenance, which swells sooner than in the
Distinct kind. Afterward they appear like a white skin glu'd to the Face, and
are not much higher than the Surface thereof. The eighth day being past, the
white Film grows daily rougher by degrees, and of a brown color. The Pain in
the Skin is more intense, till at last the Scales fall off, which in so cruel a
Disease happens not till after the twentieth day. This in the mean time is
worthy to be observed, that by how much nearer the ripening Pimples approach to
a duskish color, so much more dangerous are they, and disappear more slowly;
but the yellower they are, they run the less together and vanish more quickly.
After the Film is fallen off there appears no roughness in the Countenance, but
it is immediately overspread with mealy Scales of a very corrosive nature,
which leave Pits behind them, and oftentimes Scars. Sometimes the Skin of the
Shoulders and Back comes off. The Dangerousness of the Disease is to be
estimated by the number and frequency of the Pimples in the Face alone. These
that are in the Hands and Feet are biggest, and the higher you ascend from the
extremities of the Limbs, the lesser and narrower they grow. In adult Persons,
Salivation, and a Looseness in Children (tho not so certainly) accompanies the
Running Kind. The Salivation sometimes begins at the time of Eruption,
sometimes two or three days after, the sick Person spitting at the first a thin
matter, which on the eleventh day grows more viscid, and is voided with great
difficulty. He is thirsty, hoarse, extremely dull and sleepy; the Cough
sometimes surprises him as he drinks, and the Liquor returns through his
Nostrils. Then the Salivation usually cease, and unless the Swelling of the
Face and Hands now notably beginning, and considerably lasting, supplies its
room, the sick person forthwith dies: for though, according to the Genius of
the Disease, the Swelling of the Face should abate somewhat on that very day,
yet ought it not entirely to disappear till a day or two after. The Diarrhaea
surprises not Children, so early as the Salivation does Men. In both these
Kinds of Small Pox, the Fever reigns from the beginning to the time of the
Eruption, from which to the time of the Maturation of the Pimples it abates,
and that being finished, vanishes. The Bad Regimen, or Government of the sick
Person, occasions diverse irregular Symptoms; such as the Flaccidity and falling
down of the Pocks, Phrensy, Coma or perpetual Sleepiness, Purple Spots
scattered between the Pimples, and little black Spots on the Tops of them
subsiding in the middle, pissing and spitting of Blood about the beginning of
the Disease, suppression of Urine.

The Separation and Febrile Ebullition are transacted in the first three or
four days. The Expulsion is perfected in the following days by means of little
Abscesses arising in the skin.

Let a Vein be opened in any of the three first days, and nine or ten ounces of
Blood taken away; and afterward exhibit a Vomit of an ounce, or an ounce and a
half of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum.

During the first days let the Blood be diluted by frequent draughts of Small
Beer hopp'd.

As Soon as all the Pocks are come forth (which is usually the sixth day of the
Disease) let an ounce of Syrup of Meconium be given at night, which must
afterward be repeated every night to the tenth day after the invasion. Let the
Dose be augmented that night (if the Pocks be of the running kind) to an ounce
and an half, and one ounce in the morning, and continued in like manner till
the Patient be recovered from his Sickness.

If the Syrup of Meconium do not agree with him, you may substitute Liquid
Laudanum in its place, viz. eighteen Drops for an ounce of the Syrup, and five
and twenty Drops for an ounce and an half. In the mean while it is to be
observed, that, if the Quieting Medicine given twice a day be not sufficient to
allay the Commotion (as it oftentimes happens about the end of the Disease,
when the Pocks run notably together) in that case it ought to be repeated every
eight hours, or oftener, if need require.

But when the Pocks are distinct, it will suffice to exhibit a Composing
Draught once every night after the full Eruption, and also in a smaller Dose.

But of whatsoever kind the Pocks are, and in whatsoever time of the Disease a
Phrensy supervenes, it is altogether necessary to curb the disorderly motion of
the Spirits, and therefore if the former Quieting Dose prove ineffectual, it
must be repeated again and again, till the tumult be wholly asswag'd;
interposing always a convenient space between the Doses, that we may be able to
discern, whether the last Dose has already performed as much as we desire,
before we proceed to exhibit another.

If the Urine be totally suppressed, let the sick Person be taken out of his Bed,
and made to walk a little.

If the Spittle by reason of the Heat be so tough, that it cannot be
expectorated, let a Gargarism be frequently injected into the Throat with a
Syringe. It may be made of Small Beer or Barley Water with Honey of Roses: Or
thus.

Take of the Bark of the Elm-tree six drams, Liquorish Roots half an ounce,
twenty stoned Raisins, Red Roses two Pugils; boil them in a sufficient quantity
of Water to a Pint and an half; in which being strained out, dissolve Oxymel
simple, and Honey of Roses, of each two ounces. Mix them for a Gargarism.

If upon the eleventh, or any other succeeding day, the Secondary Fever, with
Unquietness, Tossing of the Body, and such like other Symptoms, be so fierce
and high, that all the Pacific Medicines (how often soever repeated) are not
able to put a stop to its Fury, and Death seems to be at hand, let a Vein be
immediately opened, and Blood copiously extracted, viz. to about twelve ounces,
and the same once or twice repeated in the following days, if the consideration
of the forementioned Symptoms require it, but not otherwise. And in this case,
after the Letting of Blood, the Patient may be gently purged on the thirteenth,
or any other succeeding day, and not before; as for example, let him take an
ounce of the Lenitive Electuary, dissolved in four ounces of Cichory or Milk
Water. But neither the Letting of Blood nor Purging does forbid the use of
Composing Medicines, which (these notwithstanding) ought to be exhibited both
largely and frequently, if need be: For after all we must constantly have
recourse to them in this Disease.

When the Pocks are perfectly dried up, let the Face be anointed with a
Liniment made of equal parts of Oil of Sweet Almonds and Pomate, two days, and
no longer.

On the twenty first day of the Disease let a Vein in the Arm be opened, and
the day after let a Purging Medicine be exhibited, and thrice repeated every
second day.

As for the Government of the sick Person, let him abstain from his Bed till
the sixth day after the first Invasion of the Disease; and afterward keep his
Bed till the seventeenth day, being covered only as he was wont to be, when in
health.

Let him feed upon Oat-meal and Barley Broths, boiled Apples, and Small Beer,
and after the eleventh day, let him drink if he pleases, foor or five spoonfuls
of Spanish Wine, twice every day.

If the Swelling in the Legs yield not to the Evacuations above prescribed, it
may be easily driven away with Fomentations of Mallows, Base Mullein, Elder,
and Laurel Leaves, with Flowers of Chamomil, and Melilote, boiled in Milk.

If during the first days of the Disease the Patient spit or piss blood, let
the Powder and Tincture, prescribed in the Chapter of Spitting Blood, be
carefully exhibited every sixth hour, till these Symptoms entirely disappear.
In which case also large Doses of Composing Medicines must be given.

Of Saint Vitus's Dance.
It Is a sort of Convulsion, that infests Children from ten years old to the Age
of Puberty. It is known by their Limping, or by the instability of one of their
Legs, which they draw after them, after the manner of Fools. If the Hand of the
same side be laid upon the Breast, or any other part of the Body, they cannot
keep it a moment in the same posture, but it will be distorted by the
Convulsion into another situation and place, whatsoever efforts they make to
the contrary. Before one of these can put a Cup to his Mouth, he uses a
thousand ridiculous Gestures, and Jugler-like Tricks: For he does not bring it
to his mouth in a straight line, but, his Hand being strangely drawn aside by
the Convulsion, he tosses it a good while hither and thither, till at last as
it happens to come near to his Lips, he suddenly throws the Liquor into his
mouth, and greedily swallows it down, as if he intended to make Sport to the
Spectators.

Let eight ounces of Blood be taken away, more or less, according to the Age of
the Patient, by opening a Vein in the Arm.

The day following let him take one half of the Common Purging Potion, or
somewhat more, with respect to his Age, and at night the following draught.

Take Black Cherry water one ounce, Langius his Epileptic water three drams,
Treacle of Andromachus one scruple, liquid Laudanum eight drops for a draught.

Let the purging Potion, with the pacific draught at night, be thrice repeated
every second day.

Afterward let more Blood be taken away, and the purging Potion repeated as
before, reiterating in this wise the letting of Blood and Purgation, to a third
or fourth time, and allowing always a convenient respite between the
Evacuations, that the Patient be not exposed to any danger.

In the days that are free from Purgation, prescribe as follows:

Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of the yellow part of an Orange, of each
one ounce; Conserve of Rosemary flowers, half an ounce; old Treacle of
Andromachus, and preserved Nutmeg, of each three drams; preserved Ginger one
dram; with as much as suffices of syrup of the juice of Citron make an
Electuary. Dose as much as a Nutmeg in the morning, and at five a clock in the
afternoon, drinking after every Dose five spoonfuls of the following Wine.

Take of the Roots of Peony, Elicampane, Masterwort and Angelica, of each one
ounce; Leafs of Rue, Sage, Betony, Germainder, white Horehound, and the tops of
lesser Centory, of each a handful; Juniper Berries six drams; the Pills of two
Orenges. Let all be sliced and infused cold in three quarts of Canary Wine.
When you use it, strain out so much as you intend to drink.

Take of Rue water four ounces; Laugius his Epileptic water, and compound
Bryony water, of each one ounce; Syrup of Peony six drams; mix and make a
Julep. Dose four spoonfuls every night at the time of going to Bed, with eight
drops of the spirit of Hartshorn.

Let a Plaster of Caranna be applied to the soles of the Feet.

The next year, about the same time of the year that the Disease first
appeared, let a Vein be again opened, and a purging Medicine exhibited some
days, for prevention of a Relapse.

It seems probable to me, that the Falling Sickness in adult persons might be
cured by this method, which nevertheless I have not yet experienced. But since
it is accommodated to the tender Ages of those that are wont to be infested by
Saint Vitus his Dance, if it be applied to the Cure of Epilepsies in persons
grown up, both the quantity of the Blood that is to be taken away, and the
Doses of the purging Medicines ought to be augmented.

Of the Apoplexy.
It consists in a most profound Sleep, and total privation of Sense and Motion,
excepting only Respiration, which is still performed, but with difficulty and
snoring.

Let a Vein be instantly opened in the Arm, and twelve ounces of Blood taken
away, and afterward eight ounces more out of the Jugulars. Immediately after
exhibit a Vomit or an ounce and an half, or two ounces, of the infusion of
Crocus Metallorum.

Let a large and sharp blistering Plaster be applied to the hinder part of the
Neck.

While these things are doing, let the sick person sit upright in his Bed, not
oppressed with too great a burden of Clothes.

Let Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, excellently rectified, be held to his Nose.

After the operation of the Vomit is finished, let three or four spoonfuls of
the following Julep be from time to time exhibited.

Take Rue water four ounces; compound Bryony water, and Langius his
Anti-epileptic water, of each one ounce; Spirit of Hartshorn twenty drops;
Sugar Candy, as much as suffices: make a Julep.

Or a spoonful of compound Spirit of Lavender, may be given twice or thrice by
it self, during the Fit, interposing the space of an hour, or half an hour,
betwixt the Doses.

Observe heedfully, that Cordials ought not to be exhibited too frequently, and
such as are too hot not at all, as it is the custom to do: For, after all,
whatever specific virtue they may seem to be endued withal, they do more
mischief than good, by melting the humors, and consequently augmenting the
Disease. which inconvenience also is no less occasioned, by too great a burden
of Clothes.

After the Paroxysm is over, to prevent a Relapse, let these things be
prescribed.

Take of the pill Cochiae the greater, two scruples for a Dose, to be repeated
six times every third day, at Four of the clock in the morning, sleeping after
them.

Take Conserve of Sage Flowers, and of Rosemary Flowers, of each one ounce;
Conserve of the yellow part of an Orange six drams; pre, served Nutmeg, and
preserved Ginger of each half an ounce; old Treacle of Andromachus two drams;
the powders of the Electuaries Diambrae, and Diamoschu Dulcis, of each one
dram; with a sufficient quantity of the syrup of Citron pickle make an
Electuary. Dose as much as a Chestnut, every morning and evening, drinking after
it two spoonfuls of Langius his Epileptic water.

Take of Ambergris half a dram; the distilled Oils of Anise-seed, Cinnamon and
Nutmeg, of each two drops; Oil of Cloves one drop. Sugar dissolved in
Orenge-flower water as much as suffices to make Tablets according to Art; Let
the Patient eat one at his pleasure.

Let him abstain from all manner of strong Drink, and eat Broths made of
Barley, Oats, or of Chickens; and sometimes even the flesh of Chickens and
Lambs, and such like Meats of easy digestion, especially while purging
Medicines are exhibited.

Of the Inflammation of the Eyes.
It is manifest of it self, Let ten ounces of Blood be taken out of a Vein in
the Arm, and the common purging Potion exhibited the next day, and repeated two
days after, and once more reiterated after a like interval of time. The same
Nights let the Patient take a quieting draught of an ounce of the Syrup of
Meconium.

Also let him drink four ounces of an emulsion of the greater cold Seeds and
white poppy Seed three or four times every day that is free from purgation.

Take of Plantain water, Red-Rose water, and Frogs sperm water, of each one
ounce; Powder of prepared Tutty one dram. Make a mixture. Pour a few drops of
it into the Eye twice every day, beginning after the first purgation.

If the Disease do not yield to these Remedies, the Letting of Blood
(especially if it appear pleuritic) and Purging must be repeated yet twice more.

Let the Patient abstain from the use of Wine, and all sorts of strong Liquors;
from Meats also that are salt and hard of digestion; and drink milk and water
boiled, all the days that are free from purgation.

Note, that it often happens, that the setting of Blood and purging, how often
soever repeated, are still found to be ineffectual. In this case a composing
draught of an ounce of Syrup of Meconium exhibited every night, perfects the
Cure, without the help of any other Remedy.

Of the Falling down of the Womb.
Take of the Bark of an Oak two ounces; boil it in four quarts of Spring water
till one half be consumed; adding (toward the end) the Rind of a Pomgranate
beaten, one ounce; Red Roses and Pomgranate Flowers, of each two handfuls; then
add half a pint of Red Wine. Let the part affected be fomented with woollen
Cloth dipped in the Liquor that is strained out, two hours before the Patient
rise every morning and at night when she is in her Bed, till the Symptom
disappear.

Of the Paroxysms of the Stone in the Kidneys.
The Signs are these: A fixed pain in the Region of the Loins, bloody Urine,
the voiding of Sand or Stones, the numness of the Leg on the side of the
affected Kidney, the retraction of the Testicle of the same side where the pain
is felt, a queasiness of Stomach, and vomiting. There is a near resemblance
between this Disease and the Colic, but they differ in some Symptoms, an
account of which you may read in the Chapter, Of the Bilious Colic.

If the Patient be of a sanguine Constitution, let ten ounces of Blood be taken
from the Arm answering to the affected Kidney; then let a Gallon of Posset, in
which two ounces of the Roots of Marshmallows have been boll'd, be hastily
swallowed down, and the following Clyster injected.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, of each one ounce; the Leafs of
Mallows, Wall-Flower, Brank-Ursine, and Chamomil Flowers, of each one handful;
Linseed, and Fenngreek-seed, of each half an ounce: Boil them in a convenient
quantity of water to a Pint and an half. Make a Clyster. After the rejection of
the Vomit and Clyster, let a large Dose of Liquid Laudanum be exhibited, viz.
to five and twenty drops, or 15 or 16 grains of Matthew's Pills.

If the Patient be an old Man, or one that is much weakened by the long
continuance of the Disease, or an old Woman subject to Vapors, (especially if
at the beginning of the Paroxysm she void black and gravelly Urine) then omit
the letting of Blood, but in all other things proceed according to the method
above described.

Of the Dysentery, Diarrhaea and Tenesmus.
There is first a chilness and shivering, then an universal Heat all over the
Body, which is shortly followed by Gripings of the Guts, and these by a
frequent voiding of slimy matter (only sometimes some Stools of natural
Excrements are interlac'd) with tormenting pain, and as it were a descending of
all the Entrals, with which the sick person is miserably afflicted as often as
he goes to Stool. In the mean while the matter that is evacuated, is intermixed
with streaks of Blood; though sometimes not the least mixture of Blood does
appear during the whole course of the Disease. In an advanced Dysentery
sometimes pure Blood is voided, and the Entrals affected with an incurable
Gangrene. When the sick Person is in the prime of his age, or heated by the use
of Cordials, he is taken with a high Fever, his Tongue is somewhat white,
covered all over with a certain thick slime, sometimes black and dry. The
strength of the Body is overthrown, the Spirits are dissipated, and the inward
parts of the Mouth and Throat ulcerated, more especially when the evacuation of
the peccant matter is unseasonably stopped by astringent Medicines, before that
which nourishes the Disease is expelled by purgation. Sometimes the Dysentery
comes without a Fever, and the Gripings of the Guts leading the Dance, the rest
of the Symptoms follow.

In a Diarrhaea, Excrementitious Humors are voided without Blood, or the
ulceration of the Entrals.

In a Tenesmus, there is a perpetual desire to go to Stool, yet nothing is
evacuated but a little bloody or purulent Slime.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm as soon as may be, the same night a composing
draught exhibited, and the next morning the common purging Potion, which must
be repeated to two other Doses every second day, as also the pacific draught
after the operation of the purging Medicine is over; but in the intermediate
days let it be given morning and evening.

After the Patient has been let Blood, and once purged, through the whole
course of the Disease, let the following Cordial be exhibited.

Take of Black-cherry Water, Strawberry Water, of each three ounces; Plague
Water, Compound Scordium Water, and Barley Cinnamon Water, of each one ounce;
prepared Pearl, one dram and an half; Sugar Candy, as much as shall suffice;
add half an ounce of Damask Rose Water, to give the Julep a grateful relish.
Let the Patient drink four or five spoonfuls of it, in case of fainting, or at
his pleasure.

Let his ordinary Drink be Milk boiled with a treble quantity of Water, or the
white Decoction, thus:

Take of Hartshorn burnt, and Crumbs of a white Loaf, of each two ounces; make
a Decoction in three Pints of Spring Water to two, and sweeten it with a
sufficient quantity of the best white Sugar. Or if the Feebleness of the
Patient require it, boil two Pints of Spring Water with half a Pint of Canary
Wine for his ordinary Drink, to be taken cold.

After he has been thrice purged, the whole Cure-depends upon the use of
Laudanum, repeated twice or thrice every day, only let a Clyster of half a Pint
of Cows Milk, and an ounce and an half of Treacle of Andromachus be now and
then injected, which is of excellent use in frequent Evacuations.

When the Flux of the Belly rises no higher than a Diarrhaea, omit the letting
of Blood and Purging, and prescribe the following Bolus to be taken every
morning.

Take of Rheubarb in Powder, half a dram, (more or less, according to the
Patient's strength) with a sufficient quantity of Diascordium make a Bolus, to
which add two drops of Chemical Oil of Cinnamon.

Let a composing draught of an ounce of Barley Cinnamon Water, and 14 drops of
liquid Laudanum be exhibited every night.

If the sick Person be tormented with dry Gripings, voiding nothing, they are
cured by washing with Whey, (being drunk cold, and injected warm) as in the
Disease called the Cholera, with Chicken Broth or Posset.

If this Disease last long, so that all the force thereof fall upon the strait
Gut, with a perpetual desire to go to Stool, let a restorative Diet be
prescribed, and some cordial Liquor to be drunk at pleasure, that the Patient's
strength may be re established, which returning, the Tenesmus instantly
vanishes.

Sometimes it falls out, that after a Dysentery has been ill cured, the sick
Person is for some years troubled with tormenting Pains; but by the repeated
letting of Blood, he may be restored to his former health.

Note, that in such Constitutions of the Air as are less favorable to this
Distemper, omitting all Evacuations, it is cured by the alone use of Laudanum,
repeated every morning and evening, till the Symptoms wholly disappear; or, if
need be, thrice in 24 hours.

Of the Bilious Colic.
It is a most fierce Pain in the Guts, which begins with a Fever that lasts a
few hours. Either it wrings them, as if they were girt with a Swathing-Band; or
being contracted into a Point, bores them as it were with an Awger. Sometimes
it grants a Truce, but presently returns to the Assault. At the beginning it is
not so certainly fixed in any one Point, there is not so frequent a desire to
vomit, nor does the Belly so stubbornly resist the force of purging Medicines;
but by degrees, as the Pain is augmented, it is also more obstinately fixed in
a Point, the desire to vomit grows more troublesome and frequent, and the Belly
more costive, till at last the Colic degenerates into the Iliac Passion.

It is thus distinguished from the Stone in the Kidneys. 1. The Pain of the
Stone is fixed in one of the Reins, and from thence is stretched out to the
Testicle, according to the length of the Ureter. But the Pains of the Colic are
more unconstant and moveable, compassing about the middle of the Belly as with
a Girdle. 2. The Colical Pains are increased after eating; but the Nephritical,
or Pains of the Stone, are rather mitigated. 3. In the Colic, the voiding of
Excrements gives greater ease than in the Stone. 4. The Urine of those that are
troubled with the Stone, is at the beginning of the Paroxysm clear and thin,
afterward there appears some Sediment, and at last Sand or little Stones are
voided: whereas in the Colic, the Urine is thick from the beginning.

Let a considerable quantity of Blood be taken out of one of the Arms, and
three or four hours after an Anodyne exhibited: the next day give a lenitive
Purge, to be repeated every other day to two Doses more.

But if the Disease was occasioned by gourmandizing, or by soon perishing
Fruits, then first of all the Stomach ought to be washed with great and
frequent draughts of Posset, and after that is done an Anodyne given; the next
day order a Vein to be opened, and afterward proceed in the method above
prescribed.

When this Disease, having been unskilfully handled, has continued very long,
and the sick persons have been reduced to extreme Feebleness by it, the liberal
drinking of either Plague Water, Aqua Mirabilis, or any other with which they
were wont to be most delighted while they were in health, has helped them
beyond all expectation.

Of the Disease called Cholera.
It contains it self within the Bounds of the Month of August, and scarcely
makes any Excursions into the first Weeks of September. There is a Disease
like unto it, occasioned by Surfeiting and Gluttony; which tho it be cured
after the same manner, is yet of another Form. The Signs are enormous Vomiting,
and the voiding of corrupt Humors by Stool; with great Trouble and Difficulty;
Vehement Pain, Swelling up and Distension of the Belly and Entrals; Gnawing at
the Heart or Stomach, Thirst; the Pulse quick, frequent, small and unequal;
Heat and Anxiety; a most troublesome Nauseousness or Loathing, Sweating,
Contractions of the Legs and Arms, Swooning, Coldness of the Extreme Parts, and
such like Symptoms, which kill the sick person in the space of 24 hours.

Let a tender Chicken be boiled in about three Gallons of Spring Water, that
there be scarce any taste of Flesh perceivable in the Liquor, and let the sick
person swallow down several large Cups of this Decoction lukewarm, or (for want
of it) of Posset, whilst in the mean time Clysters of the same Liquor are
successively injected. And an ounce of the Syrups of Lettuce, Violets,
Purslain, and Water Lillies, or any of them, may be now and then mixed both
with the Draughts and Clysters.

The Business of Washing being finished, which requires the space of three or
four hours, a composing Medicine puts an end to the Cure.

When the Physician is not called till after the Patient is utterly spent and
enfeebled by the Evacuations, and the extreme parts are already cold, recourse
must immediately be had to liquid Laudanum, and that in a large Dose, ( viz. 25
drops of it in an ounce of Cinnamon Water) which even after the ceasing of the
Symptoms ought still to be repeated, but in a lesser Dose, till the sick Person
be restored to his former health.

There is a sort of Cholera, that usually troubles Children, and is often
fatal to them, which is occasioned by their Breeding of Teeth, or Surfeiting.

Their tender Age will not bear the washing of their Stomach with large
Draughts of Liquors, much less the raising of a greater tumult in the Humors
by purging Medicines; and therefore the whole Cure is to be committed to the
use of Laudanum. Let two, three, four, or more drops of it, according to the
Age of the Child, be exhibited in a Spoonful of Small Beer, or some convenient
Water, and repeated as the occasion shall require.

Of the Disease called Colica Pictonum, or the Colic of the People of Poictiers.
It Is a kind of Colic that usually degenerates into a Palsy, and a total loss
of motion in the Hands and Feet; which under this name is mentioned by Riverius
in his Chapter of the Palsy, and is very well known in the Carribee Islands,
where multitudes of People are infested by it.

This most cruel Pain is cured with Balsam of Peru exhibited frequently and in
great Doses, thus, Pour 20, 30, or 40 drops of it into a Spoonful of the finest
white Sugar, and give it twice or thrice in the day. But the Palsy yields not
to this Remedy.

Of the Iliac Passion.
The Peristaltic Motion of the Guts is inverted; purging Medicines and Clysters
do immediately become Vomits; the Excrements of the Belly are voided by the
Mouth.

Let nine or ten ounces of Blood be taken out of the right Arm. After some
hours, exhibit the following Powder.

Take of Rosin of Scammony, or (in default of that) Rosin of Jalap twelve
Grains; Torquets Calomel one Scruple; mix and make a Powder, to be taken in a
Spoonful of Cows Milk, drinking after it one or two Spoonfuls of the same Milk;
or if the Form of Pills be more acceptable to the Patient,

Take of the Pills de duobus half a dram; Calomel one scruple: with a
sufficient quantity of Balsam of Peru, make four Pills, to be taken in a
Spoonful of Syrup of Violets.

After the Operation of the Purge is ended, let the Patient take the following
Draught.

Take of strong Cinnamon Water one ounce, liquid Laudanum 25 drops: mix them
for a Draught, which must afterward be repeated twice, thrice, or oftener every
day, till the Vomiting and Pain be assuaged: and even after they disappear, for
the Confirmation of the Cure, let the Patient continue the use of the same
Composing Draught for some time, when he goes to Bed, but in a lesser Dose.

Of the immoderate Flux of the Terms.
The Monthly Courses of a Woman flowing naturally, may fill the Capacity of the
Shell of a Goose-egg. The immoderate Flux of them is known by the Patient's
ill-bearing or uneasiness under it, by the failing of her Strength, want of
Appetite, ill Habit of Body, ghastly color of Face, like that of a dead
Carcass, and swelling of the Feet.

Let a Vein be opened in the patient's Arm, and eight ounces of Blood taken
away. The next morning let her take the common purging Potion, and repeat it
every other day to two Doses more, drinking at night after every Purgation a
composing draught of Syrup of Meconium.

In the intermediate Days let her take that which follows.

Take of Conserve of dry Roses two ounces; Troches of Lemnian Earth one dram
and an half; Rind of Pomgranates, Red Coral prepared, Bole Armenick, of each
two Scruples; Boodstone and Dragons Blood, of each one Scruple: with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Quinces make an Electuary; of which let her
take the quantity of a large Nutmeg in the morning, and at five a clock in the
afternoon, drinking after it six Spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take of the Water of Oak-buds and Plantane, of each three ounces; Barley,
Cinnamon Water, and Syrup of dried Roses, of each one ounce; Spirit of Vitriol
as much as suffices to give it a grateful sharpness.

Take of the Leafs of Plantane and Nettles, of each a convenient quantity. Beat
them together, and press out the Juice, of which being clarified, let her take
four or five Spoonfuls now and then at her pleasure.

After the first Purgation, let the following Plaster be applied to the Region
of the Loins.

Take of Vermilion plaster, and the plaster for a Rupture, of each an equal
quantity. Spread them on a piece of Leather, for a plaster to be applied to
the Region of the Loins.

Of the Hysterical Colic.
It is a certain kind, or rather a very notable and usual Symptom of the
Hysterical Disease, which is accompanied with a most sharp pain about the pit
of the Breast, and vomiting of green Humors.

First, that the glut of the corrupt Humors lodged in the Stomach may not
obstruct the efficacy of the quieting Medicine, let a large quantity of posset
(as for example a Gallon and an half) be swallowed down, and cast forth again
by vomiting. After which, exhibit 25 drops of liquid Laudanum in an ounce of
strong Cinnamon Water, plague Water, or any other convenient Vehicle.

Concerning the use of the composing Medicine, it is to be observed, that they
ought to be constantly repeated, till the Symptoms wholly disappear,
interposing a convenient space between the Doses, that so we may be able to
judge of the effect of one, before another be exhibited.

If the patient be of a sanguine Constitution, nor has been formerly subject
to this Symptom, or weakened by it, then let a Vein be first opened, before the
use of the prescribed Vomit.

The Disease called, The Hysterical Clavus, is also cured by the same method.

But if the Hysterical Colic continue a great while, and come by Fits, then let
the following things be given in the Intervals between the paroxysms.

Take a Dram of Zedoary reduced to fine powder, and make a Bolus with a
sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Citron pickle, to be taken every morning
and evening for 30 days together, drinking the following Infusion after it.

Take half an ounce of Zedoary cut into small pieces, Infuse it cold in four
ounces of Canary Wine, and after it has stood twelve hours, strain it for your
use. Or take Balsam of Peru, as it is prescribed in the Chapter of the Colic of
the people of Poictiers.

What is here said of the Hysterical Colic, ought to be applied to the
Hypochondriacal Colic. And this also is to be heedfully observed.

The nature of both these Distempers seems in a peculiar manner to require,
that we should essay several Medicines, till that at last be found out to which
the Disease naturally yields: tho for the most part Steel is in this case most
effectual.

This kind of Colic, both in Hypochondriacal and Hysterical persons, does often
degenerate into the Jaundice, which by degrees vanishes of it self: But if it
continue long, let the following Apozem be exhibited.

Take of the Roots of Madder, (such as Dyers use) Turmerick, of each one ounce;
greater Celandine (the whole plant) Tops of lesser Centory, of each one
handful. Boil them in equal parts of Rhenish Wine and Spring Water to a Quart.
In the strained Liquor dissolve two ounces of the Syrup of the five Roots. Make
an Apozeme. Dose half a pint warm every morning and evening, till the patient
recover.

Of the Jaundice when it does not come after the Colic.
It is known by the following Signs: a yellow color of the whole Body, with
which also all Objects appear tinged to the sick persons, and it is chiefly
conspicuous in the White of the Eyes; an Itching, Laziness and Weariness;
Bitterness of the Tongue, sometimes choleric Vomitings, Hiccoughs, White
Excrements: the Urine is of a Saffron color, and dies Cloths that are dipped
therein of the same color.

Exhibit the common purging potion; and then prescribe the things that are here
subjoined, during the use of which, let the purging potion be repeated every
fourth day.

Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood; Conserve of the yellow part of an Orange, of
each one ounce; preserved Angelica, preserved Nutmeg, compound powder of Aron,
and Steel prepared with Vinegar, of each half an ounce; extract of lesser
Centory; extract of Gentian, and Cream of Tartar, of each two drams; English
Saffron powdered half a dram; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the
five Roots make an Electuary; of which let the patient take the bigness of a
Nutmeg every morning, and at five in the afternoon, (or instead of the
Electuary, you may give Chalybeat, or Steel Pills) drinking after the morning
Dose four pints of mineral purging Waters, and half a pint of the Apozeme
prescribed in the Chapter of the Hysterical Colic after the Dose that is taken
in the afternoon.

But if any Signs of a Dropsy appear, let the patient use the Apozem both in
the morning and evening.

But if the obstinacy of the Disease will not be overcome by the long continued
use of these Remedies, let the sick person have recourse to the Iron or Spaw
Waters, which ought to be drunk at the Fountain head.

Of the Preservation from Abortion.
Use the same things that are prescribed in the Chapter of the Immoderate Flux
of the Courses, omitting only Purgation and the Juices.

Of the immoderate Flux of the Loches, or Childbed Purgations.
There are three things required to constitute a natural flowing of the Loches.
First pure Blood flowing copiously for the first three days; then watery Blood,
like Water wherein Flesh has been washed, continuing about four days after;
and last of all tough and clammy matter coming forth during the five or six
days next following, and so onward to the end of the month.

Now the immoderate Flux of the Loches is to be estimated from the decay of
strength; Swooning, the coming forth of clotted Blood; Loathing of Meat, Pain
in the Hypochondria, or under the Ribs, Distension of the Belly, a weak and
frequent Pulse, Dimness of Sight, Noise in the Ears, and Convulsions.

Let a thickning Diet be prescribed, and the following Potion added.

Take of Plantane Water and Red Wine, of each one pint; boil them together,
till a third part be consumed, then sweeten the liquor with a convenient
quantity of fine white Sugar, and let the Patient drink half a pint of it cold
twice or thrice a day.

In the mean time let some mild Hysterical Julep be now and then exhibited, and
the following Bag applied to her Nose.

Take of Galbanum and Asa Faetida, of each two drams; Castoreum a dram and an
half; Volatile Salt of Amber half a dram, mix them, and tie them in a Bag. Or

Take two drams of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and put it frequently to her Nose.

Of Suppression of the Loches.
The Signs are these: A Swelling of the Belly, a heavy Pain in the lower parts
of the Belly, the Loins and Groin, redness of Face, difficulty of breathing,
perturbation of the Eyes, Shiverings, acute Fevers, Swoonings, Cold Sweats, a
Sense of Beating and Burning heat in the Womb, a Palsy of the lower parts, and
sometimes an Epilepsy.

Let her be instantly confined to her Bed, and the Hysterical Plaster applied
to her Navel, then prescribe this Electuary.

Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and of Rue, of each one ounce; Troches of
Myrrh two drams; Castoreum, English Saffron, Volatile Salt of Amber, Sal
Ammoniac, and Asa Foetida, of each half a dram; Syrup of the five Roots as much
as suffices to make an Electuary, of which let her take the quantity of a
Nutmeg every four hours, drinking four or five spoonfuls of the following Julep
after it.

Take of Rue water four ounces; compound Bryony water two ounces; Sugar Candy
as much as is convenient: Make a Julep.

Or let her take a scruple of Troches of Myrrh every four hours.

If after the prescribed quantity of these Remedies is consumed, the Loches
continue still to be suppressed, exhibit only one dose of Laudanum, namely, 14
drops of Laudanum Liquidum in compound Bryony water, or one grain and an half
of solid Laudanum made up into two Pills with half a scruple of Asa foetida.

If these suffice not, let a Clyster of Sugared Milk be only once injected.

Of the Dropsy.
This Disease is first known by the Pits or Impression remaining in the lower
parts of the Legs, after you have thrust your Finger upon them, which appear
conspicuously at night, but vanish in the morning; especially if this sign be
accompanied with a difficulty of Breathing; though women with Child, and such
as are troubled with a suppression of their Courses, and Men that are suddenly
freed from an inveterate Asthma, are also not unfrequently molested with
swellings of a like nature. The Feet and Legs being extremely swollen, the Waters
rush into the Abdomen, and by degrees filling up its capacity, stretch it forth
to the uttermost, till at last falling upon some of the more noble Entrals, the
sick person is drowned. As the bulk of the parts affected increases, the rest
do proportionably grow more and more slender. In the mean time there is a
difficulty of Breathing, and little Urine is voided. This Disease does commonly
assault Men when they grow old, and Women when they leave off Childbearing.

The principal Scopes of the Cure are, first the evacuations of the Waters, and
then by the restoration and strengthening of the Blood, to prevent the new
increase of the Waters.

Take of White Wind, four ounces; Jalap in fine powder, one dram; powder of
Ginger, half a Scruple; Syrup of Buckthorn, one ounce; mix them for a Potion,
to be taken early in the morning, and repeated every day, or every second day,
according to the strength of the Patient, till the Swelling be abated. Or

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, Senna Leafs two drams, Rheubarb a dram and an
half: Boil them in a convenient quantity of water to three ounces; dissolve in
the straining, of Manna and loosning Syrup of Roses, of each one ounce; Syrup
of Buckthorn, half an ounce; the Electuary of the juice of Roses, three drams:
mix them for a Potion, to be taken as above. Or

Take of the Pills ex duobus, one Scruple; Elaterium, three grains; Chemical
Oil of Cloves, two drops. Make three Pills, to be taken early in the morning,
and repeated as the occasion shall require. Or

Take of Gambugia, fifteen grains; White Wind, and Cichory-water, of each one
ounce and an half; Syrup of Buckthorn, half an ounce: mix them for a Potion, to
be taken as above. Or

Take three handfuls of the inward Bark of the Elder; boil them in a quart of
milk and water equally mixed, to a pint. Let the Patient take one half of the
strained liquor in the morning, and the other in the evening, every day, till
he be restored to his health. But this Remedy is of no efficacy, but only in
those Bodies that are very easily moved by purging Medicines.

Concerning the use of Purges in this Disease, three things are to be observed.

In the first place consider whether the Body of your Patient, is wont to yield
easily or difficultly to purging Medicines. For one ounce of Syrup of Buckthorn
being exhibited by it self to such as are easily wrought upon, will evacuate
the Waters very copiously; whereas in others, the strongest Purges above
prescribed, will hardly produce the desired effect.

Secondly, Such Purges as are of slow operation, do more mischief than good,
and therefore such as work strongly, and even too strongly, are always to be
preferred before these that are too weak.

Thirdly, The Waters ought to be evacuated with as much haste, as the strength
of the Patient can possibly bear; lest by interposing too long Intervals
between the several purgations, we give occasion to the Waters to gather again.

There are some Cases in which all purging Medicines, of whatsoever kind they
be, may and ought to be wholly omitted. For when the sick person is of a weak
constitution, or a Woman subject to Vapors, the Evacuation of the Waters is to
be attempted only by Diuretics, or Medicines that provoke Urine, among which
the most efficacious are those that are composed of lixivious Salts. For
Example:

Take a pound of Brome-ashes, infuse them cold in four pints of Rhenish Wine,
strain the liquor through a piece of brown paper, of which let the Patient
drink three ounces in the morning, at five in the afternoon, and at night till
the Humors be wholly evacuated. Which being performed, let such Medicines as
heat and strengthen be exhibited, as for Example:

Take the Roots of Horseradish, Leaf of Garden-Scurvy-grass, common Wormwood
and Sage, the Tops of lesser Centory and Brom: infuse them in strong Ale for
ordinary Drink, which alone does sometimes cure a beginning Dropsy, without
the help of purgin^ Medicines. Or prescribe that which follows:

Take of the Conserve of Garden-Scurvygrass, and of Roman Wormwood, of each one
ounce; extract of Gentian, of common Wormwood, and of lesser Centory, of each
three drams: with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Citron Pill, make an
Electuary. Dose as much as a large Nutmeg, in the morning, at five a clock in
the afternoon, and at night, drinking four ounces of the following Infusion
after it.

Take of Gentian Roots one ounce, Brom tops, and tops of lesser Centory, and
common Wormwood, of each one handful; Seeds of Fennel and Parsley, of each two
drams: Chop them small, and pour upon them four pints of Rhenish Wine* let them
stand together in a cold Infusion, and strain out the Liquor when you use it.

Note, That during the use of these corroborating Medicines, you must in no
wise purge the Patient.

Which ought also to be observed, when Lixivious Salts are exhibited, during
the use of which it is also convenient to give corroborating or strengthening
Medicines.

Take of Horseradish roots three ounces, Leaves of Garden Scurvy Grass, common
Wormwood, and Sage, Brom tops, and tops of lesser Centory, of each three
handfuls; three Orenges sliced. Infuse them in six Gallons of Strong Ale not
hopp'd, while it is fermenting. Make use of it for ordinary drink.

Of the CLAP, or virulent RUNNING of the REINS.
It begins with an unusual pain of the Genitals, and a rolling of the
Testicles. If the Head, or Nut of the Yard be still covered with the Foreskin,
a spot like a Measle appears on the top of it, immediately after liquid matter,
resembling Sperm begins to drops out, which daily receding from the color and
consistence of Seed, at length grows yellow, and of a more dilute color than
the Yolk of an Egg. In the Venereal Pox, that are risen to a higher degree of
virulency, the same is green, and mixed with a watery humor tinged with Blood.
The forementioned Wheal at length degenerates into an Ulcer, not unlike the
Exulcerations in Children's Mouths, which daily eats deeper and wider, the
Orifice being beset with a Callus. Those that are circumcised, or have the Nut
of the Yard stripped bare, are not troubled with an Ulcer therein, but only with
the Gonorrhaea or Running of the Reins. Presently a violent pain is felt in the
Yard, as often as it is erected, especially in the night, when the sick person
is hot in is Bed, as if it were wrung hard with ones hand. The Yard is bowed by
the contraction of the part called the Bridle. To these Signs may be added,
Scalding of the Urine, which is scarce perceptible while the Urine is coming
forth, but after it is voided, there is a sense of burning through the whole
Urethra, chiefly where it ends in the Glans or Nut of the Yard. Sometimes
little Excrescences of Flesh hinder the passage of the Urine, and now and then
there happens a pain and inflammation of the Scrotum or Cod.

Take of the Mass of the Pills Cochiae the greater three drams, Extract of
Rudius one dram, Rosin of Jalap and Diagridium (or prepared Scammony) of each
half a dram, Opobalsamum as much as suffices. Make Pills, six out of every
dram, of which let the Patient take four every morning, till the Scalding of
the Urine, and the yellow color of the Seed-like matter be much abated.
Afterward let him take them every other day for two weeks together; and at the
last twice a week, till the humor wholly cease to drop out.

If the sick Person cannot easily be moved by evacuating Medicines, you may now
and then interpose the common purging Potion between the Doses of Pills, adding
thereto of Syrup of Buckthorn, and the Electuary of the juice of Roses, of each
two drams; and if after all, the Cure do not succeed according to your desire,
you may exhibit Turbith Mineral, to eight grains for a Dose twice or thrice, at
the distance of four days; or instead of the Turbith,

Take of the Pills ex duobus, half a dram; Mercurius dulcis, one scruple: with
a sufficient quantity of Opobalsamum, make four Pills, to be taken early in the
morning.

If the Patient utterly dislike this method of Purging, after he has taken the
Pills that are first prescribed, for three days together, let the following
Clyster be injected twice every day, namely, in the morning, and at five a
clock in the afternoon; but once or twice in a week the Clyster must be
omitted, and a purging Medicine prescribed.

Take of the Electuary of the juice of Roses, six drams; Venice Turpentine
dissolved with the yolk of an Egg, half an ounce: dissolve them in a pint of
Barley water, and add to the straining two ounces of the Syrup of Violets; mix
them for a Clyster.

Every night let him take 25 drops of Opobalsamum, or Balsam of Mecha in a
piece of Sugar; in default of this, you may substitute Turpentine of Cyprus, to
the quantity of a Filberd Nut.

Let him use Milk and Water for ordinary Drink, and Small Beer at Meals.

Or you may follow this method.

Take of the Pills ex duobus, half a dram; Opobalsamum, three drops: make three
Pills, which are to be taken at four in the morning, sleeping after them, and
repeated every second or third day.

In the intermediate days, let the Clyster before described be injected in the
morning, and at five in the afternoon.

What method soever you follow, the Patient must be let Blood once or twice
about the middle of the Cure. Prescribe also a cooling and thickning Diet, and
Medicines that are endu'd with the same Virtues, as Milk and Water, Emulsions
of the cold Seeds, etc.

If the Yard be swollen,

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, of each one ounce and an half;
Leafs of Mallows, Petty Mullein, Elder, Henbane, Chamomil Flowers, Melilote
Flowers, of each one handful; Linseed, and Fenngreek Seed, of each half an
ounce: Boil them in Spring Water for a Fomentation, which must be applied to
the part affected one whole hour twice or thrice a day.

After Fomentation, anoint the part affected with Linseed Oil freshly drawn,
then spread a little of the Plaster of Mucilages upon Lambs Skin, and wrap
about the swollen Lips of the Prepuce.

But if there be an Ulcer in the Lips of the Foreskin, or in the Glans that
lies under them, prescribe the following Liniment.

Take of the Ointment Basilicon, six drams; Ointment of Tobacco, two drams;
Praecipitate washed in Rose Water, and well laevigated, half a dram. Mix and
make a Liniment. Let it be applied to the Sore upon scrapings of linen Cloth,
always after Fomentation.

If the Scrotum or God be swollen, let a Vein be immediately opened in the Arm,
and the prescribed Fomentation applied to the part affected twice every day,
adding to each Fomentation a Spoonful or two of Spirit of French Wine, or
instead of it, apply a Cataplasm of Oxycrate and Bean Flower.

In the mean time the purging and cooling Medicines already described, must be
given inwardly.

Of the FRENCH POX.
When by the long continuance of a G^^norrhaea, or the undue use of astringent
or binding Medicines, the Blood is corrupted, the Disease called the French Pox
does arise. Bubo's or malignant Botches appear in the Groin. The sick person is
afflicted with a pain in the Head, and in the spaces between the Joints,
chiefly when he grows hot in his Bed; and diverse parts of the Body are covered
with a Scurf, which is of a yellow color like a Honeycomb; and the more the
Scab is diffused, so much the less he is tormented with pain. In the Skull,
Legs and Arms, there are bony Excrescences, Inflammations and Rottenness of the
Bones; and in diverse parts eating Ulcers, which for the most part appear first
in the Jaws, from whence creeping by degrees through the Palate to the
cartilaginous part of the Nose, they quickly consume it; and the Nose being
thus robbed of its Prop, falls down flat. The Ulcers, Rottenness and Pain,
increasing daily, the Members perish by turns, till at the last the mangled
Carcass, already grown burdensome to the living, is buried out of sight.

Take of Hogs-lard, two ounces; crude Quicksilver, one ounce, mix them for a
Liniment, to be divided into three equal parts, with one of which let the
Patient anoint his Arms and Legs, with his own hand, for three nights together.

If within three days after the last anointing, the Salivation does not begin,
let eight Grains of Turbith Mineral be exhibited in Conserve of Red Roses, or
(to those that are less robust) one scruple of Mercurius dulcis: Also if the
Salivation already begun, grow languid before the total disappearing of the
Symptoms, it must be quickened now and then with a like Dose of Mercurius dulcis.

The Salivation ought to be so moderated, that the Patient may spit about four
Pints in 24 hours.

But if it rise too high, and be attended with too great an Inflammation, and
other Symptoms of that nature, it ought to be represt with purging Medicines,
and kept in a due degree of moderation.

Immediately after the disappearing of the Symptoms, let the Patient's Shirt,
and the Sheets of his Bed be changed, and others put in their room, which must
be such as have been formerly used.

If the Patient be troubled with a Diarrhaea or Looseness, (which for the most
part happens before the Salivation be much advanced) it ought to be stopped by
the use of Liquid Laudanum, still augmenting and repeating the Dose, till it
has produced the desired effect.

If the Mouth be ulcerated, let it be washed with Damask-Rose-water, or Milk
and water mixed, or with the following Decoction.

Take of Marshmallow Roots, and cleansed Barley, of each one ounce;
Quince-seeds, half an ounce: Boil them in a convenient quantity of wa^er to a
quart. Mix and make a Gargarism, which ought to be frequently used.

Let the Diet and Government of the sick Person be the same that is usually
prescribed, when purging Medicines are exhibited; but during a few days in the
beginning, let him make use of Posset, Barley and Oat-broths, and small Beer
warmed.

All these things being rightly performed (though there be no appearance of any
Symptom left, and the Disease seem to be perfectly cured, yet) to secure the
Patient from the danger of a Relapse, let him once in a week take a scruple of
Mercurius dulcis, repeating it four or six times, though he should be well
enough to walk abroad, and seem to be perfectly recovered.

Of the Whites, or White Flux.
The Humor that flows out is sometimes white, sometime^ pale, yellow, green or
blackish; it is sometimes sharp and corrosive, and sometimes stinking and of a
strong smell. The Flux is accompanied with diverse symptoms, as Wanness of Face,
a pain in the Backbone, Want of Appetite, Swelling of the Hands and Feet. If
that which comes forth be received upon a Clout, it will manifest the Humor
that causes the Flux, after it has been dried.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm, and eight ounces of Blood taken away.

Take of the Pills Cochiae the greater two scruples, Castoreum two grains,
Balsam of Peru three drops; Make four Pills which are to be taken at four a
Clock in the morning, sleeping after them, and twice repeated every second or
third day, according to the strength of the Patient.

Take of Rue water four ounces, compound Bryony water two ounces, Sugar Candy
as much as is sufficient: Make a Julep, of which let he take three or four
spoonfuls in every languishment. Afterward let her use the Remedies that are
here subjoined.

Take of Treacle of Andromachus one ounce and an half, Conserve of the yellow
part of an Orange two ounces, Diascordium half an ounce, preserved Ginger, and
preserved Nutmeg, of each three drams; Compound Powder of Crabs Claws, one dram
and a half; the outward Rind of Pomgranates, Roots of Spanish Angelica, Red
Coral prepared, and Troches of Lemnian Earth, of each one dram; Bole Armenic,
two Scruples; Gum Arabic, half a dram: with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
dried Roses, make an Electuary, of which let her take the quantity of a large
Nutmeg in the morning, at five in the afternoon, and at night, every day, for a
whole month, drinking six Spoonfuls of the following Infusion after every Dose.

Take of the Roots of Elicampane, Masterwort, Angelica, Calamus Aromaticus, of
each half an ounce; Leafs of Roman Wormwood, White Horehound, Lesser Centaury,
Common Calamint, and Sage dried, of each one handful; Juniper Berries one
ounce: let them be chopped small, and infused in four Pints of Canary Wine: let
them stand in a cold Infusion; strain it only when you use it.

Let her eat Meats of easy digestion, and abstain from all sorts of Pot Herbs,
and Fruits; and at every Meal drink Spanish Wine.

Of the Diabetes.
The Juices that are brought into the Blood being crude and undigested, seek a
passage forth through the Urinary Ducts, by which means the strength is by
degrees wasted, the Body is melted or dissolved, and as it were the substance
of it drained out through this Kennel. This Disease is also attended with
Thirst, burning Heat of the Bowels, Swelling of the Loins and Haunches, and
frequent spitting of frothy Mat^er.

Prescribe the same things that are commended in the Chapter, Of the Whites,
the ^etting of Blood and Purging being only ^mitted.

Of the Pain of the Haemorrhoids.
The sick Person is tormented with a most intense pain, when he voideth
Excrements, the surface of which is also sprinkled with Blood. Sometimes
Tumors like Warts lurk inwardly in the Muscle, called the Sphincter, or appear
in the Brims of the Fundament.

Let ten ounces of Blood be taken out of the Right Arm.

Take of the Seeds of Melons and Pompions, of each half an ounce; White Poppy
Seeds, two drams; five sweet Almonds shell'd. Beat them in a marble Mortar,
pouring in gradually of Barley Water above a Pint, Rose Water two drams; fine
white Sugar, as much as suffices. Make an Emulsion according to Art; of which
let the Patient take three ounces frequently.

Take of Flowers of Brimstone, Powder of Liquorish, and Sage of each one dram:
with a sufficient quantity of Lucatella's Balsam, make six Pills out of every
dram, of which let him take thrice a day, drinking six spoonfuls of the
Emulsion after them.

Take of Frogs Sperm Water, four ounces dissolve in it of Litharge, two drams;
Opium, one scruple: Apply a linen Clout soaked in a little of this mixture to
the part affected; or if the Tumor lurk inwardly, inject three spoonfuls of
the same mixture by way of a Clyster.

Let the Patient make use of Water boiled with Milk, or of Barley Water, for
ordinary Drink, and abstain from Flesh. Every night let him take Diacodium.

Of the immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids.
It is known by the Decay of Strength, a long and copious Flux of Blood, foul
color of the Body tending to a Citron color, as in the Jaundice. It brings an
evil Habit of Body, and afterward the Dropsy.

The same things are profitable in this Case, that are prescribed in the
Chapter, Of the immoderate Flux of the Courses, omitting only Purgation.

Of the Epilepsy in Children.
Children are usually troubled with the Faling Sickness, either during the
first Month, after a Looseness, (in which case Diacodium, to ^he quantity of a
Pepper Corn, dissolved in Saxifrage Water, or Mothers Milk, and exhibited, is a
most excellent Remedy;) or about the time of their Breeding of Teeth, from the
seventh to the tenth Month; it is accompanied with a Cough, or (which is far
worse) with Vomiting and Looseness, the Infant voiding green Excrements, after
the manner of Hysterical Women. Sometimes the Fit comes suddenly, and
unawares, distorting the Mouth and Eyes, overspreading the Face with Blackness,
and causing convulsive Motions in diverse Limbs: And otherwhile the coming of it
is signified beforehand, by the Contraction of the Fingers into the Fist, and a
settled and unusual unmoveableness of the Eyes. The Fits are sometimes long, and
sometimes short; sometimes they return at settimes, and otherwhiles observe no
certain period; but when Death is at hand, they come so thick, that they seem
to tread upon one another heels. If at any time they grant a Truce, the Child
remains drowsy, and prone to sleep, till he be roused by a new Paroxysm.

Apply a Blistering Plaster as soon as may be to the hinder part of the Neck.

Take of Langius his Epileptic Water, three drams; Liquid Laudanum one, two, or
more drops, according to the Age of the Child; Syrup of Peony, one dram: mix
them for a Draught, which must be instantly exhibited.

Take of Rue Water, three ounces; Langius his Epileptic Water, and compound
Bryony Water, of each one ounce; Syrup of Gilli-flowers half an ounce: mix and
make a Julep, of which give a spoonful every hour, if the Draught already
prescribed has not discust the Paroxysm.

Of the Rickets truly so called.
It is known by the Looseness, Softness, Feebleness, Languishment, Laziness,
Dullness and unequal nourishment of the parts, viz. the Head is bigger than is
meet, the Face fuller and more florid, the fleshy parts beneath the Head pine
away, the Joints are possessed with Knotty Protuberances, chiefly the Wrists, but
the Ankles not so much, the Bones are bowed, especially those of the Legs, and
next to them those of the Cubit between the Elbow and Wrist, sometimes also the
Shoulder and Thigh-bones: the Teeth come forth slowly and with pain, they are
loose, black and fall out, the Breast is narrow toward the sides, and high and
sharp before: Other signs are a stuffing of the Abdomen or Paunch, distension
of the Hypochondria, or places under the short Ribs, Coughing, faultiness of
the Lungs; and an averseness from lying on one side, which happens to be
sometimes the Right side, and otherwhiles the Left.

Take of the Leaves of common Wormwood, lesser Centory, White Hore-hound,
Germainder, Scordium, common Calamint, Feverfew, Meadow Saxifrage, St. John's
wort, Golden rod, wild Time, Mint, Sage, Rue, Carduus Benedictus, Pennyroyal,
Southern-wood, Camomil, Tansy, and Lilly of the Valley, all freshly gathered
and chopped, of each one handful; Hogs Lard four pounds, Sheeps Tallow two
pounds, Claret wine a quart. Let them stand twelve hours soaking on hot ashes
in an earthen Vessel, then boil away the Moisture and afterward strain them
for a Liniment, with which anoint the Belly, and the parts under the short
Ribs, and also the Limbs every morning and evening, for thirty or forty days,
or till the Child recover.

Take of each of the prescribed Ingredients two handfuls, infuse them cold in
four Gallons of Beer not hopp'd, for ordinary drink.

When Tumors possess the Bellies of Children, caused by excessive Evacuations,

Let the Blood and Bowels be strengthened with corroborating Herbs, as in the
Rickets (properly so called); Only let the Armpits be also anointed on both
sides, but not the Limbs.

Of Fevers proceeding from the Breeding of Teeth
Let two, three, or four Drops of Spir it o Hartshorn, according to the Age of
the Child, be exhibited every four hours in a spoonful or two of Black Cherry
water, or some other convenient Julep, repeating it four or six times.

Of the Hectic Fever in Children.
They languish with a notable Heat, and Dejection of Appetite; the Trunk of the
Body, and the Limbs are extenuated.

Put two drams of Rheubarb sliced into a Glass Bottle capable of containing a
Quart of Small Beer, for ordinary Drink: and after it is drunk up, pour upon
the same Rheubarb another Quart of Beer, and so a third time.

But if the Drink be too strongly impregnated with a Purgative Virtue, after
one Pint is drunk up, let another be immediately added to that which remains.

Of Bleeding at the Nose.
It is attended with Pain and Heat in the Forepart of the Head.

Let a Vein be frequently opened in the Arm, and a cooling and thickening Diet
injoined. Prescribe also cooling and thickening Juleps, and cooling Emulsions.

Let a cooling Clyster be injected every day, and a composing Draught of Syrup
of Meconium exhibited every night, and prescribe the common purging Potion to
be be taken once or twice.

Dip a piece of Linen cloth four times doubled in cold water, in which Sal
Prunellae has been dissolved; and squeezing it a little, apply it to the Neck
behind and on both sides, oftentimes in a day.

After the Evacuations, apply the following Liquor.

Take of Hungarian Vitriol, and Alum, of each one ounce; Phlegm of Vitriol half
a pound: Boil them t^il the whole be dissolved, then suffer the Liquor to grow
cold, and strain it through Brown Paper, and separating it from the Crystals
that now and then arise, add to the remaining Liquor a twelfth part of Oil of
Vitriol: Or rather,

Take of Plantane Water, four ounces; Bole Armeniac in fine Powder, half an
ounce: mix them thoroughly. Dip a Tent made of the scrapings of Linen in this
Liquor, and put it into the Nostril out of which the Blood flows, where let it
remain two days.

If these things do not prevail, dissolve Roman Vitriol in common Water, and
dipping a Tent therein, put it into the Nose. Clouts dipped in this Liquor, and
applied, do also stay Bleeding in any of the external Parts.

Of the Green Sickness.
The Signs of this Disease are these: Ill color of Face, and of the whole
Body, Swellings in the Face, Eyelids and Ankles, Heaviness of the whole Body,
a stretching Weariness of the Legs and Feet, difficult Breathing, Feverish
Pulse, Sleepiness, Pica or longing for things that ought not to be eaten, and
stoppage of the Courses.

Let the Patient take the Chalybeat Pills or Powder, prescribed in the Chapter,
Of the Hysterical Passion, more or less, according to her Age, drinking after
them a Draught of any sort of Wine that pleases her, or of the corroborating
Infusion of the Roots of Angelica there described. If she be not very weak,
purge her once or twice, before she enter into this Course.

Of the Suppression of the Terms.
They loath Meat, the Face is discolored, the whole Body is heavy, the
Forepart of the Head, Loins, Legs, and Lower Belly, are pained, and the Feet
are swollen.

Prescribe the same Remedies that are commended in the Chapter, Of the
Hysterical Passion; but if these will not prevail, proceed thus:

Every morning, and at four a clock in the afternoon, give five spoonfuls of
the Hysterical Julep without Castoreum, with twelve drops of Spirit of
Hatts-horn, and every night at her entrance into Bed, let her take one scruple
of the Troches of Myrrh made into a Bolus, or Pills with Syrup of Mugwort.

Of Vomiting or Spitting of Blood.
Spitting of Blood is accompanied with a Pain and Heat in the Breast, and a
certain Feebleness.

Let ten ounces of Blood be taken out of the Right Arm. The next morning let
the Patient take the common purging Potion, and the same night a composing
Draught, of three ounces of Black-cherry Water, and one ounce of Syrup of
Meconium

Then let him use the following Remedies.

Take of Bole-Armeniac, one ounce; Powder of Comfry Roots, two drams; sealed
Earth, Boodstone, and Dragons Blood, of each one dram; fine white Sugar the
weight of all the rest: mix them, and make a fine Powder, of which let him take
one dram in the morning, at five a clock in the afternoon, and at night,
drinking four ounces of the following Apozeme after it.

Take of the Leafs of Plantane, wild Bramble Bush, and Yarrow, of each one
handful. Boil them in a convenient quantity of Water to a Pint and an half: in
the straining dissolve two ounces of syrup of Comfry: mix and make an Apozeme;
or let him take six spoonfuls of the following Tincture.

Take of Red Rose Flowers, six drams; the inner Bark of the Oak, half an ounce;
Plantane Seeds somewhat bruss'd, three drams; Spring Water, one quart; Spirit
of Vitriol, as much as suffices to give the whole a pleasant sharpness. Infuse
them four hours in a close Vessel, with a gentle Heat: To the straining, add
three ounces of Barley Cinnamon Water, and as much fine white Sugar as is
sufficient to make it pleasant to taste.

If the Patient have an aversion against Powders, let him use the Electuary
prescribed in the Chapter, Of the Immoderate Flux of the Terms.

Prescribe a Clyster to be injected every day, and Diacodium to be taken at
night.

Moreover the Patient must be let Blood again once, twice or thrice, according
to the necessity of his condition, some days being interposed. Also, if need
be, let him once again repeat the purging Potion,

And observe a cooling and thickning Diet.

Of the Pricking of a Tendon.
A watery Humor or thin Gleet does perpetually drop out of the Orifice of the
Vein that is cut.

Take of White Lilly Roots boiled in Cows Milk till they grow tender, and
beaten, four ounces; Lin-seed flower and Oat-flower, of each three drams: Boil
them to the consistence of a Cataplasm, in the same Milk in which the Roots
were boiled. Apply it to the part affected, every morning and evening.

Of Burning.
Foment the part affected with Clouts dipped in Spirit of Wine, till the pain be
assuaged; then dip the Clout again and apply it three or four times in a day to
the part affected.

Of Common Madness.
This Disease proceeds from a too vivid and exalted Constitution of the
Blood. There is also another sort of Madness that comes after long intermitting
Fevers, and at length degenerates into Folly, which is caused by the Weakness
and Flatness of the Blood, proceeding from a long Fermentation thereof. You
must therefore prescribe high Cordials, such as Treacle of Andromachus, the
Electuary de Ovo, the Countesses Powder, Sir Walttr Rawleigh's Powder in Plague
water, Treacle water, or some other convenient Vehicle. And injoin a
Restorative Diet.

In young Persons let a Vein be opened in the Arm, and eight or nine ounces of
Blood taken away twice or thrice, every fourth day.

Then let the Jugular Veins be once opened. After which the whole Cure depends
upon the use of the following purging Medicine, which must be given every third
or fourth day while the Disease lasts; But in the mean time it is to be
observed, that after the Patient has been purged eight or ten times, the
exhibition of the Evacuating Medicine must be omitted for a Week or two.

Take of the Domestic Medicine (that is, White Briony Roots) in powder, one
dram; Cows Milk four ounces; Or,

Take of the same Roots half an ounce, or six drams; White Wine four ounces:
Infuse them a whole night. In the strained Liquor dissolve one ounce of Syrup
of Violets. Mix them for a Potion. Or,

Take of Gambugia fourteen grains, Black-Cherry water three ounces, Syrup of
Clove-gilliflowers half an ounce: Make a Potion.

Of Contusions or Bruises.
Let a Vein in the Arm of the side that is most affected be opened, and ten
ounces of Blood taken away. The next morning exhibit the common purging Potion;
and thenceforward in like manner repeat Blood-letting and Purgation by turns,
till the Patient recover. In the mean while, if the inward parts are hurt, let
him use the following Remedies during the whole course of the Cure.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction a pint and an half, Syrup of Violets, and of
Maidenhair, of each two ounces: Mix them for an Apozem, of which let him take
half a pint thrice a day. Exhibit also frequently a Spoonful of Oil of Sweet
Almonds newly drawn.

Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds, the Ointment Dialthaeae and Pomate, of each one
ounce: Mix them for a Liniment, with which anoint the part affected morning and
evening, laying over it a Cabbage Leaf.

Of Scurf or Scales in the Head.
Let the Common Purging Potion be twice exhibited. Then

Take of Oil of bitter Almonds, Oil of Laurel, the Ashes of Sothernwood leaves,
of each one ounce: Mix them thoroughly for a Liniment, with which anoint the
whole Head every night, rubbing it in diligently, and then cover it with a
Sow's Bladder.

But first let all the Hair be cut off, and afterward rub off the Scales by
degrees, every morning, according as they are ready to fall away.

Of the Biting of a Mad Dog.
After 40 Days or more, the Signs of Melancholy appear: a Fever. Thirst,
Hydrophobia, or the Fear of Water, and at length Convulsions of the extreme
Parts.

Take of Spirit of Wine highly rectified, four ounces; Treacle of Andromachus,
one ounce: make a mixture, with which anoint the part that is hurt, thrice
every day, laying over it a Clout dipped in the same mixture.

Of the Ulcer of the Bladder.
Stinking matter is voided, or Blood, and sometimes Scales, or membranous
Skins, and as it were scurfy Crusts like Bran; whereas when the Ulcer is in the
Reins, pieces of Flesh (which sometimes are very big) are voided with the
Urine. There is also a perpetual difficulty of Urine, and continual pain in
those parts: But in an Ulcer of the Reins, the difficulty of Urine and Pain
come by Fits, and there are some Intervals of ease; the Matter also that comes
from the Reins is more abundant, white, thin, and not stinking, the Urine is
voided like milk, but after it has stood long, the Matter being separted,
falls to the bottom.

Take of the Plaster called Flos Unguenti, a dram and an half: make nine
Pills, of which let the Patient take three at the physical hours, ( viz. at
eight a clock in the morning, and five in the afternoon) drinking six spoonfuls
of the following Water after them.

Take of the Roots of Comfrey, Fennel, Birthwort, and Avens, of each three
ounces; Leafs of Agrimony, St. John's Wort, Bugle, Sanicle and Plantane, of each
six handfuls; chop them small, and distill them in White Wind and Milk, of each
four Pints. Draw off only four Pints for your use.

Take of the Powder of Comfrey Roots, and Gum Arabic, of each one ounce; Sugar
of Penides, two ounces: make a Powder, of which let the Patient take a spoonful
twice a day.

Of an Asthma, or Difficulty of Breathing, in Persons of a Sanguine
Constitution.
Of this Disease there are three kinds. Dyspnaea, which is a difficult
Breathing, in which the Breath is drawn often and thick, without noise or
rattling, arising from the stuffing of the Lungs. Asthma, or a great and
frequent Breathing, in which the Diaphragma or Midriff, and intercostal
Muscles, as also the Muscles of the Abdomen are violently moved, with a rattling
noise and wheesing. In the former kind the substance of the Lungs, in the
latter the Bronchia, or Gristles are stopped. And Orthopnaea, which is the
greatest difficulty of Breathing, in which the sick person cannot breath but
sitting, and with his Neck stretched upright; the Muscles also of the Breast
and Shoulders are vehemently agitated.

Let ten ounces of Blood be taken from the Right Arm, and the next day let the
Patient take the common purging Potion, and repeat the same every third day to
two other Doses.

In the intermediate Days let him proceed thus:

Take two drams of Anniseed in fine powder, and with a sufficient quantity of
Lucatella's Balsam make twelve Pills, of which let him take three in the
morning, and at five a clock in the afternoon, drinking after them four ounces
of the bitter Decoction, without the purging Ingredients, warm.

If the Symptoms still remain, let the whole Process be iterated afresh.

Of the Palsy.
Both the Faculties of Sense and Motion, or either of them singly, are entirely
lost, or at least diminished, and vitiated in the parts affected.

Take of the Pills Cochiae the less, two scruples; let them be exhibited six
times every other morning: And afterward let the Patient take the
Antiscorbutic Electuary, thrice a day for thirty days together. See the
Chapter, Of the Scurvey.

Take of the Unguent called Nervinum, three ounces; compound Spirit of
Lavender, and Spirit of Garden-Scurvy-Grass, of each an ounce and an half; with
which anoint the parts affected, as the Backbone, etc. every morning and
evening.

The most part of the Re^^^ks there prescribed, though they seem to be only
adapted for the Cure of the Scurvy: yet forasmuch as they are peculiarly
qualified to volatize crude and fixed Humors, they are also good against the
Palsy.

Of the Cough and Pthisis, or Consumption.
The Cough is evident of it self. As for the Consumption it is to be observed,
that People are obnoxious to it from eighteen to thirty five years. The Signs
of it are these: An Hectic Fever, which is augmented after Meat (as appears by
the quickness of the Pulse, and Redness of the Cheeks;) the Matter that is spit
forth with Coughing is bloody or purulent (that is, mixed with Quittor,) being
cast into the Fire, it sends forth a noisome Smell; and if it be put into a
Vessel full of water, it sinks to the bottom: Sweating at Night, Blueness of
the Cheeks, Paleness of Face, and Sharpness of the Nostrils. And the sinking of
the Temples, crookedness of the Nails, falling off of the Hair, and melting
Flux of the Belly, are the immediate Forerunners of Death.

When the Cough is of no long standing, nor is yet accompanied with a Fever, or
other Signs of a Bastard Peripneumonia, nor came after a Pleurisy or
Peripneumonia, for want of sufficient Blood letting, in such a Case it will be
sufficient to caution the Patient against the use of Wine or Flesh for some
days, and to prescribe these or the like Remedies to be used by him at his
pleasure.

Let him take ten drops of Balsam of Sulphur anisated in a spoonful of
Sugar Candy, twice or thrice every day, and frequently eat one of the following
Tablets, which he ought always to carry about him.

Take a pound and an half of Sugar Candy; boil it in a convenient quantity of
Spring water, till it stick to the ends of your Fingers: then add to it of the
Powder of Liquorish, Elicampane, Anniseed, Angelica Seeds, of each half an
ounce; Powder of Flower-de-luce, of Florence and Brimstone, of each two drams;
Chemical Oil of Annis, two scruples. Make Tablets according to Art, which may
be called Domestic Lozenges. And in the mean time let the Patient use the
following lambitive Medicine.

Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds, two ounces; Syrup of Maidenhair and Violets, of
each one ounce; Sugar Candy as much as suffices to make a Lohoch; let the
Patient lick thereof with a Liquorish Stick, when the Cough surprizeth him.

In a thin Defluxion, you may prescribe thickning Lohochs.

But if the Cough yield not to these Remedies, (more especially if it be
attended with a Fever, or came after a Pleurisy or Inflammation of the Lungs) in
that case it will be to no purpose to rely upon pectoral Medicines, forasmuch
as the Cure must be wrought by Blood-letting and Purging, according to the
method described in the Chapter, Of the Bastard Peripneumonia.

If after all, the Cough do not only continue to molest the Patient, but by
long and violent concussion of the Lungs, has exceedingly weakened them, and
thereby introduced a Pthisis or Consumption, you must proceed thus:

Pour ten drops of Balsam of Peru into a spoonful of Syrup of Ground Ivy, or
(if the Patient dislike that) of Sugar Candy; and let him take it thrice a day,
drinking after it four ounces of the bitter Decoction, prepared without the
purging Ingredients, or if that does occasion a Looseness of his Belly, let him
diminish the Dose to three ounces.

But of all the Remedies that hitherto have been invented, the most excellent
and efficacious, is for the Patient to take long and far Journies on
Horseback. It is moreover to be observed, thar Men, or such as have already
past the years of their Youth, must spend more time in this exercise, than if
they were Boys or Young Men. And, truly, the Peruvian Bark is not a mucn more
certain Remedy for intermitting Fevers, than, in this Age, Riding is for a
Consumption.

Of the Scurvy.
It is attended with Heaviness of Body; Weariness that comes of it self, or
without any precedent Cause; difficult Breathing, especially after Exercise;
Rottenness of the Gums; stinking Breath; often Bleeding at the Nose; difficult
and uneasy Walking; and (which is a constant Symptom of this Disease) Spots in
the Legs, which are black and blue, yellow, or of a lead or violet color, the
Legs in the time being sometimes swollen, and sometimes extenuated, and the Face
of a color between pale and tawny.

Let a Vein be opened in the Arm, and eight ounces of Blood taken away, if no
Signs of a Dropsy appear.

The next morning exhibit the common purging Potion, and again a second and
third time every third day.

In the intermediate Days, let the Patient take the following Remedies, and
continue the use of them for a month or two afterward.

Take of Conserve of Garden-Scurvy-grass, two ounces; Conserve of Wood Sorrel,
one ounce, compound Powder of Aron, six drams; Syrup of Orenges, as much as
suffices to make an Electuary, of which let him take the quantity of a large
Nutmeg, in the morning, at five a clock in the afternoon, and at night,
drinking after it six spoonfuls of compound Radish water, or of that which
follows.

Take of Raspings of Horseradish Roots, two pounds; Aron Roots, one pound;
Leafs of Garden-Scurvy-Grass, twelve handfuls; Leafs of Mint, Sage,
Watercresses, and Brook-lime, of each six handfuls; Seeds of
Garden-Scurvy-Grass a little beaten, half a pound; Nutmegs, half an ounce;
White Wind, twelve pints: Distill them in a common Still, and draw off only six
pints for your use.

Or distill the fresh Leafs of Garden-Scurvy-Grass by it self, for the same use.

Moreover, let the Patient make use of the following Beer for ordinary Drink.

Take of the fresh Roots of Horseradish sliced, two drams; twelve Leafs of
Garden-Scurvy-Grass; six Raisins stoned; and the half of an Orange sliced. Put
them altogether into a Glass Bottle capable of containing a Quart of Small
Beer, and stop it immediately with a Cork.

After the manner that is here described, prepare at the same time six Bottles
for your use, and after some days six more, before the first be quite spent,
and so onward. Or,

Instead of the Beer, you may add three or four spoonfuls of the following
mixture, to every draught of your ordinary Drink.

Take of the Roots of Horseradish, and Seeds of Garden-Scurvy-Grass, of each
half an ounce; Leafs of Garden-Scurvy-Grass, two handfuls; the pulp of one
Orange. Beat them together in a marble Mortar, pouring in by degrees half a
pint of White Wind. Strain them, and squeeze them a little; and reserve the
Liquor for your use.

The same Remedies are also of excellent use in the Scorbutic or Hysterical
Rheumatism; only the letting of Blood, and Purging, must be omitted.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABortion. 57 Ague. 14 Apoplexy. 40 Asthma. 90
B.
BIting of a mad Dog. 88 Ulcer in the Bladder. 88 Bleeding at the Nose. 79
Vomiting and Spitting of Blood. 82 Difficult Breathing. 90 Bruises. 86 Burning.
85
C.
CHolera. 49 Hysterical Clavus. 54 Bilious Colic. 48 Hysterical Colic. 54 Colic
of the people of Poictiers. 51 Consumption. 92 Contusions. 86 Cough. 92
Immoderate Flowing of the Courses. 52 Suppression of the Courses. 82
D.
DIabetes. 73 Diarrhaea. 44 Biting of a mad Dog. 88 Dropsy. 59 Dysentery. 44
E.
EPilepsy. 75 Epilepsy in Children. 75 Erisipela's and Erisipelatous Fever. 23
Inflammation of the Eyes. 42
F.
FAlling Sickness in Children. 39 Cleansing Fever. 1^ Erysipelatous Fever. 23
Hectic Fever in Children. 79 Intermitting Fever. 13 Pestilential Fever. 11
Present Fever. 14 Present Fever in Children. 16 Scarlet Fever. 17 Fever from
the Breeding of Teeth. 79 Flux of the Belly. 46 Immoderate Flux of the Courses.
52 Immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoids. 75 Immoderate Flux of the Loches. 57
White Flux. 71 French Pox. 68
G.
GOnorrhaea. 64 Green Sickness. 81
H.
HEctic Fever in Children. 79 Flux of the Hemorrhoids. 75 Pain of the
Hemorrhoids. 74 Hypochondriacal Passion. 5 Hypochondriacal Rheumatism. 22
Hysterical Clavus. 54 Hysterical Colic. 54 Hysterical Passion. 5 Hysterical
Rheumatism. 22
I.
JAundice. 56 Iliac Passion. 51 Itching. 24
K.
STone in the Kidneys. 43
L.
IMmoderate Flux of the Loches. 57 Suppression of the Loches. 58 Looseness. 46
M.
MAdness. 85 Measles. 27
N.
NEphritical Paroxysm. 43 Bleeding at the Nose. 79
O.
OPthalmia. 42
P.
PAlsy. 91 Bastard Peripneumonia. 19 Pestilential Fever. 11 Phthisis. 92
Pleurisy. 18 French Pox. 68 Small Pox. 29
Q.
QVinsy. 25
R.
COmposition of Remedies. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Rheumatism. 21 Scorbutic and Hysterical
Rheumatism. 22 Rickets. 77 Running of the Reins. 64
S.
SCarlet Fever. 17 Scorbutic Rheumatism. 21 Scurf in the Head. 87 Scurvy. 95
Diseases of the Skin. 24 Spitting of Blood. 82 Stone in the Kidneys. 43
T.
FEvers from Breeding of Teeth. 79 Pricking of a Tendon. 84 Terms. See Courses.
Tertian-Ague. 14
V.
VEnereal Disease. 68 St. Vitus's Dance. 37 Vomiting of Blood. 82
W.
WHites. 71 Falling down of the Womb. 43
FINIS.

