THE BOOK OF NATURE Translated and Epitomized.

Psalm. 19. 1, 6. Romans 1. 19, 20.

By GEORGE SIKES.

Printed in the year 1667.

CHAP. I.
Four degrees of created beings.
THere are four general degrees of creatures, by which as four distinct rounds
in the ladder of created nature, man may ascend to the right knowledge of
himself and of God. There was no other general and visible book for mankind to
read the mind of God in, and their duty toward him, for the first 2513. years
of the world. Then began the book of the holy Scriptures to be written by
Moses, which was finished by John, about the year 4100. The former volume of it
was peculiarly committed to the jews. To them perteined the giving of the law,
the service of God, and the promises. Other nations took little notice of it,
till the promised Messiah came in the flesh, and brake down the middle wall of
partition between them and the jews; on which, the holy Oracles became common
to all the world. But this book, though it do more perfectly, excellently, and
fully declare the mind of God, as to the duty and concerns of man, then the
book of nature, yet does it no ways rescind, obliterate, or invalidate it.
That book is yet in being, and does by the various voices and lines thereof,
administer the same significant instruction unto man, as from the beginning.
And hereof is he obliged to take notice, even by the Scriptures of truth, as
may appear by the two places thereof, quoted in the title page, with others,
which, for brevity, I refer to the reader's enquiry.

1. The first general degree, or lowest rank of creatures, comprehend's all
those things that have being only, not life, sense, or understanding. 2. The 2d
comprehend's all such things as have being and life only, not sense nor
understanding. 3. The third comprehend's all those creatures that have being,
life, and sense, but not reason or understanding. 4. The fourth comprehend's
only those creatures, that have being, life, sense, and understanding with
free will, which are rational and intellectual powers.
In the lowest round of this ladder, the first degree of created beings, we
find more various species or kinds, as also more individualls, then in the
second; in the second, more then in the third; in the third, more then in the
fourth. There is but one species or nature at all, in the fourth, to wit,
humane; and not so many individuals as in any of the former trhee.

1. In the first degree, we find abundance of distinct species or natures of
things, one above another, in dignity; the four elements, all inanimate
compounds, the visible heavens with the furniture thereof, Sun, Moon, and
Stars. Water excells the earth, and is situated above it. Air excells water in
dignity and situation. Fire excells air. The celestial orbs with their
furniture, excel them all, The glory of the celestial bodies, it one: the
glory of the terrestrial, another. There is one glory of the Sun; another, of
the Moon; another, of the Stars. And one Star differs from or excels
another Star, in glory. There are also many kinds or species of metalls and
mineralls generated under the earth, very different in worth and excellency, as
Gold, Silver, copper, tinn, ledd; brimstone, alume, etc. There are also diverse
sorts of precious stones, different in worth, as Diamonds, Rubies, Saphirs, and
the rest; amongst which, the Diamond has the pre-eminence. Many other kinds of
things there are in the first degree, of different natures from each other;
together with all sorts of artificial things, which agree in this, that they
have being only, not life, sense, nor understanding. 2. In the second degree,
are all trees and plants or herbs. Of both sorts there are many species,
distinguished from and surmounting one another in their different properties,
qualities, and usefulness. They draw nourishment from the earth, whereby they
do grow, bring forth fruit and seed for the use of man, as also for the
multiplying of themselves. 3. In the third degree are contained all variety of
creatures that have being, life, and sense, but not reason. Sense here is
comprehensive of whatsoever is found in mere animals, birds, beasts, fishes,
and creeping things, over and beyond what is to be found in any things of the
second rank, to wit, plants and trees. 4. In the fourth round of nature's
ladder, we find but one species or nature only; man's. In man is summed up and
put together whatever is found in the other three degrees, to wit, being, life,
and sense, advanced into a union with reason or understanding and free will.
This nature is lord of the other three, and ought to own no other lord over it,
but God himself.
These four degrees of things, well considered (of which there can be no doubt,
as being evident unto the common reason and experience of mankind) we may, by
duly comparing and observing of them (as to their agreements with, or
differences from each other) gain great instruction, as to our duty toward
God, and advantages therein, both temporal and eternal.

Chap. 2.
Section. I.
The general agreement that is found in the constitution of man, with other
creatures.
THe agreement or similitude man has with the three inferior sorts of
creatures, is twofold, general and special. So also is his difference from
them, or excellency above them, general and special. His general agreement is
this.

1. He has being, with elements, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all inanimate compounds.
His body is compounded of, nourished and maintained by the elements and
products thereof, as other things are. He dwells and lives in and by them,
every moment. 2. He has life, with trees and plants. They live, are nourished,
grow, increase, and multiply, by propagation of their like. The herb yields
seed, and the fruit-tree yields fruit after his kind, whose seed is in
itself. Genesis 1. 11. 3. In harmony or agreement with things of the third degree,
birds, beasts, fishes, and every thing that creeps upon the earth, he has
outward senses; seeing, hearing, etc. He has also all the inward senses, powers,
or faculties of animalish life. He has the attractive, retentive, digestive,
and expulsive powers, in order to growth, nourishment, and generation. He sees,
hear's, smell's, tast's, sleep's, wake's, eats, drink's, etc. as they do. No
degree then of created being, is wanting in the composition of every individual
man. He has being, with all inanimate parts of the creation; life, with herbs
and trees; sense, with beasts, etc; reason, with angels. He is the only true
microcosm, or little world, in whose nature and constitution is put together all the variety of nature that is to be found in the whole creation.
SECT. II.
The fruit or profit that is to be reaped from this general agreement of man with
all inferior creatures.
FRom this general view and comparison of himself with all inferior creatures,
may man argue and certainly conclude, that there is some invisible lord over
him, who gave to all inferior things what they have; and to himself, what he
has. If he had given to inferior things, what they have, he had bin their
creator. If inferior things had given him, what he has, they had given him
more then they have in themselves, and would be superior to him. The same
almighty lord made, ordered, proportioned, and limited all, within their
several bounds. All are the works of his hands. He made us, and not we
ourselvs. Ps. 100. 3.

Again, the excellent order of so different and innumerable things,
demonstrates the creator to be but one. Every inferior order of things is
exactly calculated and fitted to the use and service of it is superior. The
elements enter the constitution of trees and plants, nourishing them
continually. Herbs and the fruits of trees enter into creatures endued with
sense, and nourish them. Elements, herbs, fruits, and the flesh of beasts,
enter into man, and nourish him. The celestial bodies, Sun, moon and stars do
influence and give vigor and warmth unto all. Thus do inferior things help
the superior, in great unity, harmony, and order. Things in the first, second,
and third degrees, are ordained for the service of man, who is the only
creature in the fourth.

Now if the many particular and special natures, comprehended in the three
general degrees of inferior things, be ordained for the relief and Service of
one nature only, to wit, man's; much more ought that nature to yield itself
wholly up to the service of one only nature above it, the divine.

There are many distinct special natures comprehended under one general, in
the three inferior degrees of things. There are many species or natures in the
first; elements, sun, moon, stars, metals, mineralls, stones, etc. In the
second, are many several natures, species or kinds of trees and plants. In the
third, are several kinds of birds, beasts, fishes, and creeping things, very
different in their natures. But in the fourth, we find only one nature or
species, wherein all the individuals do agree.

All the several species or distinct natures of things in the first degree,
are united in one general consideration, as having being only. All the several
species in the second, have being and life only. All in the third, agree in
this, that they have being, life and sense only, not reason. Thus may we
observe a general unity of the distinct respective species under the three
inferior degrees of creatures. In the fourth, all are of one species or
particular nature, differing only individually. And that nature which is above
humane, and all the rest, must have one degree of unity above humane, to wit,
numericall, without any diversity, so much as in individuals. One degree of
unity ought to be acknowledged incident to the divine nature, above humane,
which can be no other, or less then this; that one and the same undivided
substance, nature, or essence, be found in three divine persons, really
distinct from, and yet most intimately one with each other. Otherwise would nor
the unity of divine nature in three persons, be superior to the unity of
humane nature in three or more men. All created natures are gathered up and
knit together in humane nature, which is but one species; and humane nature is
united with the supreme nature of all. So comes the whole world to be
consummated and terminated in the greatest unity that is possible.

Moreover, he that gave being, life, sense, and understanding to his creatures,
has all these eminently and incomparably in himself, beyond what they are in
the creature. He has being, life, sense, and understanding, in supreme
perfection and unity. He had them from all eternity in himself, He received
them not from any other, nor did he give them to himself. They are not limited
in him. For who should measure them out unto him? They are infinite,
immeasurable, and boundless. They are all one and the same thing, in him. Life,
sense, and understanding, are the self-same thing with his being. In him is no
composition. What then is attributable unto his being, is attributable to all
the rest. If his being be infinite, his understanding is infinite, etc.

Thus having found out the infinite perfection of God, by the finite things
which he has made, we may further conclude from such infinite perfection, that
he made not the world, as standing in need of any thing his creatures could be
or do unto him, for ever. But in mere bounty, did he communicate unto them
their being, in order to bring them into a final state of indissoluble union
with himself, which is their utmost perfection and eternal blessedness.

Chap. 3.
Section. I.
The special agreement or harmony, that is found in the constitution of man,
with other creatures.
1. MAn has a special harmony with the lowest sort of inferior things, in the
frame or composition of his body, as also in the scit^ation of the parts
thereof. He is made up of the same elemental materials with them. The nobler
and more excellent of them are situated above those of lesser value.

The celestial bodies are highest; the earth is the lowest part of the visible
creation. The elements, according to their different intrinsecall worth and
usefulnes, have their place and situation in the universe, higher, or lower.
So in the body of man, the head, as the noblest part, is the highest: the feet,
as the meanest, are the lowest. And as the heavenly bodies do influence and
rule the inferior parts of the world, so do the head, hands, and other
superior parts of man's body, govern and order the inferior.

2. Man has a special agreement or similitude with things of the second degree,
in the production of his body. The seed of plants and trees is sown and lies
hid for a season in the earth; so is the seed from which man in due time
springs up, sown and covered in the lowest parts of the earth. Again, from one
small seed, wherein is no apparent diversity, but great similitude of parts,
many very different things do spring up and come forth, as roots, stock, bark,
pith, leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds. In like manner, from the small seed
of man, wherein is no discernable dissimilitude or diversity of parts, do so
many different, and wonderful parts come forth, head, eyes, nose, ears,
tongue, hands, fingers, legs, feet, toes, brain, heart, lungs, stomach, liver,
spleen, reins, bones, nervs, veins, arteries, etc. When we duly consider such a
number of different parts, so fitly disposed, qualified, tempered and situated
for our use, we may well conclude, that we are fearfully and wonderfully made,
curiously wrought or embroidered by the hand of the lord. 3. Thirdly, man has a
special agreement and much more likeness yet, with things of the third degree, in
the production, constitution, and life of his body. They are generated by male
and female; so is he. They are formed and in due season brought forth, as he.
They have head, eyes, nose, mouth, tongue, teeth, heart, liver, stomach, and
other parts, as he. They can se, hear, go from place to place, eat, drink,
digest, and be nourished, as he. And as in time, they come to die, and return
to the earth, from whence they sprung up, so he. For that which befalls the
sons of men, befalls beasts; as the one dies, so dies the other. All go
unto one place. All are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. The spirit of
man goes upward, and the spirit of the beast goes downward to the earth, as
well as his body: but the bodies of both return alike unto dust.
SECT. II.
The fruit that is to be reaped from this special agreement of man with inferior
creatures.
1. THe knowledge hence to be gained, is like unto the former; as a farther
strengthening and confirmation thereof. The special agreement of man does more
and more confirm us in this persuasion, that the same workman made all, and
that the same lord that made them, orders and disposes all things by his
counsel and providence, to the uses and ends by him intended. 2. The infinite
power, wisdom, and goodness of the creator and disposer of all things, does
appear in this, that out of the same elementary matter, he form's up such
innumerable different things, as are to be found in the visible creation ^ the
chief and most excellent whereof, is the body of man, qualified and organized
for the performance of all manner of rational, sensitive, and vegetal
operations, by his Spirit. We may farther conclude, that he who could form up
such an excellent thing as is the body of man, out of the lowest element, can
exalt it yet higher, out of the state and fashion of an earthly, mortal body,
into the state of a spiritual, heavenly, and immortal body. 1 Cor. 15. 44. This
advance of knowledge may we gain from our special agreement with other creatures.
It Is our duty and concern, thus to mark and spell out the significant
instruction, which by the voices of the creatures is ministered unto us, in the
book of nature. So much of the agreement of man with other creatures, general,
and special; with the fruits of both.
Chap. 3.
Section. 1.
The general difference of man from other creatures.
THe difference of man from other creatures is also general and special, as
well as his agreement with them. A greater degree of knowledge is atteinable, by
considering his difference from, or excellency above them, then by considering
those things, faculties, powers, organs, and operations, wherein he agrees with
them. The knowledge atteinable from his agreement with them, will profit us little
or nothing, unless we proceed also to take notice of his difference from them.
In order to this, we are first to consider the difference that the three
inferior degrees of creatures have from one another, which is also general and
special.

Their general difference has bin already spoken to. Things of the second
degree excel those of the first, by having life, which is not to be found in
the first. Things of the third, excel them both, by having sense, which is not
found in either of them. Man ha^s being, life, and sense, in a general
community or fraternity with them; and he has, over and above, reason and
free will, which none of them have. Herein lies his general difference from, or
excellency above them all.

There are also special differences to be found amongst inferior creatures,
under each of the three general degrees. There are many distinct natures,
species or kinds, under the same general degree.

1. Under the first, the elements differ in dignity, nature, qualities, and
situation, one from another. Amongst metals, gold has a peculiar nature and
excellency above silver; silver, above tinn; tinn, above lead, etc. Amongst
stones, one is more excellent then another, by its peculiar nature, and
specifical difference from others. Yet all these things do agree and meet
together in one general degree of creatures, that have being only; not life,
sense, or understanding. 2. Under the second general degree of things, that
have being and life only, there are many also and great specifical differences.
All the various kinds of trees and plants, have their peculiar natures,
distinct from one another. 3. In the third general degree of creatures, there
are many kinds of beasts, birds, fishes, and creeping things, that have their
peculiar natures, very different from one another. 4. In the fourth and highest
general degree, are no such special differences. We find only one nature or
species; humane. All men are of one and the same nature, or kind. They differ
only as distinct individuals. One man may have many individual differences
from, and excellencies above another, in his personal constitution,
qualifications, acquirements, or gifts; but his nature is one and the same with
his fellows. If God strip such a man of his accidental ornaments in mind or
body, whereby he excelled others, (as is familiar to observation) he does not
thereby lose his nature; which demonstrates that those differencing incidents
to his person, advanced him not above the sphere of that nature, which all men
partake of. When many pieces of cloth, equal in worth, are variously colored,
the different value of the superadded tinctures makes them to be of different
prices. But all such differences are accidental to the clothes. All men have
the rational powers, called understanding and will, which equally difference
them from all inferior creatures. But accidental differences, incident to
these rational powers, may render some men fit to ascend over the heads of
others, into places of superiority.
Having thus taken notice of the differences that are found in the three
inferior orders of things, both general and special, let us now observe the
difference that is found in the nature of man, from them all, which also is
both general and special. (...) is wholly delectable, and that in him alone is
absolute satisfaction to be had. He is an infinite, boundless good, and he is
communicable to us, or capable to be enjoyed by us. Yea, even his own infinite
understanding and desire have absolute and complete satisfaction in his own
infinite being, and unutterably desirable goodness.

2. Having thus ascended by the creatures, to some general knowledge of the
creator, as infinite in wisdom, power, goodness, and all possible perfections;
let us descend again to the consideration of ourselvs, and of our duty toward
God. Man is generally differenced from brut's, by his understanding and will.
All things then that we rightly conclude from this general difference, must be
concluded from the due consideration of his understanding or will, or both
together. Whatever he is bound to do, as a man, perteins to one or both of
these powers. These ought he to use in such a way only, as is conducible to his
own true good, perfection, and blessedness; and not against himself, to his own
disadvantage, damage and destruction. Whatever any creature received from the
hand of God that made it, it received to its own advantage, and ought to use it
so. Inferior creatures fail not so to use it; and shall man only, the
masterpiece and lord of all the rest, miscarry in this great point? Each
element enlarges itself as much as it can, and destroy's its contrary, but
never does any thing against itself. Things of the second degree, trees and
plants, do draw convenient nourishment from the earth and water, for their
augmentation, growth, and support in life. They fix their roots in the earth,
and multiply their kind. In like manner do things of the third degree, beasts,
birds, fishes, and creeping things. They seek and lay hold on what is good for
them; fly, avoid, and refuse what is hurtful; and multiply themselves by
generation. And ought not man, the lord of all these things, carefully to
improve what he has, to the glory of his maker, and his own true profit and
advantage (which is inseperably connexed therewith) as much as he can; and not
at all against God, and consequently against himself, to his own detriment? If
he do abuse them to his own ruin, he alone in the whole visible creation,
act's contrary to the glory of God, to his own true good, to the order of the
universe, and common law of nature in all creatures. He alone, for whose use
and service the rest were made, does perversely deviate from the general order
and due course of nature, in all.

The rational powers of man, as they are more excellent then any thing that is
found in inferior creatures, so ought they more heedfully to be improved, to
the praise of him that gave them, and man's own true profit, advantage, joy,
peace, consolation and blessedness; not against the honor of God, and so to his
own damage. He ought to resist those fleshly, foolish, and hurtful lusts,
which war against his soul, and tend to the sinking and drowning of him in
destruction and perdition. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

3. We may conclude from this general difference of man from other creatures,
by his understanding and will (which are given him for his own true profit and
advantage) that his understanding is able to se and conclude such truths, as
are evidently conducible to his welbeing and comfort, and to oppose and reject
the errors, contrary thereunto. It Is his true interest and advantage, that
there is a God, infinitely powerful, wise, holy, just, and good; that there is a
resurrection, and an eternal reward of just men; that God is able so to
principle and qualify men, as to render them fit for such reward. These, with
many other truths, which conduce to the true good and blessedness of man, may
and ought, on that very account, to be owned and asserted. If the contraries
thereunto be enterteined, owned, and asserted by him, his understanding which
was given him to use for his profit, is abused to his ruin, against the law of
nature. He enterteins and own's false persuasions, destructive to his own
being, enemies to his own soul; and so abuses his understanding, to his damage,
despondency, and ruin, that was given him to use for his profit and salvation.
He does thereby, what in him lies, destroy and render void his own nature and
all the rest, even the whole universe, whereas inferior creatures do exactly
use and improve their various natural powers to their own advantage, and for
the preservation of the universe.

4. By man's will and the freedom thereof, duly considered, may we yet attein a
more distinct and full knowledge of God, of ourselvs, and of our obligation and
duty to God. Inferior creatures have no power over their own operations. They
act by natural impulse and necessity. Man has power to consider of any thing,
and deliberate within himself, whether he were best to do it or no, before he
does it. He know's his own works, and can judge of his own actions, whether they
be good or evil. By the freedom of his will, he is lord of his own operations.
His works may properly be called his own, as done by the choice of his own
will. Other creatures may rather be said to be acted, then to act, being
carried by such an instinct and impulse, planted in them by the creator, as
determin's them constantly one way, exclusive to any exercise of deliberation
or choice. Hence it fallows, that the works of man, being properly his own,
are imputable to him; the works of inferior creatures, not so to them. They
sin not, because they have no power to do any thing upon deliberation, and by
choice. Hence also may we conclude, that the works of man are honorable and
praiseworthy, or culpable and shameful. The former are capable of approbation
and reward: the latter, of detestation and punishment. The actions of man do
leave behind them desert or guilt. They do adorn and cloth, or stain, vitiate
and corrupt him, accordingly as they are good or evil. The actions of other
creatures have none of all these properties. Good actions do more and more
dispose and incline a man to good: evil ones do more deprave him, habituate and
incline him unto evil. If man use not his understanding and will aright, in
doing what he ought, he perverts what was given him for his good, to his own
damage and confusion, and to the disturbance of the general order and harmony
of the universe.

Four things do follow the works of man, desert, guilt, reward, punishment.
Desert is the natural consequent of a good work; reward a consequent of desert.
Guilt is the natural consequent of an evil work; and punishment is the certain
consequent of guilt. The inseparable properties of the works of man, in
distinction from the works of inferior creatures, are, first; that they are
his own; Secondly, that they are imputable to him; thirdly, that they leave
merit or demerit, desert or guilt behind them; fourthly, that therefore reward
or punishment is due unto man, for them.

SECTION. III.
Another use or fruit of this general difference.
FOrasmuch as the rewards and punishments, due unto all the good and evil works
of man, are not dispensable by man; there must needs be some one above him,
that can reward and punish him, in a suitablenes and correspondency to his
works. This can be no other but God alone, who exactly know's all the works of
all men, with all their aggravations and dimensions, to the full. If man can
sin and deserve punishment, some one there is against whom he sin's, who know's
all his sins, and can punish or pardon him. Both the fault, and the consequent
guilt, obligation, or debt thereby contracted, do argue there is a God, that
can punish man for his sins. This then is a good argument; man can sin,
therefore there is a God; and this also; Man can do and deserve well, therefore
there is a God, who is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11. 6.
Thus from the works of man, as man, we may conclude there is a God, who is the
only meet rewarder and punisher of his actions.

We may farther conclude from the works of men, and the recompense thereof,
both ways, in rewards and punishments, that the rewarder and punisher thereof
is omniscient, omnipotent, and most just. He perfectly know's all the thoughts,
intentions, desires, words, and actions of all men, that ever were, are, or
shall be. So can he exactly proportion rewards and punishments thereunto. He must
be absolutely infallible in his knowledge of all the circumstances and
aggravations of every step man makes, within or without, in thought, word, or
deed. Otherwise, how can he be exactly and absolutely just, in recompencing
them? And how numberless are the thoughts, words, and actions of one man, in a
race of 40, 50 or 60 years, more or less? How innumerable then must all the
works, words, desires and thoughts of many millions of men, in all places and
ages of the world, needs be? And what then must he be, that know's all, in such
sort, as exactly to proportion rewards and punishments thereunto? His
understanding must be infinite, who is the infallible judge of all these
matters. And he must also be omnipotent, that is able to perform, and
effectually to dispense such rightly proportioned rewards and punishments unto
all men, for their numberless thoughts, words, and actions, good or evil.
Otherwise, the due recompense of all may yet fail. As for the justice of God,
shall not the judge of all the earth do right? can he do wrong? His will is the
supreme rule of all justice.

To sum up all then. Man, by the free exercise of his rational powers, can
perform works good or evil. There is therefore some rewarder and punisher of
all men: and he must be infinitely wise, powerful, and just; that every thought,
word, and action of every man, may receive its due recompense.

SECT. IV.
The principal reward or punishment of man, is intellectual, spiritual, and
invisible; not corporeal, sensible, or visible.
THe rational powers, by which man is distinguished from beasts, and other
inferior creatures, are the root of all such operations as deserve reward or
punishment. These being intellectual, invisible powers, the rewards and
punishments must be so, too. The LIBERUM ARBITRIUM, or power of working
arbitrarily, in its true and full extent, comprehend's both the rational
powers, understanding and will. The former discern's, judges, propounds; the
latter chooses and executes. The joint operation of both, is required in every
free action: and therefore, as jointly considered, are they the proper
reception and subject of reward or punishment. The principal riches or
treasures then of man, as well as his punishment, must be spiritual and
invisible, not corporeal, sensible, or visible. They are also everlasting, as
the powers that immediately receive and possess them, are. The chief good of
man, as man, consists not in any thing he has in common with beasts, and
therefore not in any thing that can be perceived or received by such bodily
senses and powers of life, as he has in common with them. Consequently, it
consist's not in any bodily delights or pleasures. Nor does the evil of man as
man, principally consist in bodily punishment. They then that place the chief
good of man in things bodily, visible, or sensible, do embrace and teach a lie,
deceiving others and themselves, to their own destruction.

CHAP. IV.
The special difference of man from all inferior creatures, whereby a yet more
complete knowledge of him is to be gained.
THe general difference of man from all inferior things, by having what they
have not, is common to other degrees. The second has what the first has not;
the third, what the second has not. But there is a more peculiar and especial
difference of man from all inferior creatures; and that is, not that he has
what they have not, but that he know's both what they have, and what he has,
which none of them know. They know not at all, what value they are of, in
themselves, or comparatively with one another. They know not of what order or
degree they are, or wherein they differ from and excel one another. Beasts,
birds, fishes, and creeping things do not know what they have received from the
hand of their creator, beyond trees and plants. Nor do trees and plants know
what they stand possessed of, beyond elements, stones, metalls, mineralls, and
all inanimate compounds. Man only, in the whole visible creation, know's what
he has of excellency and dignity above all the rest; and what they have above
one another. He know's also that other creatures do not know either what he
has, or what themselves have. He knows that he only can know both.

There are five degrees of difference to be found amongst creatures; and four
of them are peculiar unto man.

1. Man has that in his nature, which no inferior creatures have. Things of
the third degree have also that in their nature, which no things in the first
or second have; etc. So this difference is common to other creatures, as well as
man. 2. The second difference is, that man know's what he has, beyond other
creatures; and what they have, above and beyond one another. This difference is
special and peculiar unto man only. 3. Man know's that what he has, he has not
from himself, but has received it from another; and that other things have not
what they have, from themselves, nor yet from him. 4. He can, by the right
exercise and improvement of his rational powers, find out him, from whose
bountiful hand, both he and all other things have received what they have. 5.
He has a capacity of cleaving fast unto him, when found out, and of being
firmly and indissolubly united with him.
Again, man only can rejoice in the things he has; inferior creatures, not.
What can it profit any creature to have a more noble and excellent nature then
other things, unless it can kuow what it has? To have a great treasure, and not
know it, will afford no matter of rejoicing. Trees and plants, on this account,
as not knowing what they have, can have no joy in what they have beyond things
without life. On like account, birds, beasts, and fishes, can have no joy or
gladness from what they have, beyond trees, plants, and other things, because
they know not what they have. For joy arises, not barely from the having of any
thing, but from the knowing that we have it, and of what value it is, in
distinction from other things. Yea, even this knowledge alone, would nor yet be
a sufficient ground of rejoicing unto man, unless he could also know him, from
whose hand he has received all; unless he could find him out, and hold him fast
when found, praising him and adhering to him eternally.

CHAP. V.
All inferior things were made for man.
Inferior creatures were not made for their own sakes, but for man's; for his
profit, necessity, comfort, and instruction. For what does any thing they have,
profit themselves, seeing they know not what they have? What they have, they have
it for man; and what is wanting in them, man has. He alone know's what they
have, and what he has. They with man do make up one visible body, city, or
Kingdom, of which he is head, ruler, and King. He, being the only creature for
whose sake they were all made, stands obliged to return praise unto God, for
himself and them. They are all freely given unto him; and he ought to give up
himself unto God; and in himself, all the rest. They received not what they
have, for themselves. Man is the only receiver, properly, and God the only
giver. And there arises a natural obligation in the receiver to the giver, from
the gift received, especially when great, and freely given. The gift is all
that man has in his own nature, and all that inferior creatures have in their
natures, for his use. There is no natural debt or obligation on them, to God;
nor can they perform any such thing. Man alone is obliged to paythe debt of
pure obedience and thankfulness unto his creator, for himself and all the rest.
He is not obliged to inferior creatures, for the service they perform to him,
because they serve him not by choice, but natural necessity. He only is bound
unto God for all, as affording therein, food for his body, and instruction to
his mind.

CHAP. VI.
Man is to be weighed and considered of, by his parts, that it may be known of
what value he is.
MAn can not fully know how much he is obliged unto God for himself, unless he
rightly know of what value he is.

1. For this, we may first consider him by his general parts, as comprehending
in his nature and composition, whatever is to be found in the whole creation.
He has being, with things of the first degree; life, with those of the second;
sense, with things of the third. And the being, life, and sense they have, are
inferior to the being, life, and sense he has, in conjunction with reason; and
are designed for the mainteining of his being, life, and sense, as the end for
which they were given. The rational powers in man, ought to rule over these
inferior general parts of him, his being, life, and sense; as also over all
inferior creatures, that have the like. The general parts of man then are
four; being, life, sense, reason. The three inferior are more excellent in
him, then in other creatures, by personal union with the fourth. All inferior
creatures then, by being yielded up to the service of man, as appointed, attein
in him a more excellent kind of being, life, and sense, then they have in
themselves, to wit, a humane being and life of sense. But although as they do
enter the composition of man, they are advanced beyond what they are in
themselves, such their advance by a personal conjunction with rational powers,
is gradual and proportionable to the different worths thereof. The elements in
man's composition, are the immediate seat of vegetative life, which he has in
common with herbs and trees. Vegetative life is the immediate seat of
sensitive; sensitive, with all its parts and powers, is the immediate seat and
servant of the rational powers and operations. The rational or intellectual
life of man, having no other created kind of life superior thereunto, ought to
be the seat or throne wherein God alone is to sit and rule the whole man, and
all the world, made for man's use, and put together in his constitution. The
will and understanding of man ought to be yielded up unto God, in order to
their becoming in seperably united with and subjected to his mind and will.
Thus, as all other creatures come to be united in man, so do they all in and
with man, come to be united with God. Man, by the resignation of his will and
understanding unto God, is therein immediately united with God. Other parts or
powers of life in man, are mediatly, by his rational or intellectual powers,
united with God; as sensitive life in man, is united immediately with his
rational; but vegetative life, mediatly, by the sensitive. The whole world, as
brought together in man, comes to be inseperably united with God that made it,
when man comes to be so united with his maker. Every man that declines or
rejects the means and way of being brought into such unchangable union with
God, does what in him lies to frustrate and render void the principal intention
of God in creating the world. The rest of the world was made for him. He
therefore is of more value then all the rest; and is more obliged to God for
himself, then for all the rest. He is responsible or accountable unto God, for
himself and for the whole world, as made for him. He ought therefore to seek
out and gain as right and clear a knowledge as he can, as to what he has
received from the hand of God, both in himself and other creatures, that he may
the better know and pay the debt thereby contracted, to his creator. 2. We may
weigh and consider man in the two principal parts of his composition, body and
soul. His body is fearfully and wonderfully made; admirably organized for all
manner of operations of his threefold life, vegetative, sensitive, and
rational. He is more bound unto God for his body only then for the whole world
besides. But much more yet is he obliged to him, for his soul.
In tbe body we find a multiplicity and diversity of excellent and fit organs;
in the soul, a proportionable multiplicity and diversity of excellent
faculties, whereby it is enabled to use all those organs, and perform all those
various offices and functions, in and by the body, which are conducible to the
good of the whole person. An artist has diverse instruments, for various
artificial purposes; the soul, on like account, his diverse bodily organs or
instruments, for various natural uses. Man has a kind of Kingdom as well as
world, within himself. In this kingdom are three orders, or distinct powers,
lowest, middle, and supreme.

1. The lowest powers of life and operation in man, the nutritive,
augmentative, and generative (all of them comprehended under the vegetative)
have four attendent of subservient faculties, with in the compass of vegetative
life and operation; to wit, the attractive, retentive, digestive, and expulsive
powers. These all are as laborers and merchants in the kingdom of man. They do
incessantly labor to sustein and keep up the other more noble orders and
excellent powers of this kingdom, within man. If they perform not their
several offices, and respective charges, the whole fabric falls, the man
dies, and the kingdom is dissolved. The office of the attractive or appetitive
power, is to desire and receive food. The office of the retentive, to keep it
in, when received. The digestive and concoctive powers do gradually prepare and
transform it into flesh, blood, and spirits. The expulsive cast's out the
superfluities, by way of evacuation sensible, as also insensibly, by
perspiration through the pores of the body. By this means is the body
nourished, augmented, and fitted for generation. All these offices does the
vegetative power of life in the soul of man perform by various bodily organs or
instruments; and without them it cannot exercise any such faculties, or perform
any such offices. And as the organs are stronger or weaker, better or worse
tempered, accordingly are such offices performed. 2. There are a middle sort of
powers in man, the sensitive, performed by outward and inward organs. By
outward organs are the powers, of seeing, hearing smelling, tasting, touching,
performed; to wit, by eyes, ears, nose, palate, and the whole body, which is
the organ of touching. By inward organs, within the head of man, calculated and
suited thereunto, do the common sense, the imaginative and memorative powers of
the soul, perform their several offices. The visive power, by the eye, discerns
and distinguishes the colors, forms, and figures of things. The auditive, by
the ear, perceiv's and distinguishes sounds, words, etc, The olfactive perceivs
and distinguishes different odors or smells, etc. These are their offices. We
may observe a kind of natural matrimony between the several organs of the body,
on the one part, and the correspondent faculties of the soul, on the other. The
body has a multitude of excellent organs, without and within. The soul has a
wel-proportion'd multitude of excellent faculties, exerciseable only in
conjunction with these organs. Besides these corporeal, organical powers in
man, hitherto named, he has also a loco-motive power, by contracting and
extending the parts of his body, whereby he can go from place to place, and
perform all artificial works, etc. 3. The supreme and most noble powers in the
kingdom of man, are the rational or intellectual, whose office it is to order
and regulate all the inferior, both vegetative and sensitive. The
understanding is the chief counselor of state in the soul, judging,
discerning, and advising what is to be done. The will is commander in chief,
furnished with a kind of kingly, imperial, executive power.
Man, thus furnished and adorned with many wonderful natural powers in his
soul, and organs in his body (and having also in his personal constitution,
being, life, and sense, in a superiority to what is found in the three
inferior orders of creatures, because in conjunction with reason, which
render's him the fourth and highest) may well be termed a microcosm, or little
world, an epitome of the whole universe. All that man has in himself, and all
that is to be found in the whole visible creation, set up and ordained for his
use and service, proceeds from the mere bounty and love of his creator. The
love of God to man is the principal thing of all. It is of like infinite
excellency with himself, for God is love. Jo. 4. 8. Great are the gifts of God
unto man, that have proceeded from, and do manifest his love. But his love to
man is infinitely greater then all his other gifts; infinitely more valuable then
man himself, and all other creatures, given for his use. Thus is there an
infinite and unspeakable obligation on man to God, first; for his infinite
love; and secondly, for his unspeakable gifts. But the knowledge of all this,
will little avail man, unless his will be yielded up in such sort unto the
will of God, as to be brought into unchangable harmony therewith, and
subjection thereunto.

Chap. 7.
Sect. I.
What is it, man ought to render unto God, for his love and all his benefits?
LOve. Something he has to render unto God, that may properly be called his
own; otherwise would he be obliged to an impossibility. Forasmuch as the love
of God is his principal gift unto man, the root and foundation of all his other
gifts (which are but as tokens and manifestations of that) the entire, free,
and most sincere love of man to God, is the most natural, reasonable, and
suitable requital, that it is possible for him to make unto the lord, for his
love, and all his benefits. Love is the most precious and excellent gift, the
will of man has to dispose of, freely and uncompulsorily, where it list's. Thus
have we found the thing we sought for, love, seated in the supreme ruling power
in man, his will. Sincere love to God, carries that in and with it, which is
the best requital man can make for all that God has done for him. It does
comprehend in it all that God requires of him. It is written; thou shall love
the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, soul, strength, and mind; and thy
neighbor as thy self. Luke 10. 27. Love is the fulfilling of the law. Romans 13.
10. Love is the radical gift of God unto man, from whence did issue forth all
other gifts. And by the love of man to God, as the prime and radical gift he
has to return, will all the secondary gifts of God, that are tokens and
manifestations of God's love to him, in his own and all inferior nature, be
surrendered and returned, used, and improved to the praise of his creator.
Man's love to God will cause him to glorify God in his body and in his spirit,
which are God's. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Love then is the most natural, orderly,
proportioned retribution, and therefore the most pleasing and acceptable unto
God, that man can make. No other gifts or performa^ces of man, whatsoever, can
be acceptable unto God, unless love be the root and spring from whence they do
proceed. Love, as it is the first, so is it incomparably the greatest gift of
God to man, or man to God. The love of man to God, is that which season's,
qualifies, and render's acceptable all his other gifts and performances. God
first loved man; man therefore ought to love God, and that in the first place,
above all; and no other things, but for his sake, or as bearing his image and
superscription stamped or impressed upon them. Otherwise, his love to God will
carry no correspondency with God's love to him, and so will not be accepted.
Though the most absolute and perfect love of man to God, can, in no wise, equal
the infinite love of God to him, yet being the best thing man can give, it
will be accepted. The love of God to man, as much exceeds all possible love of
man to God, as the being of God who is love, excell's the being of man; that
is, infinitely. But if man give all that God requires of him, even all he has
to give, it will be accepted. There is no pain, wearisomnes, or trouble in love.
It alleviates all other labor, and renders all right performances delightful.
Our love rightly placed and fixed, begets continual delight and gladness of
heart.

SECT. II.
The whole debt or service of love, which man is obliged to pay unto God,
redound's and return's singly and wholly to his own profit and advantage.
GOd is infinitely perfect, wanting nothing, that any of his creatures can do
for him. The profit and advantage of the service performable by inferior
creatures unto man, or by man unto God, must light somewhere. All is for man's
profit; both what other creatures do for him, and what he does aright unto God.
And by how much man's nature excell's the natures of all inferior things, so
much does his service rightly performed unto God, exceed the service which
other creatures perform to him. Now the more excellent the service is, the
greater is the profit, thereby redounding unto man. He therefore must needs
have incomparably more profit from his service of love, freely performed unto
God, then from any service that inferior creatur's do by a natural necessity
and impulse, perform unto him. And the more perfectly any man serv's God, the
more profit he receiv's unto himself. It Is the true interest then and highest
concern of man, to be incessantly performing his service of love to God, with
all his heart, soul, mind, and strength, seeing all redounds singly and entirely
to his own advantage.

The service, other creatures perform to man, is not remunerable or capable of
reward, because not freely performed, but by natural necessity. The service
performed by man to God, being free, is remunerable. Man then receiving all the
advantage by both services, let us distinctly consider what profit he receiv's
by the first, and what by the second.

By the first, performed by other creatures unto him, his being is for a while
continued in this mortal state. By the second, performable by him in Christ,
unto God, is his everlasting wel-being atteinable. So much then as the eternal
wel-being of man, excell's his bare temporal being in a mortal body, does the
second service exceed the first, in dignity and profit. A bare being, is not
profitable unto man, unless he may have a wel-being. Other creatures then by
serving him with all they have, unless he serve God with all he has, will but
aggravate his sin and add to his misery. Being was given unto man, in order to
his wel-being; So is the service of other creatures performed unto man, for his
temporary being in this world, in order to that service he ought to perform
unto God, with reference to his eternal wel-being, in the world to come. If the
second service be not performed by man to God; the first, to wit, of other
creatures unto him, is rendered void and to no purpose, as much as in man lies.
Yea, it is perverted to the service of the devil, in enmity to God. All the
service performed by other creatures to a man that serv's not God, is lost, or
worse. The main end and chief design of God in creating the world, is
frustrated and rendered of no effect, by the man that serv's not God.

We do plainly experience that man cannot continue his being in this world,
unless maintein'd and upheld by other creatur's: nor can other creatur's
continue or subsist, unless upheld by the same hand that made them. If they
could, they would be greater in this point of self-preservation, then man. Man
cannot maintein them in being, but is maintein'd by them. Some other hand then
above both, mainteins them, and him by them. But man alone stands indebted unto
God, as for his own being and theirs, so for the continuance of both.

By the first service, performed by inferior creatures unto man, they are
brought into union with him. By the second, performed by man unto God, he is
brought into union with God. So in and by man, the world comes to be united
with God. All things that came out of the love of God to man, by the love of
man to God are brought into union with him that made them. He then that does
not love and serve the lord, does what in him lies toward the disjoyning and
seperating of the world from God, and the bringing of all things into disorder
and confusion. Man alone (in whose nature and constitution all sorts of created
nature, life, and being are put together) is the means in and by whom all
inferior creatures come to be united with God.

SECTION. III.
FRom the first obligation on man, or debt of love which he owes unto God, does
naturally arise a second, like unto it; and that is the love of all creatures,
as the works of his hands, and as bearing any thing of his image, or
superscription upon them; on which account, himself passed that universal
approbation, that every thing that he had made, was very good. Genesis 1. 31. But
forasmuch as amongst all things there mentioned, men, for whom the rest were
made, do bear the most complete and lively image of God upon them, they are,
on God's account, to be loved by us, more then any inferior creatures. All
men, as of one and the same nature, ought to look upon themselves as one man,
not many. There ought, by the very law of nature, to be the strictest union,
the greatest peace and agreement amongst them, that is possible. As their love
of God in the first place, so is the love of one another in the second, as
bearing his image, founded in the law of nature. Thou shall love the lord thy
God, with all thy heart, soul, strength and mind, says Christ. This is the
first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it; Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thyself. On these two comma^dments hang all the law and the
prophets. Mat. 22. 37, 40. All men are bound by the law of their own nature, to
live in perfect union with God, and with one another, by love. The greatest
unity amongst men, arises from their first being united with God: and the
firmer their union, the greater their strength. Self-love divides us from God,
and consequently from one another. So come we to lose that strength which
depend's on union, and to lie naked and exposed, in our own single persons, to
all the wiles and darts of the devil; etc. Inferior creatures are to be loved
by man, only on God's account, as the works of his hands, bearing some
characters and shadowy resembla^ces of his infinitely persect being and life. We
are not to look on ourselvs as obliged to them, for any benefit, use or service
we receive from them, or have of them; but unto God only, who causes them to
perform such beneficial service. The loving of inferior creatures, as
gratifying, our sensual desires, is so far from being a natural consequent of
our loving God, that it is direct enmity to him. Such love of this world and the
things thereof, is enmity to God. If any man thus love the world, the love of
the father is not in him. Jam. 4. 4. 1 Jo. 2. 15. To ask of God
creature-contentments, to consume upon our lusts, (Jam. 4. 3.) is to desire him
that he would maintein us in our enmity against himself. The multiplicity of
heathen Gods, and the various idolatries in the world, have arisen from man's
unlawful, prohibited love of inferior creatures. Many heathens concluded that
any thing that did them good, was a God. On this account were they induced to
worship the sun, moon, stars, fire, air, earth, water, sheep, oxen, etc. Such
unlawful, idolatrous love of inferior creatures, has its rise, as a natural
consequent, from self-love. When we love our own wills, in distinction from and
opposition to God's, we love the creatures appointed for our use, only as they
do gratify our wills in enmity to god; and not at all as the works of his
hands, or as bearing any thing of his image and superscription upon them.

SECT. IV.
THe right paying or performing of the secondary debt of love, to all
creatures, as the works of gods hands, but specially to all men (and yet more
especially to the household faith, those that are not only made, but born of
God) does redound wholly to the profit of man as well as his performing the
first debt of love immediately unto god himself. God is above all capacity of
receiving any profit by any thing his creatur's can do. All inferior things
are designed for the profit of man, not of god. And all the duty god requir's
of man, is calculated singly and wholly to his own advantage. If he be wicked,
he hurts other and himself; but god he cannot hurt. If he be righteous, what
gives he to god, or what receives god at hi^ hand? Job 35. 6, 8. The
disadvantage of sin, and profit of righteousness belongs to ourselvs only God
cannot be hurt by the one, or profited by the other.

CHAP. VIII.
The nature, conditions, force, properties and fruit of love.
LOve is the only treasure man has, properly, to dispose of. If it be rightly
bestowed, it is good, and the man so too; if wrongly, evil. When it is given, the
thing chiefly beloved obteins dominion over it, and so over the whole man. The
will is the ruling power in man, commands all the rest of him. To whom or
whatsoever a man's whole love is given, his whole will is given; and
consequently, the whole man. As the chief love is, so is the man, good or evil.
Nothing better then a right love, nothing worse then a wrong. Love, being all
we can properly call our own, when we give that, we give all we have. If then
we mis bestow and lose that, we lose all. We are undone. We lose it, when we
give it where it is not due; whereby we dishonor and provoke him, to whom
alone it is due. Good love is the root of all other virtues; evil love, the
root of all other vices. He that has a right knowledge of love, know's the whole
good of man. He that know's not the nature of love, is ignorant of the whole
good of man. The proper nature and inseparable condition of love, is, that
thereby the lover is tranformed into and united with the thing loved. The lover
and chiefly beloved are of two things, made one, by love. The thang brought
upon the lover by the beloved, through the transforming, assimilating property
of love, is not forced, violent, painful, or laborious; but free, voluntary,
pleasant and delightful. The will, and so the whole man is denominated from
the thing chiefly loved. If earthly things be chiefly loved, he is an earthly
man; has an earthly will. If god be his chief beloved, he is a heavenly man,
has a heavenly will. By love a man is capable of being transformed and brought
into union with another thing, better then himself, as god; or equal to
himself, as man; or inferior to himself, as earth, gold, beasts, houses,
lands, etc. The first union advances him, the last degrades him. Through love,
as well or ill placed, is man capable of ascending and being exalted above
himself; or of being vilified, degraded, corrupted, and so of descending below
his own natural dignity in the universe. He ascend's or descend's, is advanced
or depressed, enobled or abased, accordingly as the thing chiefly loved by him,
is more or less worthy then himself. If he place his chief love on what is
equal to him, he ascend's not, nor advantages himself, at all; but indeed, does
deprave and abase himself, because he sin's, in giving away god's peculiar due,
to any creature whatsoever. God alone, who is infinitely above us, and infinitely
deserv's our chief love, does undispensably require it; and by having it, will
unspeakably advance us. Those that so honor him, he will honor. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

The chiefly beloved, is to the will of man, by love, as the bridegroom to the
bride. There Is a kind of matrimonial union, contracted by love, between the
will and its chiefly beloved; the thing so loved, becoming the husband; and
the will, the wife. And as the woman, ought to have but one husband, the will
can have but one chiefly beloved.

If a poor mean man should have eight daughters, and one of them should marry a
man of like meaness with herself; the second, a gentleman; the third, an
esquire; the fourth, a knight; the fifth, and earl; the sixth, a duke; the
seventh, a king; the eighth, an emperor; they would ascend one over the head
of another, according to the several dignities of their husbands. But though we
may find many husbands, or chiefly beloveds (of different degrees) amongst
creatures, for the will of man; there is, indeed, none but God himself, the
universal emperor and king of kings, who can truly dignify, ennoble, and
adva^ce our will, by its being brought into a state of unchangable
marriage-union with his. To a greater dignity it cannot ascend, then is so
atteinable. But the wills of men, which are equal by nature, contract some
gradual difference in dignity, within the compass of creature-beloveds. They
are called earthly, brutish, or humane, accordingly as their husband or
chief-beloved is. But there is no creature-beloved, nothing below God, which
finally rested in, and fixed on, will not leave the will and whole person
exposed to eternal confusion. We can never attein any true hapines, but by the
marriage-union of our will with God's. Nothing is worthy to be our chief
beloved, that cannot truly meliorate and ennoble us. God only can do thi^, who
is infinitely lovely, and can render all that love him, everlastingly and
unspeakably blessed. He that finally fail's, as to the performance of this
highest duty, by placing his chief love on any thing below god, will sink down
into the u^most ex^rdainity of vileness, misery, and confusion, for ever.

A woman joined to a husband that is good, rich, valiant, powerful, and wife;
has proportionably, a temporary peace, security, rest, comfort, and joy: if
joined to an ill-natured, perverse, miserable, poor, conceited, foolish man,
she is like to know sorrow, misery, and tribulation by himelf the will of man
be joined to a husband that is infinitely good, rich, powerful, and wise, it has
serenity, peace, rest, joy, unspeakable and glosious. Nothing can hurt that
beloved, or separate us from his love; neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things to come; nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature. Romans 8. 38, 39. But if our will be joined to
some poor, weak, slight, feeble, indigent, variable, insufficient thing, as its
chiefly beloved; it is in continual tribulation; or, at best, can have no true
and wel-grounded security, rest, peace, or comfort, at all.

This doctrine about the right transmutation of ma^'s will (by resignation to,
and union with god's, to his unspeakable advantage) is signified to him by such
natural and advantageous transmutations as are observable in inferior
creatures. Things of the lowest degree, are changed or tranform'd into things
of the second: things of the second, into those of the third; and all, into
man, the only creature in the fourth. The elements are transformed, as they
run-together into the composition of trees and plants. These, with their
fruits, roots, etc. are transformed into things of the third degree, whereby
they receive a more noble being, in the life of sense. And all are farther
advanced, by way of transformation, into the life of man, in whom they do
attein a yet more noble and excellent kind of being. And man, by rightly
placing his love upon God, so as to live in his will, advances all, in his own
person and nature, into uncha^gable union with God. By this last
transformation, do all things, in man, attein the most excellent kind of being
that is possible for them to have. If man be not induced freely to yield up
himself to the will of God, by this last and utmost transformation, he thwart's
the natural order and course of the whole universe, to his own destruction.
Inferior things do most orderly attein their advance, by quitting their own
form's, and ascending into personal union with rational nature, in him. If he
refuse to quit the natural activity, life, and freedom of his rational
powers, to live in the transcendently more excellent freedom and power of the
mind and will of God, as partaker of the divine nature, he, for whom all the
rest were made, is the only disorderly creature, to his own eternal damage and
confusion.

Chap. 9.
Section. I.
Two first loves, or chiefly beloveds.
THere are properly but two principal loves or beloveds, God and self, his will
or our own. The love of God carries our will forth to a right, general,
universal love of all things, as the works of his hands, loved and approved by
him. If our own will be, by way of reflection upon itself, our chiefly beloved;
such a narrow private love will not carry us forth to a right love of any other
things; but will cause us to regard or value them, no otherwise, then as
relating or subservient unto the great idol, self-interest. We shall love only
ourselvs in them; not them, as the works of God's hands, related to, and
approved by him. To these two chief loves, of God or self, are all other loves
reducible, as flowing from the one or other of them.

There can be but one thing chiefly beloved, for whose sake only, other things,
in connexio^ therewith, or as related thereunto, are loved. All other
subordinate loves to all other things, considered as in harmony,
correspondence, union, and connection with the chief beloved, are included in
the first love, as the basis and cause of all; the root and fountain, whence
they do pullulate and arise. All are but as one love, centring in, and relating
to the chief beloved. It Is the chief beloved only, that is properly loved in all
other things. Whatever is in conjunction with that, must necessarily be loved:
and whatever is against it, or contrary to it, will as certainly be hated. It
is so strongly and intimately united with the will; does so vehemently and
entirely draw and engage it unto itself, that it suffers it not to love any
other thing but for it is sake, as in harmony with, and subserviency thereunto.
By necessary consequence, so many particular hatreds will be begotten in the
will, as there are things contrary to, or against its chief beloved; and as
many particular subordinate and secondary loves, as there are things in harmony
and union therewith. If the radical or chief love be good, just, and orderly,
all the rest are so too: if evil, corrupt, and disorderly; so are the rest. As
is the root, such are the branches: as the fountain, so are the streams issuing
therefrom.

Self-love is a narrow, private, unlawful, destructive thing, the fountain and
root of all false and unlawful loves of other things. If the love of God be not
the chief, the love of the creature is. And amongst the creatures, that which
is most near and dear unto the will, will be its chief beloved; and that is the
will itself, which can reflect its love upon itself, as the most dear, lovely,
and desirable thing to itself. If then God be not a man's chief beloved, his
own will or himself most certainly is. And then he loves neither God, nor any
other creature, but as conducible to the gratifying and pleasing of his
selfish, private, narrow will. If he do seem to have some regard unto God, so
as to pray to him; he does, in such demeanor, but make use of God in a
subserviency to his own selfish will. He asks things of God, to consume upon
his lusts. Jam. 4. 3. He regards not God, any body or any thing else, but as
conducible and helpful toward the bringing in provisions for his flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13. 14.

In the first sin of Adam, we all turned away from God, into the love of our
own will, in distinction from and opposition to his. Such self-love can never
be destroyed or eradicated, but by the irresistible grace of God, which alone
can cause man's will freely to draw off and disengage its love from every thing
else, in order to the receiving of the omnipotent creator in the room of a
frail, impotent creature, as its chief beloved. By receiving God for its
beloved, it is furnished with the power and armor of God, has the power of
godliness in it, whereby to withstand all the powers and works of darkness. No
created being can bear up against a man that is thus furnished with power from
on high. If God be for us, in us, with us, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31.

SECT. II.
THese two chief loves are capital enemies of each other, contending for
primacy. The primacy is due to god alone; and he has no enemy to contest with,
but self love. As he is infinitely above all, so ought he to be loved above all.
The prerogative and honor of being our chief beloved, does, on all accounts,
belong to him alone. Whatever then stands in competition with, or oppositio^ to
him, in this point, ought to be looked upon and handled as the capital enemy of
god.

Self-love is an unjust, false, tortuous, inordinate love, contrary to god, to
truth, to the good of man, to the order and voice of nature in the whole
universe. It Is the root of all other evil loves, of all vice, injustice,
iniquity. To deny God the first place in our hearts, and to place our selves in
his room, is a high contempt of him, a denying and jusslling him out of what is
his due by the law of nature. When a man bestow's his chief love on himself, he
offends God, both as he is the giver and receiver of his own love. He gives and
receiv's that unto himself, which is indispensabiy and undeniably due to God
alone. So, on both accounts, as giver and receiver thereof, is he the direct
enemy of God. If he should bestow his chief love on some other creature, and
not on himself, he would be the enemy of God, only as the giver away of his
right unto another, but not as the receiver thereof.

By self-love, man preferr's his own will to God's, and so makes himself his
God. In pursuit of self-interest, he will desire to annihilate God, which is
the highest enmity to him, imaginable. His will, by self-love, assum's an
absolute primacy, refusing to follow or obey another will, which is the
incommunicable prerogative of God alone. It Is peculiar to him only, to follow
his own will, and not be subject unto, or lead by any other.

When a man has once proudly set up his own will in the room of God's, he will
also rob God of his other dues. He will desire his own honor, his own glory,
his own praise, not God's. When he has presumptuously made himself his God, he
will desire all those things for himself, that are due to god. Self-love erects
a new Kingdom, dominion, and sovereignty within man, out of God, and against
him, which renders man a direct capital enemy of God.

Man's love of God or himself, is the root and cause of all he does. The love
of God in him, is the root and fountain of all good actions. It Is also the
fountain of all other right love, of all true friendship, courage, rest, peace,
comfort, light, joy, gladness, and whatever is truly good for man.

Self-love then, as the capital enemy of the love of God, is the root of all
evil actions, of all injustice, sin, blindness, ignorance, and so of all
sorrow's and evils, incident unto man. He that by selflove exalt's his own
will, into the roo^ of god's, find's this false god to be but a weak, indigent
thing. This puts him upon agreedy and eager pursuit after innumerable vanities,
corruptible, transient things, for the support of his impotent, false God,
himself; and so render's him subject unto those things, which by nature are
inferior to him. Such a man must needs be in continual solicitude and
tribulation, his false God and all the supports thereof, being but feeble,
fickle, unstable, indigent things; and the true, omnipotent, all-sufficient
God, being all along against him. Thus have we seen how selflove renders a man
the capital enemy of God, evil and perverse in himself, exposed to all evils,
and slavishly subject to abundance of transitory things, inferior to his own
nature.

The love of God render's the will divine, universal, communicative and
bountiful to others. Selflove renders it narrow, private, incommunicative to
others; all for itself. The love of god makes the will just, holy, righteous,
meek, good, peaceable, friendly, humble. Selflove makes it unjust, evil,
perverse, proud, unquiet, litigious, full of discord, tumult, and confusion. The
love of God gives the will of man dominion over all inferior creatures:
Self-love brings it into bondage and captivity under them. The love of God
makes the will unmovable, firm, stable, and fixed: self-love renders it a
fluctuating, unstable, variable thing. In a word, the love of God makes it
beautiful and lovely: Self-love makes it filthy, deformed, and detestable. He
then that know's what the love of God is, know's all the good of man. He that
know's what self love is, know's all the evil of man. He that is ignorant of
both, know's neither the good nor evil of man, in the two distinct roots and
causes of all. He that has the love of God in him, is thereby so illuminated,
that he know's what that is, and what self-love is, together with the
comfortable consequents of the former, and sad consequents of the latter. But
he that lives in self-love, is thereby darkened, blinded, and confounded, as to
the making any right judgment of himself. He neither know's what the love of
God is, nor what self love is; nor what are the good or evil consequents of the
one or other, unto man. The root of all evil in and to man, self love, is the
greatest evil; but the most lurking, hidden, undiscerned thing of all the rest.
It obscures and blind's the mind of man, that it may not be discovered, in its
native, ethiopian hiew.

SECTION. III.
Two principal parts of self-love.
MAn, having two principal parts in his constitution, a soul, and a body, has
distinct desires in reference to each; but all centring in selfinterest. The
soul desires praise, honor, and the like, in reference to itself. In reference
to the body, it desires and affects sensual delights. Self-love then puts a man
upon the seeking and looking after his own honor and bodily pleasur's, as his
two principal goods. And from these two principal branches of self-love, do
arise the secondary loves of all other things, as tending to the increase,
defense, or preservation of his own honor and sensual pleasur's. On these
accounts, he must needs love, desire, and seek after outward riches, as
conducible both to his honor and pleasures. He will also desire and seek after
humane sciences, offices, and dignities, as tending to the advance of his
honor.

Thus from self-love do arise these vicious, evil, corrupt loves in man; pride,
which is the love of his own honor, with a glorying in it; luxury and
gluttony, which is the love of bodily delights; covetousnes, which is the
inordinate love of outward things. And he that loves his own honor and
pleasur's, does by necessary consequence hate every thing, that tends to the
diminution or destruction thereof. Hence arises anger, which is a love and
desire of revenge against those that endeavor to diminish his honor or bodily
pleasur's. Hence also spring's up another monster, envy, which contein's in it
a hatred of any other's good, as it tend's to the obscuring or diminution of
his; as also a love of and delight in another's evil, if it diminish not, but
rather tend to the increase of his good. From the love of bodily pleasures, do
arise negligence, sloth, intemperance, incontinency, and the rest. Thus may we
se, how that all vices do arise and spring up from self-love.

CHAP. X.
The love of God causes union amongst men; self-love, division and strife.
LOve does most intimatly unite the will with the thing chiefly beloved. If
then the thing first loved, be one, and satisfactory to all that love it; they
that unite with, fix, and center in that one beloved, will have love and union
amongst themselves. All that deny and quit the single motion of their own
private wills, and agree to live in the will of god, must needs have union with
one another. But all that live in their own will, making that their chiefly
beloved, in opposition to the will of God, have so many distinct chief
beloveds, ^s they are men. Every one is for his own will, his own praise,
honor, and bodily pleasur's, in distinction and seperatio^ from all others;
and therefore can no otherwise love another's honor or pleasure, then as
conducing to his own. He will hate, oppose, and speak against any other's
honor or pleasure, that stands in competition with, or opposition to his. He
that makes himself or his own will, his chief beloved, makes himself his God.
So many men then, as are of this strein, so many Gods. And amongst this vast
multitude of needy, false, idol-gods, must needs arise envy, strife, division,
wrath, hatred, war, every one seeking to defend and increase his own honor and
delights, against others; and ^aking what he can to himself, for support
thereof. They contend for propriety in those outward things, whereby their
indigent wills may be gratified and maintein'd in the lusts thereof. Whence
come wars and fightings amongst men, but from their lusts, that war in their
members? Jam. 4, 1. A self-lover loves not himself as a man, in common with
others; but as this individual man, in separation from all others. Pretend what
he will, he loves not the community of mankind. He seeks only him self in the
community. His love is private, narrow, and personal; not large, universal, and
common to man, as man. Whatever love such a man pretend's to any other persons
or things, 't is himself only that he seek's in all. All other loves, arising
from self-love, are private and selfish, as the root and fountain is, from
whence they flow. He that loves God in the first place, loves all creatur's, as
related to him. The more common, larg, and universal our love thus is, the
better: the more narrow, particular, singular, and private, the worse.

CHAP. XI.
From self-love may we argue our duty to god.
BY self-love may man find, even from within himself, as the nearest and most
evidencing example that is possible, what it is he owes unto God. For having by
self-love made himself his God, he gives, seeks, and ascrib's unto himself, all
things that he ought to give unto God. He seek's his own honor, praise, and
glory, not God's. But thereby may he know what belong's unto God, into whose
room he has thrust himself. By the consequents of loving himself, and
following his own will, may be certainly know what would be the consequents of
loving God and following of his will. He now seek's his own honor, above all
other honor, of God or men: he does all he can, to preserv, defend, and
increase it. From hence may be certainly conclude, that he ought to seek,
defend, propagate, and multiply the honor of God in the hearts of men, to his
utmost; that he ought to hate, oppose, and do all he can, to diminish and
abolish any honor that is contrary thereunto. In a word; all things a man does
from an evil principle of self-love, or would have done by others, to and for
himself, ought he to do, and desire may be done by others, unto god.

Chap. 12.
Sect. I.
The different fruits of the two chief loves, the love of God, and self.
THat which is finally expected and desired by man, from other creatur's, is
fruit. Every kind of fruit has its proper seed; and every seed brings forth its
peculiar fruit, distinct from others. The will of man is a kind of spiritual
field, wherein two chief loves, as two very different seeds, are sown; self
love, and the love of God. Let us now enquire after the final fruit producible
from these two seeds or roots, which being contrary to each other, the fruits
must needs be so too.

Endless joy and endless sorrow will be the two final fruits, springing up in the
field of man's will, from the love of God, or self. Man seek's for joy in all
he does; hates and flee's sorrow. True joy springs up only from the love of
God; true sorrow, from self-love.

God only is that infinite, invariable, all-sufficient good, which when man
firmly loves and enjoys, he has joy enough; and that such, as none can ever
deprive him of. It Is a fixed, solid, invariable joy. Such as the thing chiefly
loved is, such is the love, and such the joy arising therefrom. The nature,
conditions, and properties of such joy as arises from the love of God, are the
same with those of the love of God, above demonstrated. The fruit is of the
same nature with the root. If the love of god be a just, holy, true, orderly,
pure, clean, excellent love, suitable to the nature of man and of God; the joy
arising therefrom, is also a just, holy, true, orderly, pure, righteous,
excellent joy. Such joy will endure as long as the love it spring's from; and
such love will endure as long as the thing beloved, God. The heart then that is
fixed on God, will have everlasting gladness, eternal pleasure, delight,
complacency, rest, peace, satisfaction, jubilations. Joy dilat's, fortifies,
comfort's, delight's the heart of man. Sadness contract's, weaken's,
discourages, and destroy's it. He that has perpetual joy, has perpetual life;
he that has perpetual sorrow, has perpetual death.

God is an alsufficient, inexhaustible fountain of life and joy eternal, to
innumerable creatur's, without any diminution to himself. Nor will the joy
which any man will have eternally in God, be any way's diminished, but
increased by the like joy in other men. If the holy angels rejoice afresh at
the conversion of a sinful man unto God, as receiving an addition thereby to
their former joy, how can it be but that all elect men and angels should
eternally and mutually rejoice in the joy which all of them will have in the
lord?

By how much the more clearly any man sees and know's the lord, so much the
more will he love him, and rejoice in him. Perfection of joy in God, arises
from the perfection of love to him; and the perfection of such love arises from
the perfect knowledge of him. Nothing can destroy such love, such joy, that
cannot destroy God himself, with whom man is inseperably united by such love.

SECT. II.
Resurrection.
THe perfection of man's eternal joy and blessedness in heaven, argues the
resurrection of his body. The spirit of man has a natural inclination and love
to its own body, as that which was fashioned by the hand of God, and brought
into a kind of natural marriage-union with it. The body alone is not a man, nor
yet the spirit; but both, as put together in personal union. The recovery and
restitutio^ of the body then, after it is laid down by death, cannot but be
naturally desired by the spirit, as a necessary ingredie^t into the compositio^
of the man. Till he has all the essentialls of his humane constitution about
him, so as to be completed in his personal being, wanting nothing that may
justly he desired by him, his joy cannot be absolutely perfect and complete. And
on the same ground that we may conclude the body will be restored, may we farther
conclude, that it will be restored in a state most proportioned, lovely and
desirable to the elect; to wit, a most beautiful, come^ly, glorious,
impassible, immortal, agile, spiritual body. He that can advance the soul into
a higher and more excellent state then at first he gave it, will proportionally
rarefy, spiritualize, and exalt the body, at the resurrection, into a far more
excellent state, then when formed by him out of the dust of the ground Genesis 3.
19. or fashioned in the lowest parts of the earth, his mother's womb. Psalm.
139. 15. The spirit of man, transformed by the love of God, ascends to a
partaking of the divine nature: 2. Pet. 1. 4. the body, by its proportionable
transformation, will ascend into a spiritualty of being, as partaker of the
very nature of the spirit. In the essentials of his constitution, thus
advanced, completed, and perfected, will he have an absolute fulness of joy and
blessedness, for ever. He will for ever have all he can desire, and for ever be
rid of all he hates, and would not have. And then farther; from this radical,
fundamental joy in God, will spring up innumerable other secondary joy's, on
the account of all that are in the same state of blessedness with himself. His
joy will be multiplied according to the numberless multitude of saved men and
angels. Rev. 7. 9. The elect angels rejoice in man's hapines; why should not
elected men rejoice eternally in theirs? Every man in heaven, will ever love
every one, as himself, that is in the same blessed condition with himself; and
therefore equally rejoice in the joy of every one, as in his own. If then
therebe innumerable men, that will have the like joy in God, every one of them
will have innumerable joys. Every ones unspeakable joy in God, will be
innumerably multiplied by the like unspeakable joy in others. All this is the
necessary, certain, eternal fruit and consequent of man's wel-fix'd love of God.

Chap. 13.
Sect. I.
The temporary fruit of self-love.
THe temporary fruit of self-love, in this world, cannot be any true joy, but
only a sophistical, deceptive, seeming joy, carrying real sadness in the womb
of it. He that loves his own will, praise, honor, glory, and bodily pleasur's,
loves and seek's after such things as conduce thereunto; worldly riches,
dignities, offices, sciences, etc. Such a man, when he has any considerable
hopes or enjoyment of such things, he has a proportionable kind of joy. And
because all these things may pass away, be lost or destroyed, he fear's to lose
them, and hates all that would diminish or destroy them. From such danger,
fear, and hatred, sadness must needs arife. His joy then, at best, in such
delusive, transient vanities, has sorrow and vexation of spirit, most
intimatly connexed with it.

From the properties and conditions of self-love, may we certainly conclude the
properties of the joy, arising therefrom. If such love be an inordinate,
unjust, tortuous, false, vicious, corrupt, unclean thing, contrary to the
nature of God and man, as also to the order of the whole universe; if it be a
most wicked, filthy, malignant, abominable thing, the joy arising from it must
needs be of the same complexion, and have the self-same evil qualities,
properties and conditions. Self-love is the leading injustice and injury,
dishonorable to God, and destructive to man. It sets up a false God, in the
room of the true; the will of man, in opposition to the will of God. Any joy
man can have in such a course, must needs be a false, deceptive, inordinate,
unjust, vicious, corrupt joy, contrary to the nature of God and man, as also to
the nature and order of all creatures. It Is a most wicked, filthy, poisonous,
mortal, dark, lying joy. As the root is, so is the fruit. And forasmuch as
self-love render's a man the capital enemy of God (as thereby usurping a power
of living in the absolute Sovereignty and unsubjected exercise of his own will,
which is the peculiar prerogative and incommunicable privilege of God alone)
all the joy he can possibly find in such a course, is but yet a higher strein
of enmity to God. All his joy, and complacency in things temporal, is but a
rebellious exulting, and rejoicing in his contempt of, and enmity to God. The
more a man has of such joy, the greater enemy of God is he.

Self-love and the love of God cannot stand or dwell quietly together in the
same will, but, as capital enemies, will destroy and expel one another. In
like manner is it with the two opposite joys, thence arising. The joy that
spring's up from the love of God, strengthen's man's union with God. The joy
which spring's from self-love, divides, separat's, and alienat's a man more and
more from God. For the maintenance of a false joy, such a multitude of temporal
things appears requisite, as cannot usually be gotten without damage and
destruction to others and ourselvs. The love of such riches as are the
nourishment and maintenance of a false joy, will put us upon the exercise of
many such foolish and hurtful lusts, as drown men in destruction and perdition.
1 Timothy 6. 9.

True joy in the lord render's a man bountiful, courteous, merciful, humble,
mild, and sweet. False joy in the creature, make's him cruel, wicked, proud,
implacable, revengful, and all that is naught. The former preserv's peace,
unity, friendship, and all that is good amongst men: the latter tend's to the
dissolution of all right friendship; sowes envy, strife, divisions,
animosities, and all that is evil, amongst them. The former alway's profit's,
the latter always hurt's him that has it. The former enlighten's and cleer's
up man's understanding: the latter more and more darken's and blind's it. The
former will have the greatest reward: the latter, the greatest punishment.

SECTION. II.
The eternal fruit of self-love.
Immediately after this life, he that had nothing but a false, temporary,
momentany joy in the fleeting things thereof, will for ever be deprived of all
that he loved, desired, or rejoiced in. He will be compelled by the hand of God,
to have all that he would not have; and he will be everlastingly deprived of all
he would have, his own honor, glory, praise, and bodily pleasur's. The soul of
man in hell, cannot but think of such things, as will give it perpetual sorrow.
It will look upon itself, as the most deformed, filthy, disordered thing,
imaginable; contrary to God, in the utmost extremity; contrary to the
uprightnes and glory of its own first-created, natural being; and much more
contrary to the yet more excellent glory of spiritual life, it was capable of
having bio advanced into, by a new creation, or the true regeneration, which it
wilfully refused. The soul, finding itself in this dismal posture, will most
vehemently desire to be rid of itself by annihilation; but never can. Man, in
such case, will most earnestly desire, God may lose his being, that there may
be no omnipotent hand to keep him up in being, and punish him. He will be
eternally displeased that either God, or himself, or any other creatur's are
continued in being, because all makes for his woe. Thus will fond self-love end
at last in eternal self-abhorrency, sorrow, and confusion. As eye has not
seen, ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which
God has prepared for them that love him; So nor has eye seen, ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, while on earth, the dreadful
vengeance and eternal fadnes, that will be the portion of all those that finally
persist in the love of themselves, which is enmity to God. Eternal sorrow is
eternal death, in reference to which, man will be kept up in a most exquisite
sensiblenes, by the omnipotent hand of divine justice. God know's exactly all
the sins and follies of men, in their full dimensions and aggravations; and
will proportion their punishment thereunto. Those that deny God his due (by not
loving him, but themselves, and so hating him with all their heart, soul,
strength, and mind) will be sure to meet with their due, from the most just
avenging hand of God, that fiery indignation which will devour the adversaries.

Man by self-love, exalt's himself into the room of God, with an ERO SIMILIS
ALTISSIMO, in harmony with the devil's first sin; on which he will come to be
cast down to hell (2. Pet. 2. 4.) with his leaders, the devil and his angels.
The punishment due to man for such contempt of his omnipotent creator, is
unexpressible by the tongu's of men or angles. Fire, as the most afflicting
thing in nature, is used to express the eternal punishment of man. The eternal
fire, into which he will be cast, will burn, but not consume him, or afford him
any light. It will be accompanied with eternal darkness. It will have all the
afflicting, grieving properties of fire, but none of the relieving, comforting
properties, at all. Men that love darkness rather then light here, because their
deeds are evil, will have their fill of darkness at last, for all their evil
deeds.

Man only, of all the visible world, can properly deserv, and accordingly
receive punishment from the hand of god, because he only is furnished with
rational powers, to know what he ought to do, and to do what he ought, in
obedience to God. If therefore he do things contrary to the will of God, and
his own light, God will bring something upon him contrary to his will, with
eternal darkness. His will, being a perpetual thing, and fixed in enmity to God,
God will do that which will be perpetually contrary to it. His inordinate will,
chiefly affected and sought his own honor, praise, glory, and pleasure; the
contraries whereunto, in extremity, will be his portion, eternal dishonor,
contempt, shame; confusion, and sorrow unutterable. The everlasting punishment
of man, from the hand of God, will be managed and executed in such a way, as is
most contrary to his will and desire, and most conducible to the aggravation
and advance of his sorrow.

SECT. III.
Resurrection.
AGain, from the eternal punishment and sorrow, due to the soul of man, we may
conclude, it shall recover its own body again, and that in a state most
contrary to its desire, for the increase of its sorrow. As it used it, contrary
to the will of God on earth, it shall have it in a posture most contrary to
it is own will, in hell, for ever. As the whole man, body and soul, acted against
the will of God in this world; So must the whole man, body and soul, suffer
against his own will, in hell. And because 't is more contrary to the will of
man, in such case, to receive his body again in a passible condition (or
capacity of suffering) then impassible; and in an immortal condition (incapable
of losing its sensiblenes) then mortal, etc. we may conclude that he will
receive it, clogged and attended with all imaginable disadvantages, a passible
and yet immortal body, that it may ever suffer; a most obscure, dark, deformed
body, for the increase and aggravation of his sorrow. Furthermore, all the
sorrow of others in fellowship with him; and all the joy of others, in the
opposite condition thereunto, will make for the increase of his sorrow. The
creator, and every creature, yea, the very soul itself shall avenge the cause
of God upon man; so that he will have no comfort on any account, or from any
thing, for ever. The creator, every creature, all the joy and good of others,
all the sorrow and evil of others, shall make for the increase of his sorrow.
So have we the truth and certainty, as to the two final fruits which will arise
from the two above mentioned first loves, the love of God and self.

CHAP. XIV.
Two general societies, and everlasting habitations of men.
THe freedom which man has in the united exercise of his understanding and
will (above-spoke^ to) for the judging and turning this way or that, qualifies
and capacitates him for the taking of two contrary ways, the steering of two
opposite courses, unto life or death. By the different ways which men take in
the exercise of these their rational powers, do they come to be divided and
separated in will, affection, mind, doctrine, and interest, so as to be direct
enemies to each other. It Is requisite therefore that there be two distinct final
receptions or habitations for them, suitable to the distance and contrariety of
their affections. The same thing may be also concluded from the two abovesaid
first loves, the love of God and self, which render men directly contrary to
each other, separating, elongating, alienating, and distancing them from one
another, in will, affection and their whole course, as far as is possible. One
of their habitations will be the place of sorrow and eternal death; the other,
of joy and eternal life. The one will be the royal palace and house of God; the
other, an everlasting dungeon, full of confusion, darkness, and all evil. In
the one will be more good; in the other, more evil, then can be expressed by the
tongu's of men or angels. All that have walked and finished their course in
self-love, being of the same nature and inclination, will be gathered together
into one place. And all that have lived in the love of God, as being also of
one temper and inclination, will be gathered into a distinct place, separated
from, and most opposite to the other, as a company or corporation, most
contrary in Spirit and principle to the other. The sheep will finally be
separated from the goats, and enter into life eternal; the goats must away into
everlasting punishment. Mat. 25. 32. 46. Seeing there are but two general
inclinations of men, there can be but two places for their final abode, heaven
and hell. And each place will be suitable to the different temper of the
inhabitants. Those that by self-love have sought to dethrone God, and to usurp
the peculiar sovereignty of his will, will be thrust into outer darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

CHAP. XV.
Concerning hatred.
MAn's obligation extend's to hatred as well as love. The right knowledge then
of hatred and love, is the same. All that has bin proved of love, may be
proved of hatred. As the will can love, so can it hate. Hatred alway's fallows
love. If man be bound by the law of nature, to love the lord with all his
heart, soul, mind and strength, he is consequently bound by the same law, to
hate every thing that is against God, with all his heart, soul, mind, and
strength; and that, continually and incessantly. There Is the same obligation
upon man, to hate all that is contrary to the will of God, as to love God above
all. The first and principal thing he ought by the law of nature to hate, is
his own private self-will, and that with all his heart, as most contrary to
God. And forasmuch as our own honor, praise, glory, and bodily pleasur's, do
necessarily follow the love of our own will, in opposition to God's, we ought
to hate our own honor, praise, and bodily delights, and consequently all the
vices subservient thereunto, covetousnes, envy, wrath, and the rest. As from
one principal love, many secondary, subordinate loves do arise; so from one
principal hatred, many secondary hatreds. Every man ought to hate and oppose
whatever is contrary to God, to the true good of himself, or any other man, on
the same account that he is bound to love the lord his God with all his heart,
and his neighbor as himself. Luke 10. 27.

SECT. II.
The nature, force, properties, and fruit of hatred.
THe principal power and property of love, is the transforming of the will into
the thing chiefly loved, or the uniting it most intimately therewith. The
principal force and property of hatred then, is to divide, separate, alienate,
and elongate a man from what he hates. The greater the love, the stronger is
the union of the will with the thing loved: the stronger, and deeper the
hatred, the greater is the division and distance of the will from the thing
hated. And neither love nor hatred can be compelled, but are free, voluntary
things.

SECT. III.
Two chief hatreds.
AS there are two principal loves, so two principal hatreds; the hatred of God
and his will, or of ourselvs and our own will. And as the two chief loves, so
are the two principal hatreds capital enemies to each other. The love of God
and hatred of God are opposite; so are the love of self and hatred of self, as
also the hatred of God and hatred of self. But the love of God and hatred of
self, agree well together in the same will: So do the love of self and hatred
of God. He that loves God and his will, hates himself and his own will. He that
loves himself and his own will, hates God and his. There Is no middle state or
way.

SECT. IV.
The different fruits of these two hatreds.
LOve has the primacy of hatred. For hatred arises from love. From the love of
God, and of all things in conjunction with him and his will, does necessarily
arise the hatred of self, and of all things in combination with our own,
private, selfish will. In like manner, does the hatred of God and of all things
in conjunction with his will, arise from the love of self and its interests. If
the love of God be good, holy, most orderly and just, according to the law of
nature; then is the hatred of God most wicked, disorderly unjust, and contrary
to the law of nature. In like manner, if the hatred of our own will be good,
orderly, just, and according to the law of nature; then is the love of it
wicked, disorderly, unjust, and contrary to the law of nature. The good hatred
of self, arises from the good love of God: the evil hatred of God, arises from
the evil love of self. The fruits, above-specified, that arise from a good
love, arise secondarily from a good hatred, which alway's follows such a
love: and the fruits that naturally flow from an evil love, the love of self,
do flow secondarily from an evil hatred, the hatred of God. So much of love and
hatred.

Chap. 16.
Section. I.
Concerning other particular debts man owes unto God, besides love, and that,
first, in general.
HAving considered the debt of love, which man owes to God, and the great
advantage redounding unto him, by the due payment thereof, as also his
unutterable damage if he pay it not; let us enquire after other debts, the
payment whereof will also be our great gain, and the final non-payment our
eternal damage. God made all inferior creatures for man, and man for himself;
furnishing him alone with a nature and capacity, fit to perform all the duties
and to pay all the debts, which he owes unto God, both for himself and all the
rest. No inferior creatures can perform or understand any such matters. From
what man is furnished with, for the performance of all duty to God, may he
certainly conclude what ought to be done by him. If he can know, love, fear,
honor, glorify, praise, adore or pray to God; if he can believe, hope, and
trust in God; he may conclude, that God is to be known, loved, feared,
honored, glorified, praised, adored, believed, hoped and trusted in. If he can
wholly delight himself in God, then is God wholly delectable. If he can do
well, God can reward him: if ill, he can punish him. If he can be guilty, God
can be a judge. If he can ask pardon, God can give it. In like manner we may,
the other way, from the properties of God, argue the duties of man. If God
ought chiefly to be loved, as infinitely most desirable, man ought chiefly to
love him. If he ought chiefly to be feared, honored, praised, man ought to
fear, honor, and praise him. The like correspondence as is between the soul
and body of man, is between God and man, in this case. If the body have eyes,
ears, nose, etc: we may certainly conclude that the soul has a power of seeing,
hearing, smelling, etc. And if the soul have these powers, the body ought to
have such organs. The bodily organs, without such faculties in the soul; or
such faculties of the soul, without such organs in the body, would be useless
and in vain. A man that has no eyes, is never the better for having a visive
faculty in his soul. He sees nothing.

Though all other debts man owes unto God, are included in and connexed with
love, yet has each its proper and special reason why it ought to be paid. For
they are due to him, on different and special accounts; love, on one; fear, on
another; honor, on a third; praise, on a fourth; etc. Again, love is not fear,
or honor, nor is honor love or fear; each is a distinct debt. But where love
is paid, all will be paid. God is chiefly to be loved, because he is originally,
essentially, and unchangably good. There is none thus good, but God only. Mar.
10. 18. He alone is to be feared, as omnipotent. He alone is to be honored, as
the inexhaustible fountain of all things; and of all the joy, comfort, and
blessedness, that his choicest creatur's, in their most extended capacities, are
ever able to receive. Obedience is due to him, as the supreme lord of all.
Glory and praise are due to him, as the creator of all things. And because he
is infinite, he is infinitely to be loved, feared, honored, obeyed, praised,
and glorified. He is infinitely to be believed and trusted, because infinitely
faithful and true. But love does most principally correspond with the nature of
God. For God is love. 1 Jo. 4. 8. It cannot be said that God is honor, or
fear, etc.

SECT. II.
Concerning these duties, in special, and first, of fear.
ALl other debts or duties of man to God, must be founded in and spring from
his love of God. Love is acceptable of itself. No other performance is
acceptable to God, but as in conjunction with love. He that fear's God without
love, his fear carries in it punishment, sadness, torment, bondage to himself,
and find's no acceptance with God. He that pretend's to honor god, without
love, flatter's him, play's the hypocrite, and is abominable. But fear joined
with love, is voluntary, free, and acceptable; has no torment, sadness, or
bondage in it. Fear then, singly considered in itself, without love, being but
a servile thing, carrying with it pain and torment, ought not to be multiplied,
as love ought. One right fear of God admits no other fear's, but expell's them.
From the love of God, do flow infinite secondary loves of all creatur's, as
made or born of him, and as more or less resembling what is in him. But from
the true fear of God, issue no secondary fear's of any creature whatsoever, I
am he that comfort thee, says God, who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall die, and forgettest the lord thy maker? Isai. 51.
12, 13.

SECT. III.
Two principal fears.
AS there are two principal loves, so two principal fears; the one arising from
the love of God; the other, from the love of self. And accordingly are they
good or evil, just or unjust, as the love is, whence they flow. The true fear
of God strengthen's man's union with God. He that rightly fear's him, need's
fear nothing else. But the evil fear, arising from self-love, is multiplied
infinitely beyond the love from whence it spring's. From one of the many
secondary loves, issuing from self-love, may arise numberless fears, all which
being in conjunction with an evil love, do multiply punishment, sadness, and
sorrow to him that has them. This multiplication of fears demonstrat's the
poisonous filth of self-love, to him that lives in it. He that chiefly love's
himself, must needs fear all those things that can diminish, hurt, or destroy
him; which are numberless. In like manner, his own honor, praise, and glory
being earnestly sought by him, he must need's fear all that can diminish or
destroy them. And loving bodily pleasures and delights, he fear's bodily
torments, cold, heat, poverty, or whatever tend's to the diminution and
destruction thereof. Thus is evil fear, arising from an evil love, infinitely
more multiplicable then the love itself. A self-lover fear's every thing that
can hurt or diminish any thing he love's; himself, friends, wife, children,
parents, brothers, sisters, houses, possessions. He fear's to lose all these,
and therefore fear's every thing that can take them from him, hurt, or destroy
them. The foundation of all his misery and fear's, is, he foolishly loves that
which can be destroyed, and therefore slavishly fear's all that can destroy it.
He that chiefly loves God, and by love is united with him, has no cause to fear
any of these things, which the self-lover is so sollicitous about. Nothing can
diminish, hurt, or destroy his beloved. The perfect love of God cast's out all
slavish, tormenting fear. 1 Jo. 4. 18. The true fear of God is often put in
Scripture for the whole worship and service of God, performable by man. He that
truly fear's God, does truly worship and serve him. He that fear's other
things, makes himself the servant thereof; becom's a slave to many such things
as were made for his use and service. He incurr's infinite bondages, and loses
all true liberty. By man's false fear's is the world turned upside down. Man,
who was created uppermost, is laid at the bottom, as the subject, serva^t, and
slave of all things. But by the true fear of god, he recovers his due place in
the universe, suitable to his own nature, to the nature of God, to the will and
command of God, and to the natural order and voice of the whole creation.

SECT. IV.
Honor.
Honor has its distinct consideration by itself. All things are done for
honor or profit, or both. Of the two, honor is the more excellent, and
belongs to God alone; profit, to man only. The creature is in itself, indigent
and needy; profit therefore is calculated to its interest; not honor, at all.
But the creator, being infinitely full of all perfection within himself, no
profit can possibly redound unto him, from all the works of his hands; but
honor only. Profit is due to the creature, honor to God, who aim's jointly at
his own honor and the profit of his creatur's, as the complete end of all he
does. Honor as much excell's profit, as God (to whom all honor belong's)
excell's the creature, to whom all profit belong's; that is, infinitely. God
therefore principally intend's his own honor in all his works; but his
crearur's profit is so wrapped up, and inseparably connexed with it, that the
more he design's his own honor, the more he design's his creatur's profit; and
the more his creatures honor him, the more profit do they receive. Here then
are the two grand fruits of the universe, God's honor and man's profit. The
honor redounding unto God, from all his works of creation and providence, will
endure for ever. They therefore must remain for ever, that can ascribe it to
him. And consequently their profit will also remain for ever. God will have
everlasting honor, and man everlasting profit; each, that which is most
convenient and suitable to them. What should a needy creature do with honor;
or the inexhaustible fountain of all fulness and perfection, with profit? Man is
a needy creature within; honor therefore, being a mere outward thing,
signifies nothing to him. Nothing does him any real good, but what tends to
his inward perfection and accomplishment. If he fondly seek honor, which is
due to God only, he not only receiv's no profit thereby, but great
disadvantage. He corrupt's, and waxes worse and worse within, being puffed up
with that which to him is a mere nullity, a vanity. Man is apt to be seeking
his own increase and advance, one way or other. If he seek not a right, to
increase in goodness within, he will fondly seek to increase without, in honor,
glory, praise, name or fame, in which the more he increases, the more will he
decrease in inward goodness. Such practice is direct hostility to God, against
nature, reason, and the due order of all things.

God's honor, being transcendently the most principal end of all his works, is
infinitely more valuable then all creatur's put together. He then that seek's
and usurp's his honor to himself, cannot answer the injury done to god, if he
had the whole world at his dispose, to give, by way of satisfaction. He that
seek's the honor of God, seek's his own true good, and will be sure to find it.
He that seeks his own honor, will find everlasting shame, as a vessel of
dishonor. Christ himself, as a man in flesh, sought not his own glory. Jo. 8.
49, 50.

SECTION. V.
The name of God, acquired by his wonderful works.
THere is a twofold name of God, natural, or acquired. Amongst men, there is a
proper name, whereby one person is distinguished from another, which is not
given on the account of any thing done by them. But if a man, in the course of
his life, do some notable things, he acquir's a name amongst men, as David's
worthies, according to the excellency of his performances. And this name is
joined with his other, which before did only distinguish him from other men,
but carried nothing of fame or honor in it. His former name is rend'red
honorable and famous, from this additional name, acquired by his atchievments.
Such hononr, glory, or fame, as this additional name brings with it, enters not
at all into the being, but name only of the man. Yet though the name, fame,
honor and repute of a man, be but a mere outward thing, and no intrinsecal
ingredient into his person; it is, of all outward things, the most near, dear,
and valuable to him. This acquired name of man, may increase two ways;
intensively, by more and more honorable exploits; or extensively, and by way
of multiplication, as more and more men do come daily to hear of his fame.

God, on the account of his inward natural excellencies, and infinite
perfections, has a manifold natural name, which together with his additional
name and honor, acquired by his wonderful works of creation, providence, etc.
do make up one most great and glorious name, ever to be feared and praised by
man. He does not, by all his wonderful works, acquire any new thing within him,
but an outward name only. The glory of all good things, done by God immediately;
or mediatly, with and by his creatur's, is properly attributable to him alone.
His name alone is excellent in all the earth, and his glory is above the
heavens. This name of god is capable of increase; by new works and wonders. He
got him a name, or a fresh addition to his name, by his wonders on Pharaoh, in
Egypt; Ex. 9. 16. 14. 17. And as it is with man, in this point of honor, who
by self-love makes himself his God, so is it with God; his honor or honorable
name, though but an outward acquest by his famous works, is more near, dear,
and valuable to him, then all creatur's put together, as being the principal
end for which they were all made.

God was ever omnipotent, infinitely wise, just, and good. But he cannot be
known by any other, to be so, till in a way of bountiful communicativenes, he
manifest himself to be so, by his works, to the works of his own hands, angels
and men. Had God not made some creatur's, capable to take notice of his works,
and thereby to know him, who could have known or honored him? By the works of
his omnipotency, justice, judgment, and wisdom, he declares and so gets the
name of an omnipotent, infinitely wise creator, and just judge. He does also by
his works, get the name^ or titles of most faithful, true, merciful, bountiful,
gracious, holy, helpful, savior, protector, deliverer, etc. whereby men are
obliged to place all their hopes, expectations, confidence, and trust, in him.
One glorious name of God acquired by his works, is made up of all these, to
beget the true fear thereof in men.

The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handy
work; Psalm. 19. 1. By the works of God, may and ought men to take notice of,
and know him. For the invisible things of him, even his eternal power and
godhead from or by the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. Romans 1. 20. Accordingly as men do more
or less know, regard, and consider the works of the lord, the operations of his
hands will they more or less know, love, and honor him. If they consider them
not at all, they will not know, love, or honor him, at all.

The heart or will of man, is the proper receptacle, and ought to be the
habitation of the name of God, As men then are multiplied, the most honorable
name of the lord is capable to be multiplied, as finding new hearts to reside
and dwell in. Those men, in whose hearts that name does dwell, will discover it
unto others, by some outward signs, actions, or words. Out of the abundance of
the heart or inner man, the mouth, or whole outer man will speak, and act. His
light will so shine in good works before other men, as to induce and incline
them also to take notice of, glorify and honor his father which is in heaven.
Mat. 5. 16.

Amongst the works of God, man is the masterpeece; the comprehensive epitome of
all the rest. As then a man does more or less know and se himself (the
principal mirror and resemblance of god, the sum of all created beings put
together) the more or less clearly will he se and know God; and accordingly,
more or less esteem, love, and honor him. We may know much of God, by knowing
what other creatures are; but more, by knowing what ourselvs are, as the
principal work of God: and yet much more, by experiencing the peculiar works of
his grace and spirit, in our new formation, or true regeneration, as we come to
be born of him, of his will, his spirit. As the right knowledge of ourselvs
increases, our knowledge of God will increase: and the more we know him, the
more shall we love, praise, honor, and admire his glorious name.

All the works of God are calculated and designed for his own honor, name,
glory and praise: So ought all the works of man. Every man ought to do his
utmost for the spreading abroad, increasing and multiplying the name, fame, and
glory of God, in the world. The more he does, gives, or parts with, on this
account, the more profit and advantage redounds unto himself. Godliness is great
gain. If he lay down his life for the honor of God (which is the utmost he can
do in this world) he cannot part with it on better terms, or use it more to his
own advantage.

Whatever any man does in this world, whereby he honor's not God, he
dishonours him. There Is no middle, neutrall way, thought, word, or action. To
honor God, is the greatest good man can do; to dishonor him, the greatest
evil. All that man owes unto God, (love, fear, praise, obedience, hope, faith,
confidence, etc.) belong's to his honor: and the neglect thereof, or opposit's
thereunto, are a dishonor to him. He that does not love, fear, and obey, him;
believe, hope, and trust in him; dishonour's, contemn's, and injur's him.

Chap. 17.
Sect. I.
The private honor of man is the capital enemy of God's honor.
MAn cannot be a more direct capital enemy of God, in any thing, then by
contriving and designing his own honor, praise, glory, fame, or name, in and
by all he does; and by seeking the increase and multiplication thereof. He that
seeks his own honor, busies himself to procure the increase and multiplication
thereof in the hearts of other men. So, his own foolish, vain heart, and the
hearts of others (all which ought to be vessels and living temples of God's
honor) are made temples of his own honor, fame, and name. His own private
honor, which is the enemy of god's, intrudes into and possesses the room
thereof, in his own and others hearts, which is the greatest injury that can be
offered unto God. Such tempered men desire to jussle the honor of god quite
out of the world, out of all hearts, to make room for their own, the capital
enemy thereof. Every man is for or against God, the friend or enemy of God,
seek's his own honor or God's. There Is no middle way.

The seeking of self-honour, does so blind a man, that he cannot se or think
aright of the honor of god. He ought therefore to avoid his own honor, as the
most poisonous, deadly, destructive vanity of all vanities, that will finally
appear to be nothing, and will expose him to be eternally worse then nothing.
All honor will perish but god's; and so will all that seek any other honor
then his. Who can defend his own honor, against the omnipotent God? What
transcendent folly and blindness is it, for the thing formed to think of
prospering in a contest with him that formed it?

SECT. II.
The honor of God is attended with man's profit: the honor of man tends
directly to his own damage and ruin.
GOd made all things for his own honor, as the principal end of all. He then
that seeks any other honor, in oppositio^ to that, does, what in him lies,
pervert the whole world, and frustrate God's intention in making it. He sets
himself up, by his own private authority, will, and pleasure, in the room of
God; and would have the world filled with his name, fame, and praise, as a
temple of his own private, selfish honor. Have thou, o man, an arm like God?
Job 40. 9. contend not with him then. If thou do, it is easy to guess what
will be the issue betwee^ a poor, frail, impotent creature and the omnipotent
creator, to whom all nations are less then nothing, and vanity; Isai. 40. 17.
The fruit of all such contests, must needs be unutterable damage unto man.

The more a man muse's upon, and seek's his own honor, the more is he still
dark'ned and blinded, as to any right knowledge or consideration of God and his
honor. He madly digg's his own grave; hasten's to his own eternal ruin. He
lay's the foundation of his self contrived hapines, in a lie, an error, a mere
nullity, his own honor. He not only loses all his labor in such a
self-seeking trade, but is sure to be ruined by it. As he therefore tender's
his own hapines, he ought to flee and avoid his own honor, praise, and glory,
that is enmity to God, as the greatest evil. Eternal shame, perpetual
confusion, and everlasting contempt will be the certain portion of all that
finally seek their own honor. But if a man honor God, God will put honor
upon him, and glorify him for ever, in himself.

Vain man, that is eager and hot in the pursuit and maintenance of his own
private honor, though unjust and undue, will not patiently endure the least
diminution thereof, as we may ordinarily find. And can we then think, the
almighty God will suffer any diminution of his honor, that is most justly due
unto him, without punishing the offendour?

Chap. 18.
Section. I.
Concerning Angelical nature.
HAving thus read over the book of the visible creation, and considered of some
special and highly concerning instructions unto man, deducible therefrom; let
us proceed to take notice of a third sort of created nature, which is invisible.

In the three former of the four degrees of creatur's already spoken to, we
find mere bodily nature: in the fourth (to wit, man) bodily and intellectual or
spiritual nature, joined together. By these things, so manifested and known,
may we ascend to the consideration of intellectual nature, as found alone, by
itself, in separation from bodily. Bodily nature has two ways of existing, one
by itself, in the three inferior degrees of created beings; another, in
conjunction with intellectual nature, in the fourth; man. Intellectual nature
then, being far more excellent then bodily, and much more near and like to its
creator, will doubtless be found to have the like privilege of existing also
two ways; first, singly, as a whole being, in angels; secondly, in composition
with bodily, as part of a being, in man.

We may farther conclude also, that angels, as the choicer sort of
first-created beings, excelling all others in understanding and strength (Psalm.
103. 20) were first made. Man, though the most excellent creature in the
visible world, lord and master of all the rest, was last created; because, in
respect of the bodily part of his constitution, the other visible creatures
were a requisite provision for his enterteinment and subsistence. But angels,
being mere spirits (unconcerned in, and independent on the visible or material
parts of the creation, for their subsistence and operations) might well be
before any of this visible fabric was set up. These morning stars and sons of
God, sang together, and shouted for joy, when the foundations of the earth were
fast'ned, and the cornerstone thereof was laid, by the hand of the creator.
Job. 38. 6. 7.

Now forasmuch as angelical nature had the same kind of free will that man had
in his first make, the things above proved concerning the obligation, duty, and
true interest of man, may be looked on as equally proved in reference to angels.

So have we, by ascending natur's ladder, found out the divine nature,
uncreated, which is the same numerical nature in three persons; and then, three
created natures, mere bodily, mere intellectual, and mixed.

SECT. II.
The sin of Angels.
ANgels sinned before men. Sin and depravation were first found in intellectual
nature. Angelical nature sinned without any instigation to evil, by any
superior nature, already fallen. Humane nature sinned and fell by the
instigation of angelical, the highest kind of created nature, already fallen.
Sin therefore was first in angelical nature. For, till angels were sinners,
they would not tempt man to sin.

Sin was brought into humane nature, differently from the way it entered into
angelical. It was first brought into the weaker part, the woman: then, by her
into the man; and so, into all mankind. 'T is the right method in the art of
tempting, to assault the weaker part, for entrance. When evil is to be
introduced by way of instigation, this is the surest course. But the evil of
angelical nature, entered first into the stronger part; then, by it, into the
weaker; because that nature sinned and fell of its own proper motion, without
any instigation from another. The stronger, more excellent and capacious angel,
whose will was of the most flexible, active temper, was most apt to assume unto
himself a sovereign and uncontrolled exercise of his own will, in a proud and
presumptuous opposition to God's, with an ERO SIMILIS ALTISSIMO, I will be like
the most high. This was the case of the Luciferian head of the fallen angels.

The evil of sin then may seem to have begun in him that by creation was the
most excellent of all the other angels that fell. They fell by freely and
instantly complying with his rebellious will. In humane nature, man, the
stronger part, became evil, by adhering to and complying with the weaker, the
woman's disordered will. Angelical nature first fined. By that, was the woman
tempted: by her, the man. So sin entered upon all mankind:

The chief evil angel, proudly exalted himself and his will, into competition
with God and his; and so became the first capital enemy of God. He affected
sovereignty: he would not remain subject to any superior will. He erected a
kingdom, empire, and dominion within himself, against the Kingdom, empire, and
dominion of God. And he presently became obstinate, resolute, and fixed in this
deviation from and enmity against God. He can never return from it, to all
eternity. Consequently, will he ever hate and oppose, to the utmost, the will
of his creator, as most opposite to his. Thus came there to be two totally
distinct, contrary, and opposite wills; the most absolutely pure and holy will
of the omnipotent creator, and the depraved will of the first angel that
sinned. And the said leading angel, the devil, does contend, with all his
might, for the maintenance and defense of his own will, in opposition to God's.
To these two contrary wills of God and the devil, are all other wills of men or
angels reducible. Every will truly good, is joined with the will of God; every
evil will, with the will of the devil. All the other angels, that adhered unto,
joined with, and took complacency in the will of the devil, became fixedly one
with him, so as that they cannot will any thing but what he will's. He is the
head, they the members, in opposition to Michael and his angels. Rev. 12. 7.
All the wills of of the good angels are bound up in a state of everlasting and
unchangable harmony with the will of their head, the head of all principality
and power. The evil angels are a compacted army, resolved to fight for the
defense of the depraved will of their head, and for the fulfilling thereof, in
opposition to the will of God. The good angels are an opposite army, united
with the will of their head, and contending for the fulfilling thereof, in
opposition to the devil and his followers.

By how much the more high and excellent a creature the first angel that sinned
was made, so much the more vile and inferior did he become, by the voluntary
corrupting of himself. He is the lowest, basest, and vilest of all creatur's.
His will, perverted by pride and self-love, became the root, and fountain of
all evils. When once his will was perverted, he resolved to employ the
overreaching subtlety of his understanding, in all possible arts, methods, and
ways of delusion, for the deceiving and drawing of men into the same perdition
with himself. So much be spoken concerning the voluntary evil of the fallen
angels; sin.

SECT. III.
The punishment of the angels that sinned.
THe involuntary evil, or evil of punishment, which the angels that sinned,
were forced to take whether they would or no, was a casting of them down to
hell, and a reserving of them in chains of darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day. But until they be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, (Rev.
20. 10.) after the thousand years reign of Christ; or rather, until, with
their head, they be shut and sealed up in the bottomless pit, (Rev. 20. 3. so
as to be utterly disabled to exercise any depraving influence upon men, all
along the said thousand years) they are termed rulers of the darkness of this
world. Ephesians. 6. 12. Their head, Satan, is termed the God of this world, that
blind's the minds of men, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The night of this world is now far spent,
(Romans 13; 12.) wherein these rulers of darkness have most woefully blinded men's
understandings, and captivated their wills, in and by the ensnaring vanities of
this world. The day of the lord is at hand, wherein they shall be utterly
disabled, as to any such practices. But they are now laying about them, in
extremity, as knowing they have but a short time. They have great horror and
disturbance in their present aerie mansions, from the checks, restraints, and
limitations they find themselves under, from the power of their enemy, who is
infinitely stronger then they. They are restless in their inordinate
cogitations and desires. They are troubled, that they cannot deceive the very
elect; that they cannot touch him that is born of God, (1. Jo. 5. 18.) with
their depraving, assimilating influence; that they cannot ruin all mankind, to
a man. When a sinner is converted, the eyes of his mind opened; when he is
turned from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God, (Act. 26.
18.) there is joy in the presence of the angels of God, and sorrow in the devil
and his angels; Luke 15. 10.

Chap. 19.
Sect. I.
In what manner men come to be united with the first evil angels, as their head.
THe two principal opposite wills of God and the devil, make two opposite
Kingdoms, empires, dominions, and laws; a Kingdom of darkness, and a Kingdom
of light. All men are subjects in the one or other of these Kingdoms. The devil
lays claim to all those things which belong to God; honor, praise, adoration,
etc. He is obstinate and blinded in this transcendent strein of pride and
presumption. He does all he can, to destroy the honor, glory and worship of
God, as contrary to his. He extremely hates the Kingdom of God; envies man's
capacity of ascending thither, and labor's to the utmost, to obstruct and
hinder his motions that way. He labor's might and main, to bring all men under
his dominion.

But there is a twofold difference between the first captivity of mankind, and
other fallen angels, to the will of the first; the devil. First, all the fallen
angels became fixed in and with the will of their head, in enmity to God: but
men are capable of recovery from the power of Satan unto God. Secondly the evil
angels are subject to their leader and head, as his incorporated members,
resigned up to his will. They do all most unanimously and harmoniously agree
and center in one will, so that no discord or contention can possibly arise
amongst them. They are the most free and willing subjects of the devil. As for
men, they are cozened into slavery: they are, unawares, by fraud, captivated to
the will of the devil. They agree with the devil in enmity to God. They quit
all union with the will of God; but, with design to live in the sovereign and
uncontrolled exercise of their own wills, as the devil does in his, unsubjected
either to God or him. But when they de part from God, they fall into the
devil's hands, and are taken captive by him, at his will; 2 Timothy 2. 26. Man
intend's a distinct Kingdom within himself, separate from God's and the devil's
too, as a new third Monarch, distinct from both. But it falls in, by way of
coalition, and becomes one Kingdom of darkness with Satan's, in opposition to
the Kingdom of God. The will of the devil, separated from God, of itself. The
will of man, separated from God, by the instigation of the devil; on which, the
devil gained entrance into, and dominion over his will, beyond, and contrary to
his intention. The devil caught man at first with guile, did with craft
surprise him, and does by violence and fraud usurp a tyrannical domination over
him.

The fallen angels are the devil's natural subjects, and members, being of the
same angelical nature with him. But men, as of a different nature from him, are
by fraud and force, captivated and subjected to his will. Every wicked man
retein's his own private will in himself, which alway's agree's with the will
of the devil, in enmity and contrariety to the will of God. The devil is a
gainer by men's living and walking in their own wills, as not willingly or
knowingly subjected unto his. For, by this means, he can, in combination with
the will of man, do many exploits in the world, which by himself alone, or by
his angels who are freely united in and with his will, he could not do.

Wicked men, in this world, do not center by way of resignation, in any one
will; but have every one their proper and private will, distinct from all
others. They cannot therefore agree amongst themselves, as evil angels do,
because they have distinct private wills and lusts, whence contentions, wars,
brawlings, and fightings do arise (Jam. 4. 1.) every one raking and tearing
from another, to get what he can for himself. Satan know's too well how to
manage the private lusts and passions of men, to his advantage. He does thereby
stir up man against man, nation against nation, Kingdom against Kingdom,
putting the world into an uproar, and filling it with all manner of tumults and
confusions. This he does by his hidden artifices, and unperceived influencin^
and riding of the wills of men, as hi^ ^easts, into a career of opposition to
each other. He is ready also, on all sides, to suggest innumerable ways and
arts of doing mischief, as the grand master of al mis-rule in the whole world.
He uses his angels as his own members, for the doing of mischief. But he and
his angels use men as their beasts, to ride on. Men's minds and wills are
secretly bestridden and spurred by these principalities and powers of darkness;
and they no more know or consider who is on their backs, then horses know what
men are, that ride them. Into this deplorable condition is man brought by
self-love, and living in his own will, separate from god's. He is made a
servant, a slave, a captive, a beast, for the devil and his angels to triumph
over, and ride on, who are themselves most miserable captives in everlasting
chains of darkness. Jude v. 6.

The will of the devil is a bottomless pit, wherein the wills of wicked men are
imprisoned; and their own private wills are so many distinct spiritual prisons,
subordinate to the will of the devil, wherein they are detained. Man's own will
is both the prison and the chain that bind's and hold's him fast in the will of
the devil. Here Is that man gets by living in his own will. When he has once
separated himself from God, and set his heart wholly upon vanities, in case he
sometimes get what he desires, if he rejoices in it, he add's iniquity unto
iniquity, by rejoicing in the accomplishing of the fleshly desires of his
carnal mind, that is enmity against God. All the desires of our wills, in
separation from God's, are evil. If we have not what we desire, we are sad,
looking on our disappointment as a punishment. If we have what we desire, we
rejoice, and so add to the iniquity of our unlawful lust, a rebellious
exulting and rejoicing against God. Turn which way we will then, while we live
in our own wills, we are sure to find sin or sorrow, to meet either with the
evil of sin, or evil of punishment, continually. To center, unite, live and
dwell in the will of God, is true blessedness and glorious liberty unto man, in
direct opposition to all the abovementioned captivities and inconveniences.

SECT. II.
THe whole angelical nature fell not. The whole humane nature fell. Angels
descend not from one another by generation, as men do; but were all created
together. Those angels that fell, fell irrecoverably, at first. No men were
rendered unchangably and irrecoverably evil by their first fall, nor were they
thereby exposed to remediless misery. Had mankind, by being made totally
sinful, bin totally lost, in vain had all men bin made, as to the principal
design of God in the creation of the world, which was, to bring the world,
summed up in man, into union with and enjoyment of himself. Had no course bin
taken for the recovery and salvation of men, after their first fall, we might
be apt to think it far better, that God had forthwith destroyed Adam and Eve,
on their first sin, and put a period to humane nature in their persons, without
any farther multiplication. That which Christ says of Judas, it had bin good
for him, if he had not bin born, Mat. 26. 24. may seem to countenance this
general assertion, that it had bin far better and more eligible for all those
who will eternally perish, uever to have bin at all.

SECTION. III.
Redemption.
AS to the recovery, redemption, and salvation of man, this we may take notice
of in general, that none but God himself could make satisfaction to his own
infinite justice for the sins of men. And none is obliged to give satisfaction,
but man. He then, that perform's it, must needs be both God and man, united in
one person. The natural and most intimate marriage-union of humane nature with
the divine, in Christ's person, did render it so valuable, in the virtue and
dignity of its husband, that the laying down of the life thereof, was a
satisfaction to divine justice for the sins of men, infinitely beyond what the
voluntary surrender of life, by all creatures in their full purity, would have
amounted unto. Such a man as was also God, could and did by the death of his
manhood, overcome him that had the power of death, the devil; Heb. 2. 14. And
having spoiled those principalities and powers of darkness, the devil and his
angels, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it; Col. 2. 15.
He will also cause his followers from among men, to triumph over them also; to
trample them under their feet, as Josua or Jesus (Act. 7. 45. Heb. 4. 8.) the
type of Christ, caused the captains of the men of war, to put their feet upon
the necks of the five Kings. Jos. 10, 23. 24. He does, by regeneration, put a
spirit into them, greater then he that is in the world, the devil; 1 Jo. 4. 4. a
spirit, which that wicked one cannot touch, deprave, corrupt, or assimilate
unto himself; a spirit, that cannot touch or put forth its hand unto sin. He,
or that which is born of God, sins not, nor can sin. 1 Jo. 3. 9.

SECT. IV.
THus have we seen the original evils of humane and angelical nature; the roots
of all other evils, in or to angels and men. All the evil of sin or punishment,
incident unto both, from first to last, is wholly imputable to their own wilful
deviations, apostasies, and rebellions.

Fallen man, who was seduced by a superior order of creatur's, more subtle
then himself, is, through the tender mercies of God, declared to be in a
recoverable condition; and accordingly, are there means afforded him, by the
personal sufferings and performances of Christ, whereby he may be saved. But
being fallen and corrupted into a state quite contrary to his own nature, he is
usually so far from any due considering of the vileness and misery of his
condition, or of the dreadful vengeance of eternal fire, which will certainly
follow, that he laugh's and rejoices in his chains, his prison-state under
Satan, who is a chained captive himself. He glories in his shame, put's far
from him the evil day, laugh's at the sad stories of hell and damnation, as old
wives fables. The heart of the Sons of men is full of evil; madness is in their
heart while they live; and after that they go to the dead. Man also knows not
his time: as fishes are taken in an evil net, and birds caught in the snare, so
are the Sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.
Ecc. 9. 3. 12. By the laughing, jovial, frolic practice, and senseless
security too generally observable amongst men, may it appear, that man is a
most foolish, frantic, dreamish, enchanted thing, not considering what he is,
whither he goes, or what is like to become of him for ever. The folly, misery,
and delusion, wherein man securely and pleasantly walk's, under the rulers of
the darkness of this world, who can utter? For farther ^^formation herein, I
refer the reader to the Scriptures o^ truth, as beyond the reach of the book of
the creatures, though their line be gone out, through all the earth, and their
words to the end of the world, so that there is no speech nor language where
their voice is not heard. Psalm. 19. 3. 4.

FINIS.
Page 4. line 30. trhee. r. three. p. 5. l. 5. it. r. is. p. 15. chap. 3. r. 4.
So are there 20. chapters in the whole book. p. 52. l. 26. slowing. r. flowing.


