SUBMISSION TO THE Will of God IN Times of Affliction. Asserted, in a SERMON
From 1 Samuel 3.18. By a Reverend Divine.

London, Printed for John Darby. 1683.

To the Right Honorable RACHEL, Lady Russel.
MADAM;
THe affixing so honorable a Name to the following Discourse, may be deemed by
some Persons, as a device to allure Customers, or to raise the Reader's
expectation of some Novelty contained therein. But tho Dedications are often
abused to so base, and many times to a more sordid end, yet they are of ancient
use, and may be of great profit. And the design of this Sermon, being a
persuasive to an absolute resignation of our selves to the Will of God, and a
quiet submission to his fatherly Corrections, acknowledging all that he wills
or does to be just and good, how sharp soever they may appear for the present;
'twas judged not unsuitable to your Ladyships condition, being now conflicting
under a smart Providence.

In the ensuing Sermon, your Ladyship will find, what kind of Resignation it is
that is required, and what an excellent and commendable thing it is, and the
great Advantages we have thereby, breeding in us a contentation in every
Condition, be we High or Low, Rich or Poor, Solitary or full of Company, in the
enjoyment of near and dear Relations, and our deprivation of them; causing us
to sit loose from the Creature, or any comfort thereof, be it never so amiable,
pleasant, or suitable to our desires; Curing our distrustful Fears, and carking
Solicitudes; enabling us to go on cheerfully in our Duty, with respect to this
World, and the next; and to perform that Work which God has given us to do,
leaving the success to him who has the sovereign disposal of all Persons and
Events. And as repugnancy to the Divine Will, is the ground of all that
Impiety, and consequently of all those Mischiefs that so much molest and
trouble the World. So compliance with, and submission to it, is the ground of
all true Piety and Peace. The great Quarrel kept up between God and Man, being
a Contest, who shall have their Will, whose Will shall stand, whose must stoop;
God to Man, or Man to God. Now, where Wills are at variance, he that has the
greatest interest in the thing contested about, and that has the most Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness; that can undertake, that if his Will take place, there
shall be a good issue of things; and if the others take place, there shall be a
bad issue: There Is all the reason in the World that his Will should stand, and
the others submit: Now it is clearly so in this case, between God and Us; and to
help you in this Duty, is the design of the following Discourse.

Madam; Whatsoever God has taken from you, he has left you something better
behind, he has not taken away himself and Spirit, an Interest in Christ, and a
Right to Heaven: And when he takes away any worldly Comfort, he will give
something better in the room of it to them that truly fear him; and if what he
deprives you of in Temporals, he makes up in Spirituals, you will find a good
exchange: which that you may, shall be the Prayer of,

Madam, Your Honors faithful Servant, M. S.

OF Submission to the Will of God. IN Times of Affliction.
1 SAMUEL 3.18. And he said, It is the Lord: Let him do what seems him Good.


THese Words are the Words of Eli, a pious Speech of an humble Soul,
acknowledging all that God wills or does to be Just and Good: And willingly
therefore submitting himself thereunto. A terrible Message had Samuel brought
him from God, such as he was unwilling to impart or reveal, had he not been
pressed by Eli's earnest Adjuration. But when it was discovered, see the
Effect; an humble Submission and entire Resignation of himself to the Will of
God. And he said, etc.

In the Words we have, I. An acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty. II. His
Submission thereunto.


I. An acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty, It is the Lord. Words short in
Expression, but copious and plentiful in Sense.

1. An acknowledgment of God in the Threatening, It is the Lord. Psalm. 39.9. I
was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth; because thou did it.

2. His acknowledgment of God as the Creator and Governor of all things, and so
having the Supreme Disposal of all the Creatures. Job 9.12. Behold, he takes
away, who can hinder him? Who will say unto him, what do thou? God that gave
us all our Enjoyments, may deprive us of them at his own Pleasure. As we cannot
resist his Almighty Power, so we cannot question his absolute Dominion.

3. He acknowledges his Justice, in threatening this heavy Judgment against him
and his Family for their Sins. Dan. 9.14. For the Lord our God is Righteous in
all that he has done: For we have not obeyed his Voice. Consciousness of Sin
should suppress all murmuring, and dispose us patiently to bear whatever the
Lord is pleased to inflict.

4. Here is also an acknowledgment of his Wisdom: He knows what is best and
fittest to be done for his own Glory and our Good. Job 34.33. Should it be
according to thy Mind? He will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether
thou choose. That is, God will do what is fitting, whether we consent or no,
like it, or not: God will not dispense his Providence as the Creature is
pleased, or ill pleased with it, but as it conduces to his own Glory: For he
governs not the World according to our Passions and Humors, but according to
the Counsel of his own Will.

II. His voluntary submission upon these grounds; Let him do what seems him
good: that is, not what I judge best, but what he determines for his own Glory.
It is the Duty of a Godly Soul, humbly to submit to the good Will of God, even
in those things which seem to make against us. In which two things are notable.

1. His Patience under his Punishment, as threatened by the Lord: which is no
small part of our Duty; Levit. 26.41. If their uncircumcised Hearts be humbled,
and they accept of the punishment of their Iniquity. It Is a part of Repentance,
not to refuse Punishment as justly deserved by us. Eli does not expostulate,
but submit. It Is easy to agree with Providence rewarding, or blessing us; hard,
when it chastises and scourges us. Job could bless God for taking as well as
giving: But few have that constancy of mind; Job 1.21. And he said, Naked came
I out of my Mother's Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. It Is said, 2 Chronicles.
12.6. That when God had left Rehoboam in the hand of Shishak, That the King and
Princes humbled themselves, and said, The Lord is Righteous. That is, they did
acknowledge God's just proceeding with him. If this acknowledgment were extorted
from an Hypocrite, such as Rehoboam was, much more may it be expected from the
People of God.

2. His Meekness under the Reproof of Samuel, whom he had brought up from a
Child: Eli was a very old Man, Samuel but a Youth, in effect; yet when he was
the Messenger of these sad Tidings to him; he replieth, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good. Few Men love their Reprovers or Messengers of Evil
Tidings: but so did Eli. So did David: he was not angry with Nathan, but
relented toward the Lord; 2 Samuel 12.13. And David said unto Nathan, I have
sinned against the Lord. The Wicked, when they are admonished and rebuked for
their sins, they despise the Threatening, and hate the Reprover. But so do not
God's People, they receive the Rebuke with meekness, and confess their Sins
against God, and humbly submit to his Chastisements.

Doct. That God's People have attained a good degree of Grace, when they can
absolutely resign themselves to the Will of God.

Let me show you,

I. What is this Resignation to the Will of God.

II. What an excellent and commendable thing it is.

I. What is this Resignation to the Will of God? I Answer, The Will of God may
be considered two ways.

1. As certain and known to us.

2. As not yet known, neither in the Word or Providence.

1. As certainly known to us, either by Threatenings, or Executions of God's
Sentence. 1. By Threatenings, and special Messages, as here in the Case of Eli;
He does not slight God's Wrath, but reverenceth his Word. So Hezekiah is an
Instance also; Isa. 39.8. Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the Word of the
Lord which thou have spoken. It is a terrible and sad Word, that his Treasures,
and Childrens Children, should be carried to Babylon. The only good that was in
it, That the Evil should not come in his time. Yet that was not the main
Consideration, for it is added, He said moreover, For there shall be Peace and
Truth in my Days. No, but he had other Considerations, the Pleasure and
Sovereign Will of God.

2. When the Evil is not only threatened, but inflicted, yet then God's People
show they have absolutely given up their Wills to God. Instances we have of
that, in Job 1.21. The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away; Blessed
be the Name of the Lord. Psalm. 119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright
are thy Judgments. Acts 21.14. And they ceased, saying, the Will of the Lord be
done. The sight of God's Will must silence all our Disputes.

2. In things uncertain and unknown to us as yet, we must refer it to God's
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, to determine all Events, as shall seem good in his
Eyes: He is so able, that he can accomplish what we desire; so good, that we
have no reason to trouble our selves about his Will, but submit to it without
Hesitancy: So wise, that he will choose that which is for the best. We have an
Instance in David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. And the King said unto Zadock, Carry back
the Ark of God into the City: If I shall find Favor in the Eyes of the Lord,
he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his Habitation. But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee: Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems
Good unto him. See how sweetly and meekly he submits to God's Pleasure,
wholly denying himself and his own Will: And resigneth up Person, Life, Crown,
and Estate into God's Hands, to be cast as a Dye, high or low, as it should
seem good to God. So Esther refers her case to God, If I perish, I perish,
Esther 4.16. I might produce the Example of our Lord Jesus Christ, tho the
Event was known to him as Mediator, yet when he speaks as Man, hear his
Words, John 12.27, 28. Now is my Soul troubled; what shall I say? Father, save
me from this Hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify
thy Name. We learn of Christ when we are in great Perplexity, and know not the
Event, That we should absolutely submit all things to his Will, with respect to
his Glory. For surely God will determine, and cast Matters so, as it may be for
his own Honor, and our Good. Christ consulted not with his own Case, but the
Glory of God; he respected not the innocent Inclination of his humane Nature,
but the Glory of his Father: So should we be content that God be glorified, tho
with our Loss, and bitter Cost. As natural Things will act against their
particular Inclination, for a general Good; Air will descend, and Water ascend,
to avoid a Vacuity, or to preserve a Continuity in the World. Now of this
Resignation shall I speak, for it is not fit that Man should have the disposal
of himself, or his Condition and Affairs; or that he should accommodate his
Providence to their carnal Interest and Will, or else he cannot bear it, or
think well of it. No, God's Will must always precede, and ours follow. Alas! we
have a corrupt Will, guided by a dark Understanding; and if the Blind lead the
Lame, what can be expected but Disorder and Ruin? Therefore our Wills must not
lead and make the first choice, but God's: And to bring our Hearts thoroughly to
yield to this, argues a good degree of Grace.

II. How excellent and commendable this is, will appear, if you consider, 1.
The Grounds, or Objective Reasons it goes upon. 2. The several Causes of it,
or Subjective Graces it flows from. 3. The Fruits and Effects, or what
Excellent Advantages we have thereby.


1. The Grounds of this Resignation are the three grand Attributes of God, his
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness.

1. God is infinitely Wise, and knows what is best for us, therefore his
Divine Choices must be preferred before our foolish Fancies. Isa. 30.18. The
Lord is a God of Judgment; blessed are they that wait for him. All his Dealings
with his Children are full of Wisdom: And therefore it is fit that he should
choose our Condition, and not we our selves. We would choose Life, but God
chooses Death, knowing thereby how to bring most Honor to himself, and eternal
Advantage to our selves; as we suffer the loss thereof for being Faithful to
his Interest in a Wicked World. You would choose Riches, when God knows Poverty
is best for you, to keep you holy and humble: We should soon undo our selves
if we our selves had our own Will. If God did not often deny us what we have a
mind to, as a Child would ruin his Health if you gave him all the Fruit his
longing Appetite craveth; no, that must be left to the Parents Discretion; or a
Man in a Fever would hazard his Life if you should give him all that he calls
for, that must be left to the Physicians Skill. But now on the other hand,
nothing can be done amiss by God, for Infinite Wisdom cannot err; Deuteronomy. 32.4.
As for God his work is perfect. Some things may fall out cross to our Opinions
and Desires; but our Desires are not the measure of his Dispensations, nor will
he govern the World according to our Opinion. Most Men in the World would have
nothing but Health and Wealth, and Love and Respect from Men, but it is God's
Wisdom, not our partial Conceits, must judge what is necessary for us: Therefore
many things fall out contrary to our Humor and Inclination, but he that sees
in secret, knows what is good, better, or best for us, more than we do for
our selves. It Is expedient he should displease us for our Advantage. Things may
be unsatisfactory to us, who are poor short-sighted Creatures, and often
distempered with Passions, which God sees necessary to promote our good, or
preserve the Harmony of his Providence. Our Requests many times are but
ravings. When we peremptorily interpose our Will without God, we ask we know
not what, and pray our selves into a Mischief and a Snare. Therefore all must
be referred to God's Wisdom, and we must count that good which God does,
whatever the Event be.

2. The Power of God; which notes two things.

(1.) His Sovereign Right to dispose of his own Creatures.

(2.) His Might or Omnipotency, to do what he pleases.

(1.) His Sovereign Right of disposing his own Creatures. It belongs to God
to do with his own what he pleases, and to use them at the pleasure of his own
Will. God's Sovereign Dominion over, and Interest in his Creatures, may be set
forth by three things. A right of making or framing any thing he wills, in
any manner as it pleases him. As the Potter has power over his Clay, to form
what Vessel he pleases, either of Honor or Dishonor; Jer. 18.6. As Clay in
the hand of the Potter; so are ye in my hand, says the Lord of Hosts. Nothing
before it had a being, had a right to dispose of it self; neither did God make
it what it was by necessity of Nature, nor by the Command, Counsel, or Will of
any Superior; nor the direction of any Coadjutor; neither is there any to whom
he should render an account of his Work, but merely produced all things by the
act of his own Will, as an absolute and sovereign Lord of all his Actions; Rev.
4.11. Thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created. Now this should be thought of by us, because whatever was given us in
Creation, is not a matter of Right, but the mere effect of God's Will and good
Pleasure. He might have made us Stocks and Stones, and not living Creatures; or
Plants only endowed with a Life of Vegitation and Growth. Or, as having a
sensitive Life, either in the lowest rank of those living Creatures, Toads, or
Vipers; or in the highest rank, Horse or Mule, without Understanding. Or
reasonable Creatures, as Men, or Angels among Men, all the Blessings and
Privileges that we were born unto, might have been withheld, without any
injustice. The various Constitutions or Complexions of Men, together with all
their Gifts and natural Capacities, are the Fruit of his sovereign Will.

(2.) A right of having and possessing all things so framed and made by him.
Among Men, whosoever makes any thing by his own proper Art and Labor, and
that of his own Stuff is counted to have a full right to it, and a full power
to dispose of it. Yet no Workman ever made any thing without some Matter
preexisting: But God made all things out of Nothing, and therefore surely his
right is greater. For this reason God is called, not only the maker, but the
possessor of Heaven and Earth; Genesis 11.14, 19. God is the great Proprietor, and
in a sense the only Proprietor, who has dominium proprie dictum. Man has only
the Use, and Stewardship, and Employment of these things which are committed to
him, by the allowance of God's Providence. He has given dispensationem, the
employment of these things, not dominium, or the sovereign power over them. As
to Life, the case is clear, Man is not Dominus Vitae, but Custos; not the Lord
of his own Life, to lengthen or shorten it at pleasure, but only a Guardian to
keep it for God. And this is true, not only of Life, but of Time, Strength,
Wealth, Parts, yea of all that we have. All the right we have, is to prevent
the incroachment of our fellow Creatures: A right, by way of Charge and Trust,
as a Steward to the things committed to him; as a Workman to his Tools and
Instruments, to do his Work; or a Factor to the Estate wherewith he is
entrusted, but not an absolute, independent, uncontrolable Right. They are not
ours, to use as we think meet; or ours, to keep as long as we please: For in
giving to us, God never dispossessed himself; therefore he challenges his
Propriety and Dominion; Gold and Silver are mine, Haggai 2.8. And again, Hosea
2.9. I will take my Corn, and my Oil; I will recover my Flax. All is God's to
dispose of; in whatever hands it is, God can take and give at pleasure. Now
this Consideration does not only check our Usurpations, who seek to save and
steal as much as we can from God: Or quicken our faithfulness, that the supreme
Lord may not be deprived of his Right, but also much promote our resignation,
in leaving our selves, and all that is ours, to his disposal. We do but restore
him his own, or acquiesce in his Power and Sovereign Dominion.

(3.) God has a right of using all things thus in his Possession, according to
his own Pleasure. For Reason will tell us, that the Use, Benefit, and Utility
of any thing, belongs to him whose it is. So God is the sole Disposer of all
things; he made them for himself, and governs them Ultimately and
Terminatively, for himself: Some things immediately, all things ultimately. Of
him, through him, to him are all things, Romans 11.36. And, Prove. 16.4. God has
made all things for himself. All the Conditions of Men, Riches, Poverty,
Health, Sickness, Ease, Pain, Life, Death, and the kinds thereof, are all at
God's dispose, Romans 14.8, 9. So that the Sword was but as a Key to open
Heaven's Door to John the Baptist, to free him from a hard task-master, that he
might go home to his gracious Lord. Now this right of disposing, is of great
practical use, to keep us in a due Subjection to God's Laws, and Providence,
without murmuring or repining: We cannot say to him, What make thou? or why
do thou this? Isa. 45.9. It Is enough to us, God does it whose Right none can
question, or control his Intentions, or impeach his Liberty, or challenge him
because he governs us in this or that manner, or in another way than we would
have had him to have done.

2. His Almighty Power. God is able to do what he pleases, none can stay his
Hand, or stop his Work: So that whether we will or no, all our Affairs are at
God's disposal. If he be pleased to strip us, and bereave us, either of Life,
or the Comforts of Life, Estate, or dear Relations, or Liberty of Service:
There is no standing out against him. Therefore the best way is to submit, and
refer all to him. Job 9.12. He takes away, who can hinder him? So Job 33.12,
13. God is greater than man, why do thou strive against him, for he gives
not account of any of his Matters. Now this should lay Men low before God, and
silence all their Quarrellings. We all acknowledge that God's Power is Infinite;
yet what Worm is there that will submit willingly to him, do further than
themselves please? It Is evident, do what they can, God will be Master, and take
his own Way. All Events are in his hands. Our strivings may be sinful, but they
cannot be helpful to us. Mat. 6.27. Which of you by taking Thought, can add one
Cubit to his Stature? We cannot make our selves taller or shorter; yea, not
change the color of an Hair, to make it white or black. We may busy our selves
with anxious thoughts about Events, but what do we get by it? We cannot cure a
Disease in our Bodies, nor prevent a breach in our Relations: Nor increase our
Trading, nor draw Buyers to our selves. The Hearts of all Men are in God's
hands; and when we have done all, we must stand to God's allowance; therefore
it is best at first to refer all Events to him. God's Sovereignty shows, that
it is unjust if we consent not to it; but God's Almighty Power, that it is
fruitless if we do otherwise. God's Will does and must govern the Affairs of
the World: if he require our consent and submission; it is for our Profit, that
we show our Obedience and Adoration.

3. The third Ground is, He is incomprehensibly good and gracious to his
Children, that love him, and fear him, and will convert all that befalls them
to their Everlasting Good: So that God, as powerful, can do what he pleases;
God, as kind, will do what is for the best. Romans 8.28. All things shall work
together for good to them that love God. And Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North Winds,
and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out.
Out of what Corner soever the Wind blows, it blows good to the Saints. The
goodness of God is many ways seen in the Dispensations of his Providence;
partly in this, resigning is not the way to lose the Comfort which would most
please us, but to keep it still. Abraham by offering Isaac to God, had him
nevertheless; Heb. 11.19. Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even
from the dead: from whence also he received him in a Figure. There is a kind of
a Resurrection of our Comforts from the Dead, which makes them the sweeter to
us. We gave them to God, and he gives them back again; partly, because we
shall have better things of God, for we must not resign, out of an hope that
God will not take the Offer, as the promise of an hundred fold in this Life,
with Persecutions to those that have left Houses, and Lands, and Relations, for
Christ's sake and the Gospel's: Mark 10.30. But he shall receive an hundred
fold now in this Time, Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers, and
Children, and Lands, with Persecutions; and in the World to come Eternal Life:
Meaning thereby Peace of Conscience. And the least Blessing of God with a quiet
Conscience, is more worth than all the Goods in the World: Partly by support,
God will not be wholly wanting to his People, nor leave them utterly destitute.
1 Cor. 10.13. God is Faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what
you are able, but will with the Temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. Two things are promised here. First, The Gentleness and Wisdom
of his Conduct. Secondly, A comfortable Issue. For the present, when our
Condition is at worst, if it be not comfortable it will be tolerable: For the
future he will give you a way to escape. You are not cast into the deep Ocean,
where there are no Banks nor Bottom. As long as a Man can look to the end of an
Evil, he is not quite discouraged. As a Man in the deep Waters struggling for
Life, has hope as long as he can see Shore. So that Afflictions are qualified
both as to the Grievousness and Continuance, by the Support and the Issue we
may expect from God's Goodness. Now that this may the more prevail with us, God
is represented under the Notion of a Father; he does not only act as a Lord,
out of Sovereignty, or a Judge, according to Justice, but as a Father, who
loves his Children, and will not neglect them, or any of their Concernments:
Mat. 6.12. Your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of these things. As
Children naturally expect Food and Raiment from their Parents: So the Children
of God may in all Estates refer themselves to his Fatherly Providence. A Mother
cannot be so tender of a Sucking Child, as God is of his Children: Isa. 49.15.
Can a Woman forget her Child, her Sucking Child, her only Child, the Fruit of
her Womb? they may forget, deface the feelings of Nature, but I will not forget
you, says the Lord. Fix but this one Principle, that you have a Father in
Heaven, and then why should you disquiet your Thoughts about future Events?
Your Father knows how to breed up his own Children, and will order all things
for their Good.

2. The Causes of it, or the Subjective Graces it flows from.

1. Faith, or a sound belief of God's Being, and Providence, and gracious
Promises. They know there is a God, and that he has a particular care of Human
Affairs, and has made Promises that he will not leave his People to
insupportable Difficulties: Therefore they depend upon him, and refer all
Events that concern them, and theirs, to the disposal of his Fatherly
Government, Heb. 12.5, 6. They know not how he will cast the Event, but they
wholly leave it to him. Now this Submission is an especial act of Trust, and
the great Trust required of us as to Temporal Things: For we cannot be
confident of Success. We are to go on with our Duty, and refer the Event to
God. Submission after the Event, is Patience; but before the Event, is Faith:
for it argues high and honorable thoughts of God, when we can blindfold,
trust our All in his Hands, and refer all to his Pleasure, tho we know not what
will come of it. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring
it to pass. And Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee. And 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast all thy care upon the Lord, who cares for
thee. All this argues a sound belief of God's Being, and Providence; that he
will cast all our Matters so, as may be for his Glory, and our Good. Now on the
contrary, carking Care, and anxious thoughts about the Event, show little
Faith. Mat. 6.30. Shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little Faith? You
have not honorable Thoughts of God's Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, when you
cannot depend upon his Conduct, and Government.

2. It comes from Humility: It Is a great act of Humility, to be content to be
at God's finding, especially in such a proud Creature as Man, who would be as a
God to himself, providing for himself, both as to the avoiding Evil, and
obtaining Good. Witness our first Parents, who greedily nibled at that Bait,
Genesis 18.20. Behold, the Man is become as one of us; a smart Irrision! But the
humble Man is content to be dealt withal, as the Lord pleases, and wholly
submits to his Will, and waiting for the Issues of God's Providence, as he
is pleased to dispense them.

But more plainly, there are two Properties in Humility: They that are of an
humble and lowly Spirit, they think not great things of themselves, nor seek
great things for themselves. They have not high thoughts of themselves; it is
Self-conceit that establishes Self-will. We think our selves wiser and better
than we are; or that we deserve more, and can do more for our selves, otherwise
we would stoop to God, and let him choose our Inheritance for us. Prescribing to
God, always argues ascribing to our selves. We take too much upon us, when we
wield our own Fortune, without dependence upon God, or submission to him.

So again, They that will stand to God's Allowance, do not seek great things
for themselves. It may be, God may bestow great things upon them here in the
World, as he did upon David and Abraham, but this was not their aim. When God's
Will goes with ours, for Wealth, Riches, and Honor, then we may take it
sweetly out of the hands of his Providence, and use it for his Glory: but when
we seek Meat for our Lusts, and peremptorily fix our carnal Desires, and would
set God a Task to comply withal; it is the greatest pride imaginable, merely to
set their Hearts and Wills to be Rich and Great, 1 Timothy 6.9. You despise God if
you think to do it without him, and undertake a Task too hard for you; yea,
provoke him to disappoint you. But if you think to do it by God, you would make
him to serve with your Sins, or to maintain your Lusts; therefore nothing is
left, but to be content to be at God's finding, and let his Will interpose,
before you express any Will of your own.

3. It comes from Mortification, and deadness to the World, and weanedness
from the Comforts of it; or an indifferency of mind to all future worldly
Events. For as long as there remains in us an over-eager desire of any good
that we want, or of any thing that we would fain have, or be in the World, and
the Heart runs out inordinately and impetuously upon it, we can never resign
up our selves to the Will of God: As Rachel, Genesis 30.1. Give me Children, or
else I die. Words of impatiency, and fixedness of Will on a particular worldly
Comfort.

The motions of Lust are rapid and vehement, as Jam. 4.2, 3. Ye lust, and have
not; ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, and have
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. See how
eager Men are, to have what they love, or to pursue after those things which
are a satisfaction to their Lusts. First, There was Coveting, and that bred
Envyings and Emulations; and those Emulations bred Fighting and Warring, which
made way for Bloodshed and Destruction; and then they would draw God into the
Quarrel, and his Providence must laequey on their carnal Humors: but all in
vain, and therefore it is good not to be too eager to have what we love; for
this is the way, to be either denied, or to have it with a Curse; usually Men
are passionate, because they would not have the Flesh want its Contentment. But
the Rule is, not my Will, but thine be done. The mortified Heart, whatever it
wants or desires, it leaves to God. A Christian should be positive in
nothing but his Duty.

There is a fixed Resolution becomes us if God will deliver: well, but if not,
we will patiently bear his pleasure. When Jonah's Goard is blasted, nothing
will please him but Death. Desires pettishly solicited, and finally crossed and
disappointed, breed Vexation; and over-valued Comforts, will soon breed our
Trouble. Jonah 4.8. Do thou well to be angry because of the Gourd? And he
said, I do well to be Angry: And he requested for himself that he might die.
Therefore we must sit loose from the Creature, that we may entirely refer all
to God.

3. The Fruits, or excellent Advantages we have thereby.

1. It breeds a Contentation in every Condition wherein God has set us:
though it be not so pleasing to us, yet it is that which God appoints, be we
Rich, or be we Poor, Solitary, or full of Company of Friends and Relations:
Phil. 4.12. I know both how to be abased, and how to abound every where, and in
all things. I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound,
and suffer need. They never quarrel with God's Government, but take their Lot
as they find it. And be their way to Heaven fair or foul, smooth or cragged,
up-hill or down-hill, yet they go on in their Journey. Surely, it is the duty of
Christians to be contented with what God will have us to be: Heb. 13.5. Be
content with such things as you have. We must not resign our selves to God in
Name and Pretense, but in Deed and Reality; and when our Resignation is tried,
it must be verified. Now the Reality is tried, when the Will of God is declared
by the Event. Many resign themselves to God, with an hope that God will not
take them at their word, but that is falsehood and hypocrisy; if God takes any
thing from them, they are troubled: but the true Resignation, breeds a
willingness to resign our Comforts when God calls for them, be they never so
dear to us.

2. It causes us to sit loose from the Creature. A being fixed, or cleaving,
or holding to any State or Condition in the World, or any Comfort of ours, be
it never so aimable, pleasant or suitable to our desires, leaves no room for
Submission or Resignation to the Will of God. For so far as your Souls are
bound up with any Creature, so far you are in danger of denying, or not
consenting to his Sovereignty and Authority over us. It Is a Death to many to
think of a Change or Divorce from that State in which they are. But a sober
mortifyed Christian holds all his Comforts at God's Will and Pleasure, and is
ready to resign them when God calls for them. As David speaks of carrying
his Life in his Hands: so should we all Worldly Things, as ready to give them
up if the Will of the Lord be so: Otherwise we make a Snare for our selves, and
the over-valued natural Comfort, is a Door open to let in trouble to the Soul:
It Is our Affection causes our Affliction. The Apostle coupleth Temperance and
Patience together, 2 Pet. 1.6. To Temperance Patience. And 1 Cor. 7.30. And
they that weep as tho they wept not, and they that rejoice as tho they rejoiced
not. If we rejoice as tho we rejoiced not, we shall weep as tho we wept not:
Otherwise to be crossed in a small matter, breeds great Vexation.

3. It cures our distrustful Fears, and Cares. Carking Solicitude comes from
want of Resignation. We would be our own Carvers, and take God's Work out of
his Hand, not daring to rely upon his Providence, and Promise, nor to submit to
the Event as he shall dispose it for us. Whereas if you could refer your selves
to God, and attend upon the Issues of his Holy Government, you would find this
carking both needless, and fruitless. What need we trouble our selves about
what God will do for us, or needlessly take a Burden upon our selves, of which
God is willing to ease us? God has a prospect of all future Contingencies at
once, which we have not: And is faithful to dispose of them for his own Glory,
and our Good. Could we believe this, and depend upon this, it would ease us of
many troublesome Thoughts, Prove. 16.3. Commit thy Way unto the Lord, and thy
Thoughts shall be established. And Psalm. 112.7. His Heart is fixed, trusting in
the Lord.

4. It would prevent Repinings and Murmurings at God's Dispensations, because
it is not according to our Mind. For we are not to sit Judges of God's Actions,
or to like and dislike the Disposals of his Providence at our Will and
Pleasure. The Words for Murmerers and Complainers, Jude 16. is, (...), Blamers
of their Lot and Portion, because they set up another Scheme and Model of
Providence in their own Minds, and have not resigned up themselves to the Will
of God. You should count that Good, which God does, for his Will is the Supreme
Rule and Reason of all Things.

5. That we may go on cheerfully in our Duty, whether of our general or our
particular Calling, Let us mind the work God has given us to do, and let God
take care of the Success. 1 Chronicles. 19.13. Be of good Courage, and let us behave
our selves valiently, for our People, and for the Cities of our God: And let
the Lord do what is Good in his Sight. A Christian should take more care what
he should do, than what shall become of him; he can never be comfortable in the
work of his Calling, nor have a quiet frame of Spirit, till he can refer all
things to God, but will still be distracted with anxious and dubious Thoughts.
Luke 12.29. Neither be ye of doubtful Mind: In the Margin, It Is Be not in
careful Suspense. It Is a Blessed Frame of Spirit to be eased of those
tumultuous, and unquiet Thoughts, which will haunt us in our Calling. So for
our general Calling: Make sure of Heaven and refer other things to God, Mat.
6.33. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these
Things shall be added unto you.

6. To breed a Godly Resolution in us in all Sufferings, tho we know not the
Event, as the Three Children, Dan. 3.16, 17. We are not careful to answer thee
in this matter. Our God is able to deliver us: But if not, be it known unto
thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image
which thou have set up.

USE.
Use is, To persuade us to this Resignation of our Wills to the Will of God,
and to put our selves as a Dye in the Hands of his Providence, that the Cast
may fall as God pleases. I know, it is difficult to bring our selves to such an
aequanimity, and we shall find distrusts when means fail. And it is hard to
persuade Men against present sense, that it is good to be Poor, and Sick, and
Imprisoned, and Afflicted, and to be deprived of dear Relations. That Poverty
is good, that we may not be proud; that Diseases are good, that we may learn
Patience; Trouble good, that we may have often recourse to God; Frowns of the
World good, that we may have more humble familiarity with God; that Breaches
upon near Relations are good, that we might more entirely seek our happiness in
God. That if God had not taken away our Comforts, they might have taken us away
from him: If we had not met with some outward and worldly Loss, we might have
lost our Souls; that the lessening of our Estate might occasion the diminishing
of our Lusts. Surely these things should not be strange to them, that know what
a God they serve, and measure all things by their chief Good and supreme
Happiness.

Let me press you to two things.

1. Mortification and weanedness from the World, is necessary. There is no
talking of referring all things to God, while worldly Affections reign in us:
If once your chief care be for Heavenly Things, you will soon be contented with
a moderate supply of Earthly Things: Carnal Affections are vehement, and must
have satisfaction. A Man that savoureth the things of the Flesh, will think
himself undone, when his Relations, Pleasure, Honor, and Plenty, are taken
away; but a gracious Heart, that is weaned from the World, sees enough in God's
Favor to make up the loss of these things.

2. Believe the particularity of his Providence, which reaches to all things;
especially to those who have a care of his Glory, and seek his Kingdom. Justin
Martyr tells us, That it is the Opinion of some Philosophers, That God has a
care of the Universe, but not of the Kinds and Species of all things, much less
of the Individuals, that is, of Me, or Thee. If this were true, we were left to
our own Providence; this would destroy all Prayer and Praise, Love and Trust.
No! all things are subject to his Providence. He upholdeth all things by the
Word of his Power. Heb. 1.3. All things are subject to his Providence, and
supported by the same Word by which they were created. He holds all things in
his Almighty grasp: Job 6.9. That he would let loose his Hand, and cut me off;
God could easily do it. All Creatures are at his finding; Matthew. 10.29. A
Sparrow shall not fall to the ground without your Heavenly Father. The least of
the Creatures does not die casually; they cannot kill a Sparrow, more than
God's Providence sees fit to permit and order. Now we may reason as the
Apostle; Does God take care of Sparrows, and Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. ye are of more
value than many Sparrows: much more Believers in Christ. The Hairs of your Head
are numbered, Matthew. 10.30, 31. God has the knowledge, and care, and overruling
of the least things that belong to you, or shall befall you. They are the Kernel
of Mankind, the First Fruits of his Creatures, for whose sake the World is
continued, and without whom it would be brought to an end. In a Family,
Children are much more cared for than Dogs and Swine. 1 Timothy 4.10. God, who is
the Savior of all Men, especially of those that believe. The Lord's Portion is
his People, God cares for them in a peculiar manner, hears their Prayers,
how despicable soever they are in the World, Psalm. 34.6. This poor Man cried
unto the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles.
He cares for all things wherein they are concerned, Job. 1.10. Have thou not
made an Hedge about him, and about all that he has, on every side? Providence
does so guard them, and every thing that is theirs, that without God's
permission, Satan or his Instruments cannot touch them: He observes their
Tears, Fears, Haltings, Wanderings, Psalm. 56.9. Thou tellest all my Wanderings,
put thou my Tears in thy Bottle, are they not in thy Book? Now this is a mighty
relief to Faith; can we be backward to trust him, who has such a particular
care over us, our Persons, Name, Estate, and Relations?

FINIS.

