A TREATISE OF THE Incomparableness of God In his BEING, ATTRIBUTES, WORKS and
WORD,
opened and applied.

By Geo. Swinnocke, M. A. Sometime Preacher of the Gospel at great Kimbell in
the County of Bucks.

Vera cognitio Dei, est virtus p^r quam non modo concipimus esse aliquem Deum,
sed etiam tenemus quod de eo scire nostra interest, ut eum recte colamus.
Polan. Syntag. Theolog. lib. 9. cap. 7.

(...), John. 17.3.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers Chapel,
1672.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL Henry Ashhurst, Junior, Esquire; And to the HONORABLE LADY
Diana Ashhurst HIS Religious CONSORT.
SVch is the excellency of the Soul of Man, that the very Heathen, whose Souls
were almost wholly immerst in grease and sensuality, and served but as Salt, to
preserve their Bodies for a time from putrefaction (according to the Opinion of
one of the most ingenious among them) have acknowledged it a Divine Plant, a
drop of the Ocean of Beings, a Ray of a Deity; and the Body but the Case or
Cabinet of this Jewel. The dim Rush-light of Nature has enabled some of them
to discern the spirituality, quick, comprehensive, self-reflective motions, and
immortality of (their specifical forms as they called) their Souls, and thence
to conclude their worth and nobleness: But the clear Sun-light of Scripture
advantageth unto a fuller discovery of its excellency. It shows us its
Original, that it is of Celestial extraction, created immediately by the Father
of Spirits, a beam of the Sun of Righteousness, a bubble of the Fountain of
Life, of a much higher descent then the House of Clay, and earthly Tabernacle
the Body, Genesis 2.7. Heb. 12.9. Zach. 12.1. It acquaints us with its duration,
that it runs parallel with the line of eternity, and swallows up Years and
Ages, and Generations, and thousands of thousands, and millions of millions, as
small drops and minutes, and nothings in the bottomless Ocean, and endlesness
of its abode and continuance. When the Body, like the Sacrifice, falls to the
Earth, and is turned into ashes; the Soul, like the Flame, aspireth and
ascends to God, Eccles. 12.7. Philip. 1.23. Math. 10.28. Math. 22.31, 32. It
manifests the Souls capacity, how no Being is excepted from its
consideration, all are within its compass and horizon; It can view every with
its intellectual Eye. It is not bounded with corporeal Beings, nor limited with
material Objects, nor circumscribed with created Essences; but is capable of
apprehending the first Cause, the Being of Beings, the Original of all things.
It is able not only to retrospect upon its own motions, and to survey the
several parts, and ranks, and orders, and rarities, and delicacies, and
excellencies of the Earth, and this sublunary World; but also to ascend to the
highest Heavens, and behold the beautiful Face of the blessed God, till it has
looked it self into the very likeness, and thereby rendered it self fit and meet
for his dearest Love, and eternal Embraces.

The excellency of our Souls does eminently appear in its receptiveness of the
Divine Image: (Great Princes do not stamp their Image on mean things, as Brass
and Pewter, but on the most excellent metals, as Silver and Gold,) Ephesians. 4.23,
24. Coloss. 3.10. Genesis 1.26. And its capableness of enjoying immediately the
blessed God. To stand before Kings does both speak and make a person honorable
and worthy. Prove. 22.29. Isa. 43.5.
God alone is the Fountain of Honor, and the Standard of Excellency; Every
Being is his Coin, and he stampeth on it the rate it shall go at. The Holiness
and Happiness of the rational Creature consists in these two: His Holiness,
in conformity to God; his Happiness, in communion with him: And these two have
a dependence on each other. They only who are like him, can enjoy him: If we
say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and the Truth is
not in us, 1 John 1.5. Holiness, or the Image of God, is not only an
indispensable condition, without which no man shall enjoy God, Heb. 12.14. John
3.3. But withal an absolutely necessary disposition, without which no man can
enjoy God, Coloss. 1.12. 2 Cor. 5. And as Conformity disposes for Communion,
so Communion increases Conformity; Vision causes assimulation in Nature, Genesis
31.38, 39. Grace, 2 Cor. 3.18. And glory, 1 John 3.2.

Though the motions of the Understanding and Will are in some respect circular,
yet the Understanding is the first mover, and the leading faculty, and so the
knowledge of the blessed God is both antecedent to, and productive of this
Image. Though the knowledge of Creatures puffs up, polluteth, and so debaseth
and destroys the Soul, (sinking it the deeper into Hell; as a Vessel laden
with Silver and Gold, and the most precious Commodities, when it miscarrieth,
sinketh the deeper for its weight and burden,) 1 Cor. 8.1. Luke 12.47, 48. Yet
the Knowledge of God is humbling, advancing, purifying and saving, Job 42. 2
Peter 3.18. John 17.3. The incomparable excellency of the boundless blessed
God, is the Subject of this Treatise which I present to you both, as a
Testimony of the Honor and Service I owe to you, and of my desire to be
instrumental for your spiritual and eternal good. The Subject is the highest
imaginable; and though the manner of handling it be plain and ordinary, and
infinitely below and unbecoming the Divine Majesty, (For who can express his
noble Acts, or display all his Praise, Psalm. 108.2.) yet the matter of it does
deserve, and may prevail for your acceptance of it.

If Knowledge be the excellency of a Man, and differenceth him from a Beast;
surely then Divine Knowledge, or the Knowledge of God in Christ, is the
excellency of a Christian, and differenceth him from other Men. Our awe of,
love to, and trust in the Divine Majesty, are founded in the right knowledge of
him. Creatures, the more they are known, the less they are esteemed; but the
more the blessed God is known, the more he is prized, desired and obeyed, Psalm.
73.25. Psalm. 76.7. Psalm. 90.11. Psalm. 9.10. Our hatred of Sin, and contempt of
the World, proceed from our acquaintance with God: He only has hateful
thoughts of Sin, and self-loathing apprehensions because of it; who has seen
the great and glorious, the good and gracious God, whose Authority is
contemned, whose Law is violated, whose Name is dishonored, whose Image is
defaced, and whose Love is abused by it, Job 42.6. Isa. 6.5. He only lives
above this present evil World, and all the Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures
thereof; who can look beyond it, to the infinite God, and those unsearchable
Riches, and Weights of Glory, and Rivers of Pleasures, that are in and with
him. That which was rich and glorious, and pleasant to a Soul before, has now
no worth, no glory, no pleasure, by reason of that wealth, and glory, and
pleasure which does so infinitely exceed. When the God of Glory appeared to
Abraham, he quickly and quietly left his Country and Kindred, and followed God,
not knowing whither he went, Gent 12.1, 2. Acts 7.3. If the God of Glory appear
to your Souls, you will soon wink upon these withering Vanities, broken
Cisterns, and gilded Nothings, and count them all but Dung and Dross, for the
excellency of the Knowledge of him in Christ.

You have begun well, go on and persevere in well-doing: I shall give you the
same Counsel which the Holy Apostle gives to those of whom he was persuaded,
that they had those things which accompanied Salvation, Heb. 6.9. Take heed
least there be in you an evil heart of unbelief, whereby ye should depart away
from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Look diligently, least ye should fail of the
Grace of God, Heb 12.15. When false Coin is common abroad, we are the more
careful what Money we take; when much false Grace is up and down amongst us,
and so many please themselves with their Profession, or spiritual Privileges,
or sacred Performances, or siding with this or that Party, and form of Worship,
or the respect and repute they have with others: It concerns you to be the more
suspicious of your Selves, least you should fail of that Grace of God, which
conformeth the Heart to the nature, and the life to the Will and Law of God.

SIR,
YOu are descended of a worthy, ancient, and religious Family: Your
Grandfather (as I have heard) was eminent for Holiness: Your Father is noted,
and honored, for one that fears God above many; you have hereby the more
encouragement, advantage and engagement to exercise your self to godliness.
Tamerlane made it his practice to read often the Heroic Deeds of his
Progenitors (not as proud of them, or boasting in them, but) as glorious
Patterns, to inflame his Soul with a love of their Virtues. Man is a Creature
that is led more by the Eye then the Ear, by Patterns then by Precepts; and no
Patterns are more prevalent, then of those whom Nature and Grace oblige us to
esteem and affect. These examples, above all others, as flaming Beacons on an
Hill, call us to a stout defense of Virtue, when it is invaded by its Enemies.
Alexander finding one of his Name cowardly, charged him to change his Name, or
to become valiant. When one of the Scipio's (descended of Scipio Affrican)
became dissolute: The Roman Senate ordered him to put off that Ring, which he
wore as the Badge of his Noble Family, because, by his vicious Life, he was a
Reproach to it. The truth is, a wicked Son of a godly Father (as Uriah)
carries Letters of his own condemnation about him, causing the Patterns and
Precepts of his Family to be Auxiliaries to his own reproach and infamy; whilst
the light and luster of his Ancestors renders his works of darkness the more
gross and palpable. I mention not these things, as suspecting your integrity;
but to provoke and quicken you to the greater care and circumspection in your
carriage and conversation.


MADAM,
YOur Birth is Daughter to the Right Honorable the Lord Paget.
Honorable, but such Honor without Holiness extends not beyond the Meridian
of this World; Grace only is eternal Glory. That Honor which is woven in the
finest Tapestry of earthly Privileges, will lose color, and fade away; but
the Knowledge of God is a possession for ever. Nobility by Parents is but
Nobility by Parchment, and that is but skin-deep at most, and will wast with
time. Godliness alone is that Nobility which no Age can consume, and which will
run parallel with the line of eternity.

The whole Earth has not a pleasanter sight, then Greatness joined with
Goodness. Greatness it self is venerable, but Goodness joined with it, adds
a new Splendor and luster to it; as a sparkling Diamond set in a Gold-Ring, it
attracteth the Eyes, and challenges a greater reverence and respect from all.
Evil Greatness is a swelling Dropsy, a Disease of the Body Politic, as
intolerable a burden as the Earth groans under; but Grace and Virtue are the
more excellent and amiable by the greatness of the Person in whom they dwell.
It will be your Crown and Credit to prefer God before the World, to esteem
Holiness as the only Beauty, and a Title to the Covenant, as the only Riches
of your immortal Soul.


Ye have both near and dear Relations, whose Hearts will rejoice in your
perseverance and progress in the ways of God's Commandments: That you may be
helps to each other in the best things, provoke one another to love, and to
good Works, live long together on Earth, and for ever together in Heaven, is
the prayer

Of your Servant in the Lord, Geo. Swinnocke.

The several CHAPTERS IN THIS TREATISE.
CHapter 1. The Preface and Coherence of the Text, Page 1. Chap. 2. God
incomparable in his Being, page 11. Chap. 3. God incomparable in his Being, as
from himself, for himself, and wholly independent on any other, page 17. Chap.
4. God incomparable in his Being, as it is absolutely perfect, universal and
unchangeable, page 23. Chap. 5. God incomparable in his Being, as it is
eternal, and without composition, page 33. Chap. 6. God incomparable in his
Being, as it is infinite and incomprehensible, page 40. Chap. 7. God
incomparable in his Attributes, his Holiness and Wisdom, page 51. Chap. 8. God
incomparable in his Attributes, in his Knowledge and Faithfulness, page 76.
Chap. 9. God incomparable in his Mercy and Patience, page 88. Chap. 10, God
incomparable in his Attributes, as they are from him, as they are his Essence,
as they are all one in him, as they are in him in an infinite manner, page 99.
Chap. 11. God incomparable in his Works, Creation and Providence, page 106.
Chap. 12. God incomparable in the Work of Redemption; He can do all things,
page 124. Chap. 12. God incomparable in the manner of his working: He works
irresistibly, arbitrarily, page 133. Chap. 13. God incomparable in his working:
He does it with the greatest ease, and without any help, page 141. Chap. 14.
God is incomparable in his Word, in its Authority, Condescension and Efficacy,
page 154. Chap. 15. God is incomparable in his Word, Purity, Mysteries,
Phophesies, page 165. Chap. 16. God incomparable in his Word, as it is
converting, affrighting and comforting, page 174. Chap. 17. How great is the
malignity of Sin, which contemns, dishonors and opposes this God, page
182. Chap. 19. Showing how great is the madness and misery of impenitent
Sinners, page 193. Chap. 21. How moustrous is their Pride, who compare
themselves with the incomparable God, page 209. Chap. 22. Incomparable Worship
and Service due to God, page 217. Chap. 23. Motives to acquaintance with the
incomparable God, the knowledge of whom is sanctifying, satisfying and saving,
page 237. Chap. 24. Means of acquaintance with God; a sense of our ignorance;
attendance on the Word, servent Prayer. Chap. 25. Exhort to choose God for our
Portion. Chap. 26. Give God the glory of his incomparable Excellency, with some
Considerations to enforce it. Chap. 27. Comforts to those that have this
incomparable God for their Portion.
PSALM 89.6. For who in the Heavens can be compared to the Lord? who among the
Sons of the Mighty can be likened to the Lord.


CHAP. I. The Preface and meaning of the Text.
IT is certain, that our happiness in the other World will consist in part in
our perfect knowledge of the blessed and boundless God: When we shall know him
as we are known of him, we shall be blessed as he is blessed; and when we shall
see him as he is, we shall be like him in purity and felicity; we shall be
fully satisfied with his likeness and his love. Rich must be the delight which
the most large and noble faculty of man his understanding shall receive, in its
intimate acquaintance with, and clear and full apprehension of the highest
Truth. And it is as certain, that our holiness in this World does not a little
depend upon our knowledge of him, whose Name alone is excellent. None wander
from him, prefer the Flesh and World before him, and in their whole lives walk
contrary to him; but from their ignorance of him. They are estranged from the
life of God (i. e. a spiritual heavenly conversation) through the ignorance
that is in them, because of the blindness of their Hearts. Ephesians. 4.18.
Dark corners of an House are filled with Dust, dark Cellars with Vermin, and
dark Hearts with cursed Lusts: None are enlarged in desires after God, or
ravished with delight in God, or can cast their Souls and all their Concerns on
God; but those that are acquainted with him. They who know his beauty and
bounty, cannot but love him, and they who know his power and faithfulness,
cannot but trust him: They who know thy Name, will put their trust in thee,
Psalm. 9.10. Whence comes it to pass, that Believers can trample on the Riches
and Treasures, and Wealth of this beggarly World, that they can lay their white
and yellow Earth, their Silver and Gold at the Apostles Feet, that they can
suffer the spoiling of their Goods (not only patiently, but) joyfully; Heb.
10.34.
but from the knowledge of him who is true riches, Luke 16.11. Substance, Prove.
8.21. an enduring Substance, Job 10.34. A bottomless Mine of unsearchable
Riches, Ephesians. 3.8. Whence is it that they can refuse to be called the Sons of
Kings Daughters, that they can contemn Honors and Preferments, spurn Crowns
and Scepters under their Feet, but from the knowledge of him who is their Crown
of Glory, their Diadem of Renown, and the praise of all his Saints, Heb. 11.24,
25. That which to the sensual Worldling is so glorious, has no glory in the
Believers Eye, by reason of the Lord of Glory, who does so infinitely excel.
Whence is it, that they can hate Father, Mother, Wife, Child, Liberty; yea,
Life it self, and leave all at the Call and Command of their Maker, but from
the knowledge of him who is (as Elkanah said to Hannah) better to them then ten
Sons, then all Relations, then the whole Creation. Those Stars vanish and
disappear, when once this Sun of Righteousness arises: How quickly, how
quietly, without any hesistancy or reluctance, will Abraham leave his Country
and Kindred, and Fathers House, when once the God of Glory appears to him,
Acts 9.2, 3, 4. In a word, whence is it, that they escape the pollutions of the
World (in which others are mired, drowned and destroyed,) but through the
knowledge of God. 2 Pet. 2.20. Well may our Lord Jesus say, It is life eternal,
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. To know
God affectionately, as our chiefest good, so as to give him our superlative
esteem, and intensest love, is spiritual life here, in the habit or principle,
as also in the act and exercise of it; and it is the beginning seed,
preparation and way of our eternal life hereafter. But who can know that being
which infinitely passes all knowledge: He that would know God fully, must be
God himself; and he who would tell you what God is in any measure answerable to
his excellency, had need to know him as he is known of him. And supposing I
were able to speak of the perfection of God, as one that, like the great
Apostle, had been caught up into the third Heavens: I question whether, if I
had a Tongue to speak of him after that manner, ye had Ears to hear of him, or
Hearts to understand what I should speak. But though I am not able to speak,
nor you to hear of God, according to his perfection, yet through the assistance
of the Holy Ghost so much may be spoken and heard of him, as may tend to our
present Sanctification and future Salvation. Though we cannot see him as he is,
yet we may see him as he is not; though the height of his being be above the
reach of our Understandings, we may get somewhat nearer to him (and indeed we
have no other way while we are here then) by climbing upon the shoulders of all
created excellencies, and there proclaiming, That none in the Heavens is to be
compared to the Lord, that none among the Sons of the Mighty is like unto the
Lord.

In the words, the Psalmist compares God with, and prefereth God before the
highest, the greatest in Heaven and Earth.

In the words we have a Comparison and a Praelation.

1. A Comparison, and this is between God and those that are most excellent in
Heaven, and the mightiest on Earth.

2. A Praelation, or preferring God before whatsoever is excellent in Heaven or
Earth: The Interrogation is a strong negation, as is frequent in Scripture,
Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin; i.
e. None can say I have made my Heart clean, or am pure from my Sin. So Exodus
15.11. Who is like to thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like thee, glorious
in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders; that is, None is like Thee
among the gods, none is so glorious in Holiness, so fearful in Praises, such a
wonder-working God as thou art. Thus the Psalmist understands the Text, For
who in the Heavens is to be compared to the Lord? Who among the Sons of the
Mighty can be likened to the Lord; i. e. None in the Heavens, none among the
Sons of the Mighty on Earth is comparable to Jehovah.

The interpretation of the words.
I shall first give you the meaning of the words, and then lay down the
Doctrine, which will be the foundation of my Discourse on the Subject.

For this causal Particle gives the reason why Saints and Angels should join
together in the praise of God. The Heavens shall praise thy Wonders, O Lord,
Verse 5.
thy faithfulness also in the Congregation of the Saints: For who in the
Heavens is to be compared to the Lord. By the Heavens Calvin understands the
holy Angels, who rejoice in the Churches welfare, and bless God for preserving
his People, and performing his Promises to them; and it is apparent by the
Apostle, that Angels are present in the Congregation of the Saints, 1 Cor.
11.11. And so this Text adds another Ground for their admiration of the great
God, viz. his incomparable excellency. His high and matchless Perfections, call
for high and matchless Praises. Others take the Text as a ground for the
confirmation of the Psalmists Faith in the Covenant God had made with him,
mentioned Verse 3, 4. namely, God's Superiority over Angels in Heaven, and Men
on Earth; therefore they cannot hinder him in the accomplishment of his Word,
being infinitely inferior to him.

Who in the Heavens? Who in the Sky? Ainsworth reads it. In the Clouds (in
Nubibus aequabitur), is to be equaled (says Calvin) to Jehovah, Quis enim in
superiore nube par aestimetur Jehova. Who in the higher Clouds is equal to
Jehovah, so Tremell. reads it.

Who in the Heavens? i. e. say some, in the Starry-Heavens, among the
Celestial Bodies, Sun, Moon or Stars; which were adored as gods, not only by
the Persians, but also by some Idolatrous Jews, because of their brightness and
beauty, their luster and glory. Which of all those famous Lamps, and heavenly
Luminaries, is to be compared to the Father of Lights, and Sun of
Righteousness? They may glister like Glowormes in the Night of Paganism, among
them who are covered with the Mantle of Darkness; but when this Sun arises,
and day appears, they all vanish and disappear.

Who in the Heavens? i. e. say others, in the Heaven of Heavens, the highest,
the third Heavens, among the Celestial Spirits, Cherubims and Seraphims,
Angels and Archangels, Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominions? Who
among the innumerable company of Angels? who among those pure, those perfect
Spirits (who are the ancientest, the honourablest House of the Creation) is to
be compared to the Father of Spirits?

Though Angels are glorious Creatures considered simply, and in themselves, in
respect of their Power, Wisdom, Purity and Beauty; yet if they be considered
comparatively with the blessed God, I may say of them as the Apostle does of
the Jewish Worship (which was glorious, by reason of its Divine Institution,)
in comparison with the Christian Worship, 2 Cor. 3.10.) Even that which was
glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the Glory that excels.

Is to be compared to Jehovah? Is to be likened to Jehovah? Is to be equaled to
Jehovah? Is to be put in the Scales, and worthy to be weighed with Jehovah,
that Being of Beings, that God of Gods.

To Jehovah? This name Jehovah is the chief and most proper name of God: It is
derived from Haiah fuit, and signifies that Being which was, is, and is to
come; which is always the same, and the cause of all other Beings, Rev. 1.4,
6. Psalm. 102.28. Acts 17.28. and which gives a being to his Word and Promises.
In Heaven there is among glorious Angels no such Being.

Who amongst the Sons of the Mighty? Inter filios fortium. Who among the Sons
of the strong, Jun. reads it. Among the Sons of the Gods, says Calvin, so the
Seventy read it, and understand (with the Chaldee Paraphrase) Angels, who are
called Sons of God, Job 1.6. and Job. 38.7. But we having understood Angels,
the best and highest in Heaven, by the first interrogation, Who in the Heavens
is to be compared to the Lord? It may be most convenient to understand in this
place, by Sons of the Mighty, the best and highest on Earth, the greatest and
most gracious Princes and Potentates, who are higher by head and shoulders then
others. These are called Gods, and Sons of the most High, or Almighty, Psalm.
82.6. And hereby the Prophet challenges both Worlds, Heaven and Earth, to
bring forth any that may equal or compare with Jehovah.

Can be likened to the Lord? Is such a Being as he is, can speak or act as he
does, is in any respect worthy to be named with him.

CHAP. II. God is incomparable; 1. In his Being.
THe Doctrine which I shall raise out of the words, is this, That God is
incomparable; Or, there is none among the highest, the holiest, in Heaven or
Earth like unto Jehovah. Take the greatest, the most excellent of Beings in
this or the other World, yet they come infinitely short of this Being of
Beings? Psalm. 86.8. Among the gods, there is none like unto thee, O Lord; Mark,
the Psalmist does not choose a weak Adversary for God to contend with and
conquer, but the strongest. He does not compare God with the meanest and
lowest, but even with the highest, and prefers God before them. Among the gods,
there is none like unto thee, O Lord.

1. Among those that are Gods by unjust usurpation, as evil Angels are, who are
called The Princes of the Powers of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. And the gods of this
World, 2 Cor. 4.4. Or, as Antichrist, who exalts himself above all that is
called God, or is worshipped; So that he as God sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Among these, there is none like
unto thee, O Lord. These unclean Beasts are unworthy to be mentioned with the
High, the holy God.

2. Among those that are gods by men's erroneous Persuasions and Opinions, as
Idols, and those Deities which the Heathen worship; There is none like to thee,
O Lord. Their Idols are Silver and Gold, the Work of men's hands: They have
Mouths, but they speak not, Eyes have they, but they see not. They have Ears,
but they hear not; Noses have they, but they smell not: They have Hands, but
they handle not; Feet have they, but they walk not, neither speak they through
their Throat, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, 7. Idols are the work of the Creatures, and
their Makers are infinitely below the Creator; therefore they themselves are
much more. We know that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that there is none
other God but one, 1 Cor. 8.4. Though an Idol be somewhat materially, yet it is
nothing formally, as to the intent or purpose for which it is worshipped.

3. Minuisti illum paululum a deo. Calvin.
Among those that are gods by Divine Ordination, as Angels, Psalm. 8.5.
Magistrates, Psalm. 82.66. (who have the Image of a Deity stamped on them, in
their Authority and Dominion over others,) none is to be compared to Jehovah.
These are gods by derivation, by deputation; as subordinate Magistrates are
commissionated by the Supreme, and have a Beam of his Power communicated to
them, but still remain weak Creatures, limited by his Precepts, and liable to
his Judgment. So Angels and Kings have some impressions of a Deity on them; but
their Power is derivative from God, and limited by his will; yea, their Essence
is from him, their Subsistence is by him, and their Dependence is every moment
upon him. Hence he is called the most high, Psalm. 92.1. O thou most high. Kings
and Princes are high, Angels and Archangels are higher; but Jehovah only is
the most high, Eccles. 5.8. He that is higher then the highest considers.

For the explication of this Doctrine, the truth of it will be evident, if we
consider the true God, and compare him with the highest, and most excellent in
Heaven and Earth.

1. In his Being. 2. In his Attributes. 3. In his Works. 4. In his Word.
1. God is incomparable in his Being: God has not only a Being, but an
excellency in his Being; therefore he is called, His Excellency: Should not his
Excellency make you afraid, Job 13.11. And he is said alone to be Excellent,
Thy Name alone is Excellent, Psalm. 148.13.

By Name, is meant sometimes any thing whereby God makes himself known, Exodus
20.7. But here the Being of God, or God himself, as Prove. 18.10. The Name of
the Lord is a strong Tower; i. e. God himself is a strong Tower, Psalm. 76.1.
His Name is great in Israel; i. e. The Being of the great God is magnified in
his Church, or among his Chosen. Now his Being alone is excellent, because
there is no such Being as his: There is no Being excellent besides his, because
there is no Being excellent like his. He is excellent in all, above all, and
beyond all.

His Being is such a Being, that he alone is, and all besides are non entities,
and no Beings in comparison of him. His Name speaks the incomparable nature of
his Being. And God said unto Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the Children of
Israel I am has sent thee. I am, I a Being that really is, beside whom there
is none has sent thee: What Prince, what Potentate can say I am? What Angel,
what Archangel can say I am? No, this is the proper name of Jehovah.

Therefore when he promises himself to be the Reward of his People, he does
promise himself under the Notion of Essence, Being, Substance, in opposition to
all others which are but Shadows and Nothings to him; Prove. 2.7. He lays up
sound Wisdom (Hebr. essentiam Essence) for the Righteous: Prove. 8.21. I will
cause them that love me, to inherit Substance. Junius reads it, Vt posside aut
id quod est, I will cause them that love me to possess that which is. God is,
and all other Beings are not in comparison of him, Dan. 4.35. All the
Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as Nothing. God is, and all others are
Nothing; yea, if it were possible to apprehend it, less then Nothing. It Is a
notable expression of the Holy Ghost, to set forth the excellency of Gods
Being; and the pitifulness, meanness, and nothingness of all other Beings, Isa.
40.15, 16, 17. Behold! (a note of Attention and Admiration) the Nations (the
Chaldeans that are our Lords and Masters, or all Nations of the World, be they
never so high, great, strong, or glorious) are as the drop of a Bucket, (which
falls from the Bucket, or hangs on it, when the water is powered out, yet
diminishes not the measure) and the small dust of the Balance, (which
cleaves to the Scales, when the Spice is put out, yet alters not the weight,
it is so little). Behold! (wonder, be amazed at it,) he takes up the Isles
(the great, large, vast Islands of the World) as a very little thing, (as poor
small inconsiderable things:) All Nations before him are as nothing. (Not only
the great Islands, but also the Continents, with the several innumerable
Creatures in them, are not only little to this God, but as nothing, as no
Being to his Being,) and they are counted to him less then Nothing and Vanity;
(Put them in the Scales with God, and they are not only leight, and without any
weight, Nothing at all; but if Men were capable of concieving any thing less
then nothing, such were all the World to God.) Though the World be absolutely
somewhat, yea very great; yet comparatively to God, it is nothing, less then
Nothing and Vanity.

CHAP. III. The incomparableness of God in his Being. It is from its self, for
its self, and wholly independent.
THe incomparableness of the Divine Being, will appear in several particulars.

1. His Being is from himself; No Being in the World, beside his, is its own
Cause or Original: Angels, Men, the highest, yea the lowest Creatures, are
derivative Beings: They have what they are from another, even from God; They
are drops that flow from the Ocean of all Beings; they are Rays, derived from
the Sun, the Fountain of Light and Entity. The Apostle tells us, That Men are
beholden to God for their Beings, Acts 17.28. In him we have our Beings. They
were nothing till he spoke them into something: He formed and fashioned their
Bodies, Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15. He created and infused their Souls; He put that
Heaven-born Inhabitant into the House of Clay, Genesis 2.7. Job 10.11, 12. The
whole visible World is his Workmanship, Acts 17.24. God that made the World,
and all things therein; The invisible World are also the effects of his
powerful word: Angels as well as Men may thank him for what they are. The
greatest Angel is as much bound to him for his Being, as the smallest Atome,
Coloss. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers. But God is beholden to none for his Being: He was
when none else was, even from eternity, Psalm. 90.1. Therefore none could
contribute the least to his Being: I am Jehovah, and there is none else besides
me, Isa. 45.5, 6. I am he that gives a being to himself, that am what I am
from my self, and of my self; and there is no such Being beside me.

2. God is Being, that is, for himself; as he is his own first Cause, so he is
his own last end; as he is wholly from himself, so he is wholly for himself.
All other Beings are not for themselves, but for another. All things were
created by him and for him, Coloss. 1.16. Since all are from God, it is but
reason that all should be for God: The Rivers that run from the Sea, return to
the Sea again, owning and acknowledging their Original, Eccles. 1.7. Good Men
are for God. None of us lives to himself, or dies to himself; but whether we
live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord; and
whether we live or dye, we are the Lords, Romans 14.7. Good Angels are for God,
for his glory, Isa. 6.3. Evil Men, evil Angels are for God, though not in their
intentions and purposes, yet in his intention, and by his wise powerful
Government of them, and their practices; Prove. 16.4. The Lord made all things
for himself, even the Wicked for the day of Slaughter. Good Beings are for him
intentionally, and evil Beings are for him eventually. Nay, all Beings are for
him: Of him, and through him, and for him are all things, Romans 11.36. But God
is altogether for himself, as his highest end, and not for any others. He is
his own end, as well as his own beginning; who never had a beginning, nor shall
ever have an end, Revel. 1.8. As all God does is for himself, Revel. 4.11. Thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. So all
God is is for himself: He is infinite, wise, almighty, everlasting,
unchangeable, holy, righteous, faithful Being, is for himself. It is the
profaneness of some Men to be somewhat for God; more for the World, and most
of all for their carnal selves: But it is the perfection of God, to be somewhat
for the World in general; more for his Elect in special, and most of all for
Himself; Nay, in all that he is for the World, or his Elect; he is still most
for himself. It is the excellency and purity of Saints and Angels to be what
they are, and to do what they do for God, to make him who is the efficient, the
final Cause of their Beings and Actions. But it is the excellency and purity of
God, to be what he is, and to do what he does for himself: He who is his own
happiness, must be his own end.

3. His Being is an independent Being: He is by himself, as well as from and
for himself; None ever in Heaven or Earth contributed the least toward the
maintenance or continuance of his Being; Neither the Creatures goodness, nor
their Goods do him the least good. Not their goodness; Men may be advantaged by
the goodness of Men, but God cannot: My goodness extends not to thee, but to
the Saints that are on Earth, Psalm. 16.3. Not their Goods, He is the Lord
Proprietor of the whole world, and if he wanted any thing, he would not ask the
leave of any; for all is his own, but he is above all want: If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee; for the World is mine, and the fullness thereof, Psalm.
50.12. i. e. I declare to the World, That I am incapable of the least want; or
if I needed a Meals-Meat, I would scorn to go to the Creatures Door to beg it:
I could supply my self out of my own Store, if there were need, but there is no
need at all. He challenges all the World, to produce any Being that ever
obliged or engaged him in the least: Who has prevented me, that I may repay
him, Job 41.11. Where is the Man, where is the Angel, where is the Creature
that can say, He ever did me the least kindness, that has been beforehand
with me in courtesy, to whom I am the least in debt for my subsistence? I am
here ready to make him amends: Who has prevented me, that I may repay him?

But all other Beings are dependent, the highest, the strongest of them are not
able to bear their own weight; but like the Hop or Ivy, must have somewhat to
lean upon: By him all things subsist, Coloss. 1.17. He preserves them in their
Beings, and in their Motions; In him we live and move, and have our Beings,
Acts 17.28. As the Beams depend on the Sun, and the Streams on the Fountain; so
do the Creatures for their beings and actions depend on God. He upholdeth all
things (as the Foundation the Building) by the word of his Power, Hebr. 1.3. He
is the Atlas, that bears up the whole World, without whom it would fall to
nothing. Thou preservest Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.6. Dependentia est de essentia
Creaturae.

God is to the World, as the Soul to the Body; He animates and actuates every
thing in it, and enableth his several Creatures to all their motions. Men are
apt to think that Fire can burn of it self, it being so natural to the Fire to
burn; yet if God do but suspend his influence ( actum secundum, as they speak)
a Furnace heated seven times hotter then usual, burns no more then Water, Dan.
3.27. We are ready to conceive, that it is easy for a Man to see, when the
Organ is rightly disposed; there is a fit medium, and a due distance of the
Organ from the Object: But yet if God deny his concurrence, though there are
these three Requisites to sight, a man can see no more then if he were stark
blind, Genesis 19.11. 2 Kings 6.18.

Angels themselves must have their Maker for their mover; or as active Spirits
as they are, they must stand still.

CHAP. IV. God incomparable in his Being, as he is absolutely perfect,
universal, unchangeable.
HE is an absolutely perfect Being: There is a twofold perfection competible
to Beings; Some are perfect in their kind, that is, have all things requisite
to that Species of which they are. So we say the World is perfect, because it
has all things needful to a World. A man is a perfect man, that has a body
with all its parts and members, and a Soul with all its powers and faculties:
But secondly, A Being is absolutely perfect, when nothing can be added to it,
or taken from it, when it is incapable of the least Accession or Diminution.
Now such a Being is God, and none but God. As the Sun gets nothing by the
shining of the Moon and the Stars, neither loses any thing by their Eclipses,
or withdrawing. So the self sufficient God gains nothing by all the Suits and
Services, Prayers and Praises of his Creatures; neither loses any thing by
their neglect of their Duties. He is above the influence of all our
performances; our holiness adds not the least to his Happiness. Can a Man be
profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Is it any
pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him that
thou make thy ways perfect? Job 22.2, 3. He is beyond the malice of Sin: As
Holiness does not help him, so the Sin of his Creatures does not hurt him. All
those Darts of Sin which the Wicked shoot up against Heaven, fall short, and
fall down upon their own Heads. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or
if thy Transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be
righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy
Wickedness may hurt a Man, as thou art, and thy Righteousness may profit the
Sons of Men, Job 35.6. 7, 8. Flesh and Blood may be injured and pierced by the
Weapons of unrighteousness; but not the Rock of Ages, that is impenetrable.
They who are of the same make and mold with our selves, may be advantaged by
our Blessings and Praises, but not he who is above all Blessing and Praises.

What does the great Light of the World get by the Persians admiration and
adoration of it. What is a Fountain the better, if Men drink of its water, and
commend it; or the worse, if Men pass by, and despise it. What would God get,
if he should make millions of Worlds to land and magnify him; or what would
God loose, if there were no World, no Creature at all? Who has given to him,
and it shall be recompensed again? Romans 11, 35. He has given to all whatever
they are, or have; but none ever gave to him. They who give to him their Love,
and Fear, and Trust, and Names, and Estates, give nothing to him. We can give
nothing to him, to whom we owe all: Besides, all we have, and are, and do, and
suffer for him, adds nothing to him. His declarative glory may, but his
essential glory, or glorious essence admits not in the least of any increase or
decrease. But no other Being is absolutely perfect; Men are exceeding
imperfect, since their Falls: They are so far from being above all additions,
that they stand in continual need of Additions. They need the Air to breath in,
the Earth to bear them, Food to strengthen them, Raiment to cover them, Fire to
warm them, Sleep to refresh them; They want Righteousness to justify them, the
Holy Ghost to sanctify them, Love to comfort them, and Mercy to save them. Man
is an heap of Infirmities, an Hospital of Diseases, and a bundle of
Imperfections: He is so far from being absolutely perfect, that (in a moral
consideration) since his Apostasy, he is not perfect in his kind. And though
Angels are more perfect then Men, yet they are imperfect to God: Angels, it is
true, are perfect in their kind, but not perfect in all kinds; something may be
added to them, something may be taken from them. The highest Angel may be
higher, and the holiest Angel may be holier, and the best of them may be
better. Though the Stars differ from each other in brightness and glory, yet
none of them is a Sun: Though Angels differ from Men, and each from others in
honor and excellency; yet none of them is a god, none of them is absolutely
perfect.

5. God is an universal Being, he has all good eminently and virtually in
himself: Whatsoever excellencies are scattered and dispersed among the
Creatures in Heaven or in Earth, they are all united in, and centered after an
infinite manner in the Creator. It Is a true Rule in Philosophy, Quod efficit
tale est magis tale; Whatsoever good is in the effect, is more abundantly in
the cause: Now God being the principle and cause of all the good and excellency
that is in every Creature, it must of necessity be more abundantly in him. As
some Potions have the quintessence of many Herbs, many Drugs in them; so God
has the quintessence of all Creatures, and infinitely more in him.

For this cause he is called by, and compared to whatsoever is good and
answerable, either to necessity, convenience or delight. Sometimes to that good
which is necessary, as to life, John 1.4. To the Fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.
To Light, John 1.9. To the Father of Lights, James 1.17. To Food, as to Bread;
yea, living Bread, John 6.51. To water, yea living water, John 4.10. To Rest,
Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee,
Psalm. 116.7. He is the only Ark, wherein alone the Dove wearied about the
waters of this World, can find rest: Sometimes he is compared to that good
which is convenient, as to an Habitation, Psalm. 90.9, 10. O Lord, thou have
been our dewlling place from all Generations. To Health, Psalm. 42. ult. To
Peace, 2 Cor. 13.11. To Protection or Defense, as a Shield, which defends the
Body from the shot or thrusts of men, Genesis 15.1. To a Wall of Fire, which
defends the Traveller from the fury of Beasts, Zechar. 2.5. To a Refuge, which
secures the Army, when it is foy'ld by the Enemy, Psalm. 57.1. To a Rock, a
Fortress, an high Tower, Psalm. 18.2. Sometimes he is compared to that good
which is delightful. As to Riches, Job 22.24, 25. To unsearchable Riches, Ephesians.
3.8. Durable Riches, Prove. 8.18. To Honor and Glory, as a Royal Diadem: He is
called a glorious Lord, Isa. 33.21. Said to be the Glory in the midst of his
People, Zach. 2.5. To joy and pleasure, Psalm. 43.4. To Relations, he is a
Father, 2 Cor. 6.18. An Husband, Hos. 2.19. To a Feast of fat things, of Marrow
and Fatness, of Wine, of Wine on the Lees well refined, Isa. 25.6, Which are
the delight of the Pallat. To Beauty, which is the delight of the Eyes, Cantic.
5.10. and ult. To sweet Smells, which are the delight of the Nostrils, Cantic.
4.10. Cantic. 1.3. To the most harmonious Music, which is the delight of the
Ears: His mouth is most sweet, or sweetnesses, Cantic. 5.16. My Soul failed
when he spoke, so ravishing was his Voice, Cantic. 5.6. To Truth, which is the
delight of the Understanding, Psalm. 31.5. John 14.6. To Good, which is the
delight of the Will, Math. 19.17. Thus God is not one good, but all good: The
truth is, all the good, all the excellencies that are in Men or Angels, are not
worthy to be a shadow, or foyl to set off those excellencies that are in God.
All good is in one God, Mark 10.29, 30. But Creatures are but particular
Beings: Man is but a particular Being, a low limited Being. What is Man, that
is a Worm; or the Son of Man that is a Worm, Job 25.6. There is some good in
one man, and some good in another man; but not all good in any man, no, not in
all men. Angels are but particular Beings, little Beings: One Angel is one
drop, another Angel another drop, a third Angel a third drop; every one is but
a drop: None of them is an Ocean, as God is, which contains all those drops,
and infinitely more.

6. God is an unchangeable Being, not only without, but incapable of the least
alteration. He is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever, Heb. 13.8. He is
what he was, and what he will be eternally. He is the same since the World was
made, that he was before the World, and that he will be when this World shall
be no more: With him is not the least variation, or shadow of turning, James
1.17. No (...), or variableness: It is an Astronomical word, taken from the
heavenly Bodies, which suffer many Declensions and Revolutions, which they call
Parallaxes. Though those heavenly Lights are variable, have their increases and
decreases; their times of rising and setting; yet our Father of Lights is not
variable: He knows no rising or setting, no increasing or decreasing; but
shines always with the same light and luster, with the same beauty and
brightness. Nor shadow of Turning, (...). The lesser Luminaries, or Stars,
according to their different Postures, have diverse shadowings, or obumbrations,
according to their nearness to, or distance from the Sun, their shadows are
greater or lesser; but our Sun is still the same, knows no clouding, no
shadowing, no eclipsing. When God hates those Angels as Apostates, whom first
he loved, as created pure and holy, he is still the same; the change is not in
God, but in them. Bring Clay to the Sun, it hardens it; bring Wax to the Sun,
with the same influence, it softens it, without any alteration in the Sun: When
God punishes a Man that is wicked, and prospers the same Man, becoming a
Penitent, he is still the same. If a man walk on one side of a Church, the
Pillars are on his left hand, if on the other side, on his right hand: The
Pillars remain where they were, the motion or change is in the Man.

But Creatures are all mutable; the Heavens seem constant, but it is in
inconstancy; their perpetual motion speaks their perpetual alteration: Psalm.
102.26, 27. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, they shall wax old as a
Garment, (that is, wearing out, and wasting every day); as a Vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed, but thou Lord art the same for ever.
The old Heavens will pass away, and new ones succeed in their room at the
general Conflagration, but the God of Heaven will never pass away. Man is ever
in motion, from one condition to another: His Body changes in its age,
constitution, temper, at last into rottenness, dust and corruption: I have
said to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worms, ye are my Brother
and Sister, Job 17.14. His Soul changes in its passions, affections, love
hatred, delights, desires: His whole man changes in its place, company,
carriage, conversation: He has no consistency while he is, he continues not
what he was, Job 14.2, 3. Angels are changeable, even the good Angels, though
not as Men, yet as Creatures; as perfect as they are, they have this
imperfection, 1. They are who once were not, and (in regard of themselves) have
a possibility not to be. 2. Angels may loose what they have, and attain what
they have not. 3. Angels are mutable in regard of place, sometimes in Heaven,
sometimes on Earth. What little unchangableness is in Angels, is derivative,
God is the original of it; their immutability at most is but from their
Creation I suppose some time since; for the good Angels as well as bad were
created mutable, but Gods immutability is from eternity. The whole World indeed
is a Sea of Glass, Rev. 4.6. always ebbing and flowing, never at a stay; but
the Maker of the World may well say, I the Lord change not, Mal. 3.6.

CHAP. V. God incomparable in his Being, as it is eternal, and without
composition.
GOd is an eternal Being, and none is eternal but he: Time which has a
beginning and end is competible to Men, and other visible Creatures in this
World. Aeriternity which has a beginning, and no end, is competible to good
and evil Angels, and to the Souls of Men; but Eternity which has no beginning,
succession or end, belongs only to God.

1. God has no beginning: He who in the beginning created the Heavens and the
Earth, could have no beginning himself, Genesis 1.1. Before the Mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World; from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90.2. God is eternal, a part
ante, and puzleth the most enlarged Understanding, to conceive his duration:
Behold he is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years be
searched out, Job 36.26. Psalm. 93.2.

2. God has no succession in his Duration: He dwells in one indivisible
point of eternity; He is what he is in one infinite moment of being: His
duration knows nothing of former or latter, past or to come: His Essence is
not bounded by those Hedges, but he enjoys his whole eternity every moment.
Hence he is said to inhabit eternity, to be fixed always in eternity, Isa.
57.15. Time is nunc fluens, but eternity is nunc stans: One day with him is as
a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. He inhabits a
million of years in a moment, and each moment to him is as a million of years:
He has not the least added to his duration since the World was, though it has
been near 6000 years: It Is not proper to say of him, He was (for none of his
duration is ever past with him) or he shall be (for none of his duration is
ever to come) but he is, his full eternity is always present; Hence his Name
is I am, Exodus 3.14. Not I was, or shall be; and Christ tells the Jews, Before
Abraham was, I am, John 8.58. It seems false Grammar, but it is the most proper
true Divinity. Indeed, had Adam been then alive, it had been proper for him to
have said, Before Abraham was, I was; or if an Angel had spoken, it had been
proper for him to have said, Before Abraham was, I was, because Men and Angels
enjoy their Being by piece-meals, now a little and then a little, somewhat of
their duration is gone, and somewhat to come; but it was most proper for him
that was God to say, Before Abraham was, I am, because his duration is without
all succession, the whole of it is ever present: The Psalmist further cleares
this, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. Which words
are interpreted of the eternal Generation of the Son of God before all Worlds,
and also of his Resurrection in time, which was to be some hundreds of years
after, as the Apostle either expounds it, or alludes to it, Acts 13.33. But
it is all one, for both are to day; that which was from eternity, and that which
was to be many hundred of years after, are both with him present this day.

Past or future is all present this day; that was not past to God, which never
had beginning, his Sons eternal Generation; nor was that to come to God, which
was always before him, his Sons Temporal Resurrection. It Is still, this day
have I begotten thee, millions of years, yea of Ages, add not the least moment
to his duration.

3. God has no ending: As he is from, so he is to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2.
Without beginning or end of days; Psalm. 102.27. But thou art the same, and thy
years never end. O what an excellent Being is this eternal Being? He only has
immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. And he is eternity it self, 1 Samuel 15.29. Aeternitas
Israelis, Jun. The eternity of Israel cannot lie.

But are Men or Angels comparable to God in this? Surely no: As for Man, he is
a Bird of Time, here to day, and gone to morrow, Job 14.1. Of few days: As for
Man, his days are as Grass, Psalm. 103.15. Now flourishing, but quickly
perishing.

Man has a beginning, succession and ending. There was a Time when Man was
not, Man enjoys his time by parts and parcels, and Man ere long shall be no
more. All men in this are alike, high or low, good or bad: There is a vast
difference between God and all Men in their duration; Are thy days as the
days of Man? are thy years as Man's years? Job 10.5. No, in no respect; Man's
days begin, succeed and end; not so God's days. Well might David say (though
he had lived as long as Methuselah), Mine age is nothing unto thee, Psalm. 39.5.
And truly as Men are far from being comparable to God, so are Angels: Angels
had a beginning, Coloss. 1.16. Angels have a succession in their duration, they
enjoy part to day, part to morrow, part the next day, every moment adds to
their duration; what is past they do not enjoy, nor what is to come, but only
what is present; and thus it is also with Souls of Saints in Heaven.

8. God is a simple Being: In this I take simplicity, not as opposed to Wisdom
(for in him are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Coloss. 2.9.) but as
simplicity is opposed to mixture and compositon. Thus there is a simplicity in
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 12.3. So any thing, the more simple it is, the more
excellent it is. God is a most pure simple unmixed indivisible Essence; he is
incapable of the least composition, and therefore of the least division. He is
one most pure, one without all parts, members, accidents and qualities:
Whatsoever is in him is himself, his very Being; therefore that which is a
quality in a Man or Angel, is attributed to God in the abstract: Men and Angels
are wise, but God is wisdom, Prove. 9.1. Men and Angels are holy, but God is
Holiness, Isa. 63.15. God is all Essence, all Being, and nothing else.

But how unlike are Men or Angels to God in this: Man is a grossly compounded
being, he is compounded of a Body and a Soul, Genesis 2.7. His body is compounded
of members and parts, his members and parts are compounded of bones and blood,
and flesh, and skin, and sinews, Job 10.11. His Soul is compounded, and so are
the highest Angels of substance and accidents, of essence and faculties; the
substance of Man's Soul, and of Angels, and their qualities, are distinct
things: Their Wisdom is one thing, their Power another thing, their Holiness a
third thing, and all distinct from their Essence. An Angel may be an Angel, and
a Man may be a true Man, and yet be foolish, weak and wicked. Their
Understanding differs from their Wills, their Wills differ from their
Affections, their Affections differ from both, and all from their beings: But
in God all these are one indivisible Essence, to will and to understand, and to
love and to hate, and to be, are all the same and one in God.

CHAP. VI. God incomparable in his Being, as it is Infinite and
Incomprehensible.
GOd is an infinite Being: He is a Being that knows no bounds, no limits. His
Being is without all measure, all degrees and determinations. His Understanding
(i. e. Himself, who is all Understanding) is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. God is a
Sphere, whose center is every where, and whose circumference is no where.
Behold the Heavens, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less
this House which I have built, 1 Kings 8.27. The starry Heavens, or Firmament,
is large, it compasses the whole Earth and Ocean; this terrestial World is but
a point to it, but the Heaven of Heavens, or the emperial Heaven is larger; it
contains the lower Heaven, but cannot contain the God of Heaven. No ubi, no
place can define or circumscribe him: He is neither shut up in any place, nor
shut out of any place. He is above place, without place, yet in all places.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; If I make my Bed in Hell, (Heaven
and Hell are most opposite places) Behold thou art there: If I take the wings
of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea; Even there shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. God
is in Heaven, Earth, Sea, Hell, and infinitely more, where there is neither
Heaven nor Earth, nor Sea, nor Hell.

O what a Being is the blessed God, who is boundless not only in his duration,
of which we have spoken before, and in all his Perfections and Attributes, of
which we shall speak hereafter, but also in his Essence and Being. No place can
circumscribe him, and no ubi can define him. He is over all (Creatures by his
Power and Dominion) in you all (by his Essence and Influence) and through all
(by his Providence) Ephesians. 4.6. He is every where, not only virtually, as the
Sun by his beams; nor authoritatively, as a King, by subordinate Officers; not
at all by multiplication, as the Loaves filled that place, which they did not
before the Miracle; or by extention, as the rational Creature fills that
place, when a Man, which he did not, when an Infant; nor by local motion, from
one place to another, as all bodily animate Creatures; or by division, as our
Bodies are part in one place, and part in another; or by commixtion, as the Air
mingleth it self with the terrestrial World; but essentially, after an
unspeakable manner. As Philosophers say of the Soul, It Is whole in the whole
body, and whole in every part of the body: So I may say of God, He is whole in
the whole World, and whole in every part of the World; yea, if he should please
to make 10000 Worlds, he would fill all, and his whole Essence be in every part
of each World, and yet without the least extension or multiplication, or motion.

Homo est in loco circumscriptive, Angelus definitive, Deus Repletive.
But are Men or Angels like to God in this? Alas, they are finite limited
Beings, less then drops to this Ocean. Man is in a small place, so as to fill
it up by commensuration of parts, and to exclude all other Bodies, but himself
is circumscribed in it. Angels though they are not in a place so as to exclude
Bodies, yet they are in an ubi, or space, so as to conclude themselves therein;
they are in a finite compass, beyond which their being extends not; they are
so here, that they are not there; so in Heaven, that they are not on Earth at
the same time. But God is every where in his whole Essence every moment; He
fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. ult.

God is an incomprehensible Being, such a Being as no Creature, whether Man or
Angel can comprehend, or perfectly understand. This flows from the former; if
he be infinite, he must of necessity be incomprehensible, for a finite Being
(as all are beside himself) can never comprehend what is infinite. There is no
proportion between a boundless Being and a bounded Understanding: But there
must be a proportion between the mind of the Creature, and that object which is
fully understood by it. The Sun may be contained in a small chink, and the Sea
in a Nutshell, sooner then God can be contained in the limited understanding of
Men or Angels; Job 26.14. Lo these are parts of his ways, (viz. Hell is naked
before him, ver. 6. He hangs the Earth upon nothing, ver. 7. He binds up
the Waters in his thick Clouds, and the Cloud is not rent under them, ver. 8.
He has compassed the Waters with bounds, ver. 10. The Pillars of Heaven
tremble at his Reproof, ver. 11. etc.) but how little a portion is heard of
him. The Vulgar read it, How little a drop; Others, A whisper, or smallest part
of a Voice; that which is known of God, to that which God is, and is in God, is
but like a drop to the vast Ocean; and as a Whisper, to a loud terrible
Thunder; How little a portion is heard of him. Surely much is heard of him,
from the Voice of his Almighty Works of Creation and Providence, and especially
from the Voice of his Word and his own Mouth in the holy Scriptures: But how
little is heard of him, in comparison of that immense excellency which is in
him, and which he is. Heathens hear somewhat of him, Romans 1.20, 21. His Saints
on Earth hear much more of him, Psalm. 63.3, 4, 5, 6. Perfect Spirits in Heaven
hear most of all of him, 2 Cor. 12.3, 4. 1 Cor. 13.12. Yet by all these, a very
little portion is heard of him.

The Being of God is like the Peace of God, which passes all understanding,
Philip. 4.7. And like the Love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, Ephesians.
3.19. This only can be known of God, that he can never be known fully; and
this only can be comprehended of him, that he cannot be comprehended: Can
thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection?
It Is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper then Hell, what can thou
know? The measure thereof is longer then the Earth, and broader then the Sea,
Job 11.8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God: It Is a strong Negation, i.
e. It Is impossible by all the help and advantage of Nature and Art, and Grace
and Diligence; yea, and perfect Glory too, to find out God fully. Do thou a
poor mean vile man (says Zophar) think to contain and comprehend him, whom the
Heavens, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain or comprehend? Art thou so silly
as to conceive, that the short line of thy understanding should fadom his
bottomless Being. It is not in vain for thee to seek him, but it is altogether
in vain for thee to search him. Though he be not far from thee, yet he is far
above thee, and far beyond thee; far above thy thoughts, and beyond thy
conceptions: He dwells in that Light that is inaccessible, whom no man has
seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6.16. They who see him face to face, i. e. most
clearly and fully see but little of him: Clouds and Darkness are in this sense
ever about him. As in a dark day we see the beams, but not the body of the Sun;
so even in Heaven the highest Angels rather see his rays and beams, then his
infinite Being.

Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection: Men who seek God, may find
him, Prove. 8.17. Math. 7.7. but they cannot find him to perfection: The word
for perfection signifies the height or utmost accomplishment of a thing.
Somewhat of God may be known, but not all; They who find out most, are far from
finding out the utmost of him. The Sun and all the celestial Lights may sooner
be grasped in the hollow of man's hand, and the vast Hills and Mountains weighed
in a pair of common Scales, then the Almighty found out to perfection. Natural
questions soon pose the most learned men; the forms even of inanimate Creatures
are Riddles to most. How frequently do the greatest Scholars betake themselves
to secret Sympathies and Antipathies, and occult qualities, as the Cloak and
cover of their Ignorance: Eccles. 11.5. Can thou know how the Bones grow of
her that is with Child? O how much more must Divine questions exceed humane
understanding.

It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? It Is as the highnesses of Heaven:
Take all the Heights and Elevations, all the Spheres and Altitudes of Heaven,
and try if thou can reach them with thy short Arm; yea, climb up the highest
Stories, the loftiest Pinnacles, touch, if thou can, the several Orbs; yet
the knowledge of this God, or this God the object of knowledge, is above and
beyond all. What a Fool would he be thought, who should undertake to ascend the
starry Heavens; yet he who would find out God to perfection, must climb much
higher. The Heavens are famous for their height; yea, the starry Heavens, that
some wonder that the eyes of man are not tired before they reach them; Prove.
25.3. The Heavens for height, and the Earth for depth; Yet the third Heavens
are much higher then they; but the most high God is far higher then the highest
Heavens.

Deeper then Hell, what can thou know? Heaven and Hell are at the greatest
distance, and are most remote from our apprehensions. Who knows what is done
in Heaven? what in Hell? what is enjoyed in the one, or suffered in the other?
no more can any know what God is. Who knows the nature, number, order,
motions, influence of the heavenly Bodies; something is conjecturally delivered
about them, nothing certain; much less does any know the number, nature, order,
wonder, worship of the celestial Courtiers in the third Heavens, of the
thousand thousand that are before God, the ten thousand times ten thousand that
minister to him; least of all can any know that Being that made all these, that
preserves all these, that orders and governs, animateth and actuateth all
these; that gives them all that they are, and enableth them to all that they do.

Deeper then Hell, what can thou know? Who knows the Mines and Minerals
which lie in the bosom, in the bowels of the Earth? Who knows the place of
Saphires, the Coral, the Pearls, and the precious Onix: Job 28.5, 6, 7, 8. Out
of the Earth comes Bread, etc. The stones of it are the place of Saphires, and
it has dust of Gold: There is a path which no Fowl knows, and which the
Vultures Eye has not seen: The Lions Whelps have not trodden it, nor the
fierce Lion passed by it. Much less does any know the Miseries of the Damned,
the extremity, universality, eternity of their Torments? Who ever returned from
that place, to tell us what they suffered there; or if they had, whose
Understanding is large enough to conceive them: Who knows the Power of thine
Anger? according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath, Psalm. 90.11. Least of all can
any know that God, Job 28.3.
who sets an end to Darkness, and searches out all Perfection; the stones
of darkness and the shadow of Death: Before whom Hell and Destruction are naked
and open; who forms the costly Jewels, secret from the Eyes of covetous
Mortals; who lays the dark Vault of Hell, and storeth it with Fire and
Brimstone, and gnawing Worms, and blackness of darkness, and all the
Instruments of eternal Death.

The measure thereof is longer then the Earth: The Earth is long, from one end
of it to another. Mathematicians tell us, from East to West, it is 22000 miles,
but the knowledge of God is much longer; the measure thereof is beyond all
measure.

And broader then the Sea: The Ocean is exceeding broad, it seems to them that
Sail on it, to be without Banks or Bounds. Hence we read of the Arms of the
Sea, Dan. 11.22. because of its breadth. And David calls it, Psalm. 104.25. A
great and wide Sea. So is this great and wide Sea, wherein are things
innumerable, both small and great. But the knowledge of the great God is far
greater and wider: How are the Dimensions of height, depth, length and breadth,
in their greatest extent and dimensions obvious to humane Understandings. The
Heavens are high, yet their height is finite: Hell is deep, yet its depth is
determined; the Earth is long, yet its length is limited; the Sea is broad, yet
its breadth is bounded: But God is infinite, boundless, and beyond all these.

CHAP. VII. God incomparable in his Attributes, in his Holiness and Wisdom.
II. GOd is incomparable (as in his Being, so) in his Attributes. The
Attributes of God, are those perfections in the Divine Nature, which are
ascribed to him, that we might the better understand him. They are so called (
i. e. Attributes) because they are attributed to him for our sakes; though they
are not in him as they are in Men or Angels. Vocantur Attributa quia ea sibi
attribuit Deus nostra causa, Zanch. de Attribut. lib. 2. cap. 12. Attributa Dei
dicuntur quae Deo adscribuntur in Scripturis sacris, non tam ad essentiam
naturamque Dei explicandam, quam ad declarandum nobis aliquo modo pro nostro
captu illud quod de ipso a nobis cognosci potest, Polan. Syntag. lib. 2. cap.
6. There are some Attributes of God, which the Schoolmen call Incommunicable,
(which I have spoken of under the former Head) because the Creature, as a
Creature, is incapable of them, and therefore they cannot be attributed to Man
or Angels. It Is impossible for a Creature to be independent, self-sufficient,
eternal in a strict sense, infinite, etc. so that all will acknowledge God
incomparable in those excellencies. There are other Attributes of God which are
called Communicable, viz. His Power, Holiness, Wisdom, Faithfulness, etc.
because they are communicated by him to his rational Creatures, and there is
some show or shadow of them in Men and Angels. For though it was the horrible
Pride, and monstrous presumption of evil Angels, and Adam, at first to rival
God in his Properties, that were incommunicable; to aspire to be like him in
his Independency and Sovereignty, (for their Sin was, that they would have cut
off the Entail, and have held all of themselves, as their own Lords and
Masters): And the Prince of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.6. is indicted by God of inexpiable
arrogance, That he durst set his heart as the heart of God: Yet it is the only
godliness of the Creatures to be like God, in those Attributes of his which are
communicable: The new man is after God, Ephesians. 1.24. The re-impression of his
Image on the Creature. David is therefore called a man after Gods own heart,
because he was a man after Gods own Holiness; yea, it is the perfection and
felicity of the intellectual World, Psalm. 17. ult. 1 John 3.3, 4. in Heaven.

But even in these Properties, wherein Man resembles his Maker, he is
exceedingly unlike him, and falls infinitely short of him. That God is
incomparable in his communicable Attributes, I shall discover.

1. More generally.

2. More specially.

1. More generally, and here I shall enumerate some of those Attributes,
wherein Men and Angels are conformable to God, and in each of them show that in
those in which they come nearest him, they come far behind him.

1. He is incomparable in his Holiness: Holiness in general, is the moral
goodness of a thing, or its convenience or agreement with its rule. Holiness in
the Creatures, is their conformity to the will of their Creator, in the
principle rule and end of their actions and motions: Holiness in God is that
excellency of the Divine Nature, by which he acts from himself for himself,
and according to his own will.

God is the holy One, Hos. 11.9. by way of eminency and excellency, because he
surpasses all others in holiness. He is the holy One of Jacob, Isa. 49.23. The
holy One of Israel, Isa. 43.14. because of their special interest and propriety
in the excellent Being. He is holy, holy, holy, Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. His Nature
is the only pattern of Holiness, therefore he commands us to look on him as
our Example; Be ye holy as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Man was made holy,
Eccles. 7.29. i. e. According to the Image of God, Genesis 1.26. Ephesians. 4.24. His
will is the only rule of Holiness: Hence our holiness is called a proving his
good and perfect and acceptable will, Romans 12.2. and our fulfilling the will of
God, Acts 13. And a walking according to his Word (which is his revealed will)
as our Rule, Gal. 6.16. He is universally holy in his Name, Luke 1.49. In his
Nature, Psalm. 5.5, 6. Hab. 1.13. In his Works, Psalm. 145.17. In his Word, Romans
7.12. Psalm. 119.140. He is the Original of all holiness in Men or Angels; they
are beholden to him that they are not as unholy as the Damned, as the Devils,
James 1.17. Ezekiel. 37.28. Ezekiel. 38.26, 27. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Now what Man or Angel
is comparable to him in holiness. May I not, with Moses, make a Challenge, Who
is a God like unto thee, glorious in holiness? Exodus 15.11.

Are Men holy as he is holy? nay, are the spirits of just Men made perfect, and
Angels equal to him in holiness? Behold, he puts no trust in his Saints (the
best on Earth) the Heavens (the holiest there) are unclean in his sight, Job
15.15, 16. As for man he is a Sink of Sin, a Stye of Filth, overspread from
Head to Foot with the Leprosy of Sin, Genesis 6.5. And therefore instead of
comparing with God for holiness, is bound to abhor himself for his unholiness;
yea Angels, who have nothing amiss in their Natures, who never took one step
awry in their lives, who have ever continued Gods Loyal Subjects, and faithful
Servants, observant of all his Calls, and obedient to all his Commands; whose
obedience to him, and observance of him, is made the Copy for us to write
after, Math. 6.10. are yet unholy in comparison of God: The Heavens are unclean
in his sight. The Heavens, not only the place which has a relative holiness,
in regard of Gods special presence; but even the persons in Heaven, perfect
Spirits, who have no blemish in their Beings, or disorder in their motions, are
unholy to him, and unclean in his sight. The holiness of Angels, is but the
holiness of obeying a Law, Psalm. 103.20, 21. the holiness of God, is the
holiness of being a Law, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. The holiness of Angels is but a
conformity to the pattern set them, the holiness of God is the holiness of
setting them a pattern, and of being their pattern. The holiness of Angels is
but a derivative, Gods is an Original holiness.

God is so incomparable in holiness, that it is said, He only, or solely, is
holy, Revel. 15.4. Who will not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for
thou only art holy. None is holy besides him, because none is holy like him; 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the Lord, therefore none holy but the Lord:
Saints are holy, 1 Pet. 2.9. Angels are holy, Mark 8.38. But they are not holy
as the Lord is holy. Without question, the heavenly Host who see him face to
face, and are satisfied with his likeness, are glorious in holiness, shine
brightly with those perfect beams, and that pure light which they borrow from
the Sun of Righteousness; but truly they are poor Gloworms to the Father of
Lights. Even that Grace, that Holiness, that Glory of Saints and Angels, which
infinitely surpasses the natural Heavens in all their beauty and brightness,
is no Grace, no Holiness, no Glory in this respect, by reason of that Grace and
Holiness, and Glory in God, which does so infinitely excel.

2. God is incomparable in his Wisdom (I shall not stand upon the critical
distinctions which some give between Understanding, Prudence and Wisdom):
Wisdom in general is a right understanding of things, and the ordering our
selves and actions suitable to that understanding. It appears chiefly in these
three acts: 1. In discerning the nature, causes, effects, contraries, and
consequents of things, (of which we shall speak hereafter); and this we call
Science. 2. In propounding the best, and highest, and noblest end to our
selves, in our actions and undertakings; and this is called Understanding. 3.
In suiting and fitting, and ordering the most proper means, as may be best for
the attaining our ends; and this is called Prudence, which, as the Rudder of
the Ship, steers, and directs and governs all. In all these respects God is
incomparable in Wisdom: He is wise in heart, Job 9.4. i. e. most wise, for the
heart is the seat of Wisdom. And to be foolish, and without an heart, is all
one: Ephraim is a silly Dove, without an heart, Hos. 7.11. There are in God all
the Treasures of Wisdom, Coloss. 1.19.

A Treasure denotes, 1. Preciousness; an heap of Dust or Coals is not a
Treasure, but of Silver and Gold. 2. Plenty; one or two pieces of things that
are precious will not make a Treasure, there must be an heap, or some quantity.
In God there is the most precious Wisdom, therefore called Counsel, the effect
of serious and mature deliberation; and he is called The mighty Counselor,
Ephesians. 1.11. Isa. 9.6. In God there is plenty of it, Treasures; a Treasure notes
abundance, but Treasures speaks superabundance, a redundance. In God are all
the Treasures, all kinds, all sorts of Wisdom, (...), manifold Wisdom; Ephesians.
3.10.
embroydered Wisdom, wherein is all variety, of rich and curious Contrivances.
These are all in God, He ingrosseth them all in himself; therefore you read,
With him is Wisdom and Understanding, Job 12.13. With him, as with its Master
and Sovereign Lord; with him, as with its sole Owner and Proprietor.

Some men are wise, Light and Understanding, and excellent Wisdom was found in
Daniel, Dan. 5.14. David was very wise, wiser then his Teachers, then his
Enemies, then the Ancient, Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99. Solomon was a wise man, he
exceeded in Wisdom all that were before him, and all that came after him: And
God gave Solomon Wisdom and Understanding, exceeding much, and largeness of
heart, even as the Sand on the Sea shore: And Solomon's Wisdom excelled the
Wisdom of all the Children of the East-Country, and all the Wisdom of Egypt.
For he was wiser then all men, than Ethan and Heman, etc. 1 Kings 4.29, 30, 31.
But was Solomon comparable to God in Wisdom? Truly, he that was wiser then all
men, was a stark Fool to God; The Wisdom of man is foolishness with God, 1 Cor.
3.19. The subtilty of the Heathen (and, I may say, the greatest understanding
of the Christian) is folly with God: The foolishness of God is wiser than Man,
1 Cor. 1.25. If it were possible that there should be any thing in God which
might look like folly, or if it were lawful for us to conceive any action of
Gods, which, compared with his deeper Contrivances, might have a show of
foolishness, yet even this were wiser than the greatest wisdom of man: Angels
are wiser than Men. When the Woman would speak David to be very wise, above the
rate of Mortals, she says, My Lord is wise as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14.20.
The excellency of their Natures speaks the excellency of their Wisdom, for it is
the Understanding that is the chief distinguishing faculty. But are Angels like
God in Wisdom? No, they are Fools to him: Behold, he puts no trust in his
Servants, he charge his Angels with folly, Job 4.18. Though they never
thwarted the Divine pleasure, nor in any action manifested the least
imprudence; yet before him they are indicted of folly, and to him will be
proved guilty of it. Though they are not chargeable with actual, yet they are
with potential folly; though God does not indict them of absolute, yet he does
of comparative folly.

God does so far exceed Angels and Men in Wisdom, That he is said only to be
wise: To the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. To God only wise, Romans 16.27. None
are wise beside him, because none are wise to him, Dan. 5.20. Wisdom is his,
his Peculiar, his Prerogative, his wholly, his only; so his, that it is none's
but his.

The wisest Men and Angels stand in need of a Master to teach them, and a Tutor
to instruct them; and were it not for the only wise God, they would be as
unwise as the wild Asses Colt, as foolish as Idiots, Psalm. 94.10. But God is
above all Teachers, all Tutors: Job 21.22. Shall any teach God knowledge. Some
persons are incapable of teaching, because of their extreme weakness; Ex quoris
ligno non fit Mercurius, their parts are so very low and mean, that they cannot
be taught. But God is incapable of teaching, because of his immense Wisdom: His
abilities are so high, that they are above and beyond all instruction: Isa.
40.13, 14. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor
has taught him? The wise Solomon had his Privy-Counsellors; the wisest Princes
and States have their Council-Tables, and there is reason enough for it,
because two Heads are better then one (as we say) and two Eyes see more then
one: Two are better then one, Eccles. 4.9. And in many Counselors there is
safety. But God who is all Head, all Eye, all Understanding, needs none to
advise or counsel him. Two Candles indeed are better then one, because the
light of each is little and small, and capable of increase; but one Sun is
better then a million of Candles, because its light is (after a sort)
boundless, and incapable of the least addition, or increase by millions of
Candles: Verse 14. With whom took he Counsel? (with what Angel, with what Man,
with what Politician did he ever consult,) who instructed him in the Paths of
Judgment? (taught him what was just, what was unjust, what to do, what to
forbear; how to govern and order the Affairs of the World, in what manner and
measure to cut out and carve every ones portion.) Who taught him knowledge, and
showed him the way of understanding? Where is the Creature that can say, He
obliged God, by giving him directions in any case? Where is the Man, the Angel,
that can speak it, that he ever taught God one Lesson, or told him one Letter?
If any such be, God will pay him well for his Learning: Romans 11.34, 35. Who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Who has
given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? We may know the mind of
God for our instruction, but we can never know the mind of God for his
instruction, 1 Cor. 2. ult.

3. God is incomparable in his Power: Power is that ability or force by which
we act; Power in God is that Attribute by which he effects whatsoever he
pleases. In this he has no equal; Who is a strong God like unto thee? Psalm.
89.8. Where is the Being that is like him in strength? God is not only strong,
but mighty in strength. Job 9.4. Not only powerful, but excellent in Power,
Job 37.23. Job has a notable expression, Job 9.19. If I speak of strength, lo
he is strong, i. e. As it is ordinary with us, when we would lift a man up to
the height of praise for any quality in him, to say, If you speak of Wealth,
there is a rich man. If you speak of Learning, there is a Scholar for you: So
here says Job, If I speak of Strength, lo he is strong. If I speak of
strength and ability to contend and fight, lo, behold, wonder; here is one
that is strong indeed, that never contendeth, but he prevails; who never
Combats, but he Conquers: He is strong indeed, He is strong to purpose, with
effect. He can offend, and there is no standing before him; Dan. 4.35. He does
whatsoever he will, and none can stay his Hand. He can stop the motion of the
strongest Creature in its fullest swiftest career, but none can stop or stay
him in his Actions. Many have presumption enough to oppose him, but none have
Power enough to overcome him. He can defend, and there is no striving with him;
Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the Waters (be they never so boistrous, so
tempestuous, so deep, so dangerous,) I will be with thee, and they shall not
overflow thee. The Floods of the ungodly may be very fierce and violent, but
they shall never overflow, or overcome, those whom God is pleased to protect.
It must be a strange and strong Arrow that can pierce such a Shield, Genesis 15.1.
of defense.

David tells us, God has spoken once, yea twice have I heard thee, Psalm.
62.11. (It was some special extraordinary thing certainly that David ushers in,
with such a Preface, that God spoke so solemnly, and he heard so attentively.
But what was it?) That Power belongs to God, as his proper peculiar
Excellency, as his Crown and Scepter.

God is not only Mighty, but Almighty; Not only the Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. but
the Almighty God, 2 Cor. 6.18. He is a God that never met with a Difficulty,
much less with an Impossibility: Nothing is too hard for God, Genesis 18.14. All
things are hard to Men, and many things too hard for Men or Angels, but nothing
is too hard for God: I know that thou can do all things, Job 42.2.

Men are strong, they may have a natural strength as Men, a civil strength as
Magistrates; they may be too strong in themselves for other persons, and too
strong in their Armies and Militia's for other Kingdoms and Countries; but are
they strong enough for God? surely No, 1 Cor. 1.25. The weakness of God is
stronger then Man; Vbi Deus virtutem suam occultando infirmiter agere videtur,
robustior tamen illa quae putatur imbecillitas, quares hominum virtute, Calv.
in Corinth. Not that there is any weakness in God, (for should any think so, he
ungods him,) but in those Actions wherein God is pleased to conceal his Power,
and seems to act infirmly; even that seeming infirmity excells all Humane
power and strength. Hence it is, that God throws down the Gantlet to Job, Job
40.9. Have thou an Arm like God. (By Arm, is meant Power and Strength, because
the Arm is that member of Man by which he exerteth and exercises that power
and strength which he has, so Job 35.9.) i. e. Job, though thou have had a
strong natural Arm, and a strong civil Arm, as the greatest man in the East,
and a King in the Army, Job 1.3. Job 29.25. Yet have thou an Arm like God;
Can thou make and unmake, kill and make alive, cast down and lift up at thy
pleasure, as I do? Is thine Arm as long to reach all thine Enemies, and as
strong to break and bruise them in pieces with a blow; Have thou an Arm like
God? Can thou brandish and wield a Sword with thine Arm to the terror and
horror, to the confusion and destruction of all that oppose thee? God has a
mighty Arm, strong is his Hand, high is his right Hand, Psalm. 89.13.

Angels are stronger then Men: The evil Angel is called The strong man, Luke
11.21. They are styled Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.12. Roaring Lions, 1
Pet. 5.8. Red Dragons, Rev. 12.9. which denote their Power to be far superior
to Man's. The Devil is the Prince of the Powers of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. Can
command Storms and Tempests, and with a puff of his mouth blow down Houses and
Cities. Good Angels (probably) are stronger, one of them in a night destroys
184000 men. They are so strong, that they are said to excel in strength, Psalm.
103.20. And indeed, the spirituality and purity of their natures speaks their
Power. Man's weakness is partly from his Flesh, which is a phrase whereby the
Prophet describes the impotency of the Creature: They are Men, and their Horses
are Flesh, and not Spirit, Isa. 31.3. (And when the Holy Ghost would describe
the strength of a thing, he opposes it to Flesh, 2 Cor. 10.4. Our Weapons are
not fleshly or carnal, but mighty,) partly from his moral filthiness, his sin,
which being a real Disease, does debilitate and weaken the powers of man: Hence
to be a Sinner, and to be without strength, is all one, Romans 5.6, 8. and
Holiness is called The strength of man, Rev. 3.8. But Angels are Spirits, not
Flesh; He makes his Angels Spirits, Psalm. 104.4. And good Angels are free from
sin, therefore called holy Angels, Mark 8.38. Yet notwithstanding all their
Power as Spirits, as sinless Spirits, they are weakness to God. As it is said of
Leviathan, Job 41.27.
He esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten Wood. So I may say of God, He
esteems the strength of evil Angels as Straw, and of good Angels as rotten
Wood. Evil Angels are fettered, wherever they go, in the Chains of his Anger
and his Power, which they cannot break asunder, but must bear as intolerable
as they are. And good Angels own and acknowledge his might and strength above
all other, Revel. 4.8, 11. The Power of God has no Fellow, no Parallel. There
is no Rock (i. e. no strength, Rocks being strong natural Fortifications, Vide
1 Samuel 14.4. Judges 6.16.) like our God, 1 Samuel 2.2.

4. God is incomparable in his Justice: Justice in general, is the giving every
one their due. In God it is that Attribute, whereby he disposes all things
according to the Rule of Equity, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 11.5. And rendereth to every
man according to his works, without respect of persons, Psalm. 62.12. Job 34.11,
19. Gal. 6.6, 7. God is positively or affirmatively just; Ephesians. 3.5. The just
Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do iniquity. He is eminently the just
One, Acts 7.52. He is superlatively most just; Job 34.17. Will thou condemn him
that is most just? altogether just; or as some read it, Justice, Justice,
without the least mixture, tincture or shadow of injustice, all over just and
justice. He is most just, just in the highest degree, just beyond all degrees.
He gives to all their due, without fear of evil, (He stands in awe of none
for their power or greatness, His day of Vengeance is against the Cedars of
Lebanon, and the Oaks of Bashan, and all the high Mountains, Isa. 2, 13, 14.)
without hope of gain, (men are unjust for Bribes, Hos. 4.14. and love with
shame give ye; but Riches prevail not in the day of his Wrath, Prove. 11.4.
Ezekiel. 7, 19. He is no taker of Gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.7.) and without respect to
any, for their nearness or relation to him, or Honors, or outward Excellencies;
Jer. 22.24. He will pluck the Signet from his right hand in the day of his
Justice: Israel were a People near to him, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Psalm. 148. ult. Yet he
does not spare them, when they rebel against him, Psalm. 74.1, 2, 3. Psalm.
44.10. to 15. Jer. 7.12. Read the Lamentations of Jeremiah, and you will find
his severity to them, notwithstanding their near relation to him. Adam and
Angels were great and excellent Beings, yet when they sinned, he made them to
suffer: He accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the Rich more
then the Poor, Job 34.19. He acts according to Law most exactly, and
according to a Law published, and according to a most righteous and just Law,
Romans 2.12, 13, 15, 16. Romans 7.12. therefore is most just: Surely God will not
do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment, Job 34.12. Surely the
Almighty cannot do wickedly, neither can God pervert Judgment: Men may do
justly, God must do justly, he cannot but do justly; and that because his Will
is his Law, and the most exact Platform and Rule of all Justice and
Righteousness. Whatsoever he does is just, because he does it who is the great
Sovereign and Supreme of the World, Job 34.12, 13.

The Actions of God are often mysterious, but ever righteous; Psalm. 145.17. The
Lord is holy in all his Ways, and righteous in all his Works; When his Paths
are in the Seas, and his goings in deep Waters, Psalm. 77.19. That none can
fathom them, or find out the reason of them, even then all his ways are
Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Not as Judgment is opposed to Mercy, but as Judgment is
opposed to injustice. When Clouds and Darkness are before him, (i. e. when his
Providence are such hard Texts, that none can expound them; and such dark
Riddles, that none can unfold them, even then) Righteousness and Judgment are
the habitation of his Throne, Psalm. 99.2. His disposing and distributive Power
moves always within the Sphere of Righteousness.

Men may be just, Math. 1.19. Joseph was a just man; Noah, Genesis 6.9. John, Mark
6.20. Cornelius, Acts 10.22. But shall mortal man be more just then God? shall
man be more pure then his Maker, Job 4.17. The Expression is a denial of all
comparison between God and Man: It Is the highest presumption for Man to prefer
himself before God, Isa. 14.13, 14. Yea, it is monstrous impudency for Man to
compare himself with God. We say amongst men, That comparisons are odious, but
this is the most odious comparison of all, for Enosh, a weak frail Creature, to
compare with Elchah, the Mighty, Almighty Creator; for crookedness to compare
with straitness, and Darkness to compare with Light: The most just man compared
with God, is unjust; His Righteousness is as a filthy rag: In his sight can no
Flesh be justified, Psalm. 143.2. Though in the sight of men, a man may be just,
yet in the sight of God he is unjust: Compare a Star with a Candle, and it is
somewhat; but compare it with the Sun, and it is nothing; it must hide its head
for shame. Compare a godly man with a wicked man, or one not so good as
himself, and he is somebody; but compare him with an Angel, he is no body: what
is he then, if he be compared with a God? Job 9.2, 3. How should man be just
with God? (speak the way, declare the means, the manner, how man should be
righteous before God,) If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of
a thousand; Not to one Question of a thousand which God can put to him, not for
one Action of a thousand which himself has wrought. Alas, is he just, who is
so far from ability to justify all he does, that he cannot justify one act of
a thousand that he does.

Angels are just, they are righteous in their natures, have no spot; in their
lives have no Error, Psalm. 103.20. But are they righteous to God, or before
God? No, Job 4.16, 17, 18. Angels are nothing in justice to God; though they
are just to Man, they are unjust to God: They are in a possibility (considered
in themselves) of actual injustice, which God is not; he is incapable of being
unjust. Again, the Law or Rule of Angels Righteousness is without them, and
dictinct from them, (and thereby they are the more capable of swerving from it)
but the Law or Rule of Gods Justice is within him; yea, it is himself, he is his
own Law, his own Rule, and therefore it is impossible for him to recede, or err
from it. When the Workman and his Rule are different, there may be fear of
wandering from his Rule; for though the Rule be strait, yet the Man may, through
the mistake of his Eye, or shaking of his Hand, draw a crooked Line; but when
the Workman and his Rule are the same, there is no fear: God's Will that acts
all things, is the Rule by which he acts; and therefore every Line must be
strait, and every Action just. He can never err in any thing he does, whose
Will is the Rule of all he does; nay, whose Actions are their own Rule. Such is
the Creatures weakness, that he may wander out of his way; but such is the
Creators Power and Perfection, that he cannot possibly wander, because he is
his own way; Dan. 4.35. I Nebuchadnezzar blessed the most High, who does
according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth. Observe, who does according to his Will, that is his essential eternal
Rule: God does so much surpass Men and Angels in Justice, that he is said to be
the Habitation of Justice; Jer. 50.7. They have sinned against the Lord, the
Habitation of Justice; as if Justice dwelt no where, had no abode but in him
and with him.

CHAP. VIII. God incomparable in his Attributes, in his Knowledge and
Faithfulness.
5. GOd is incomparable in his Knowledge: Knowledge is that Attribute of God,
whereby he understands all things in and of himself. He is styled in the
Scriptures, 1 Samuel 2.3. A God of Knowledge: The Lord is a God of Knowledge, and
by him Actions are weighed. As Christ is called a Man of Sorrows, Isa. 53.3. To
express the greatness of his Griefs, to denote him one made up of Sorrow;
little else then Sorrow: So God is called a God of Knowledge, to express the
greatness of his Knowledge; as if he were wholly, and only Knowledge. Hence he
has Eyes and Ears attributed to him, because he knows all that is done as an
Eyewitness, and whatsoever is spoken as an Ear-witness, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm.
11.7.

The Understanding of God is like himself, infinite, without bounds or limits;
Psalm. 147.5. His Understanding is infinite. He is said, Job 37.16. To be
perfect in Knowledge; not only comparatively, (as one man may be in respect of
another, or as an Angel may be in respect of Man) but absolutely to his
Knowledge; nothing can be given or added from his Knowledge, nothing can be
taken: His Knowledge is so perfect, that it admits not of an increase or
decrease. Men are knowing, Solomon was famous for Knowledge, 1 Chronicles. 1.12. He
could speak of the nature of all Plants, from the Cedar to the Hysop, 1 Kings
4.33. The Romans are said to be filled with all Knowledge, Romans 15.14. Angels
are more knowing then Men: Flesh is dull-sighted, and of dim understanding;
Spirits have sharper Wits, and quicker Apprehensions. The Devil, though a
fallen Angel, has one of his names Demon, from his Knowledge: Elect Angels
surely know much more then Devils, for they always Behold the Face of their
Father, and in that Face, as in a Glass, behold more then humane Eyes can
discern, or evil Angels conceive. The Spirits of just Men in Heaven see Face to
Face, and know as they are known, understand very much more then they could
here below; but Angels, as their Understandings are of larger capacity, and
their Natures more excellent, must needs know more then Men: But do Men or
Angels know as God; Can it be said of any Man, of any Angel, He is perfect in
Knowledge: His Knowledge is incapable of addition or diminution. Can it be said
of any Man, any Angel, his Knowledge is infinite. Man's knowledge in this World
is little, in comparison of what it shall be; yea, nothing: We are but of
Yesterday, and know nothing, Job 8.3. He is but of small continuance here, and
has but little experience; and therefore must have but little knowledge, yea
so little, that it is called nothing: yea, the knowledge of Men and Angels in
the other World will be so little (though enough for their perfection and
satisfaction) that it will be nothing, in comparison of the knowledge of God;
finite knowledge is nothing, compared with that knowledge which is infinite.

Whether you consider the matter or object of God's Knowledge, or the manner or
way of it, he is incomparable in it.

1. If you consider the matter or object of his Knowledge: God knows all
things; John 21 17. Lord thou know all things: 1 John 3.20. God is greater
then our Hearts, for he knows all things. He knows whatsoever has been,
whatsoever is, whatsoever shall be, whatsoever can be, whatsoever cannot be. He
knows all substances, accidents, necessary contingent things: He makes all,
upholds all, governs all, and discerns all: The Eyes of the Lord are in every
place, 2 Chronicles. 16.3.

He knows those things that are most hidden, most secret, the Hearts, the
Thoughts, the most close retired motions of the Spirit of Man; 1 Cor. 2.11.
What man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man that is in him?
Yea, what Angel knows the things of a man? but God does. Hell and Destruction
are before the Lord; how much more the hearts of the Children of Men, Prove.
15.11. Hell seems to be far from his sight, and very remote from Heaven his
Seat: The hearts of the Children of men seem to be unsearchable, so deep that
none can fathom them; but he has a Line that will sound these depths: He
knows the spirit of man, better then man knows himself: The heart is
deceitful, and desperately wicked, who knows it? (No Man, no Angel knows
it,) I the Lord search the Heart, Jer. 17.9, 10. And none knows it but he,
therefore he is incomparable herein; For thou, thou only know the Hearts of
the Children of Men, 1 Kings 8.39. It Is his sole Prerogative: Men and Angels
may see the Skins and Colors, and Lineaments and Proportions, and Faces and
Garments, or outsides of things; but God sees the in-sides, he pryeth into
the very bowels of things, 1 Samuel 16.7. All things are naked and dissected and
anatomized before him, Heb. 4.13. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Psalm. 7.10. Jer. 11.20.

He knows what is future, as well as what is past and present: Thou know
my Thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139.2. Long before I think them: They? are in thy
Thoughts, before they are in my Heart. Man knows not what a day is big with,
or may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. nor Angels neither; but God knows what is in
the Womb of eternity, what all Ages and Generations shall produce: He declares
the end from the beginning, and from ancient time the things that are not yet
done, Isa. 46.10. And tells us this is proper to himself, Let them declare the
things that shall come to pass, that we may know that they are gods, Isa.
41.23. Let them foretell what is future, and we will believe their Deity.
Predictions are Arcana Imperii, those secret things that belong only to God,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Isa. 41.22, 23, 26.

2. He is incomparable in the manner of his Knowledge: God knows all things
fully and perfectly, Men and Angels know (what they do know) but imperfectly,
and by halves: They know but part of what is knowable, and they know this but
in part. God beholds every thing thoroughly, as if (like a well-drawn Picture)
he beheld that alone, and none but that, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. His Eyelids try the
Children of Men, Psalm. 11.5. i. e. He has a distinct certain critical through
knowledge of them.

God knows all things immediately, by immediate intuition, not by species:
Men know things either by the Senses, the Eyes, Ears, or Tastes; or by species
taken in by the Sense, and imprinted on the fantasy, which are thence offered
to the Understanding; or else by Faith, and the report of others, or by
discourse and ratiocination. He knows one thing by another, the Conclusion by
Mediums and Premises; the Causes by the Effects, and the Consequents by the
Antecedents. Saints and Angels in Heaven know things in God, not in themselves:
God knows all things in themselves, and sees all things in himself, as in a
Glass, Man in this World must have a twofold Light to see by; A light in his
Eye, and a light in the Air: But the Father of Lights needs no light to see by,
Darkness and Light are both alike to him, Psalm. 139.12. His Eyes are as a Flame
of Fire, He sees in the Dark, Revel. 1.14.

God knows all things at once (uno actu and uno ictu, as they say): Creatures
know one thing by another, and one thing after another; Their Understandings
are unable to take in many Objects at once, much less able to take in all
Objects at once; but God sees all things at one View: The Lord looks down
from Heaven, he beholds all the Children of Men's From the place of his
Habitation he beholds all the Inhabitants of the Earth, Psalm. 33.13, 14. The
Eye of Man may see many things at once, as an Hive of Bees, but if it will see
other things, it must remove the sight; though the Mind of Man can take in more
then the Eye, as a whole Country or World at once, yet it is only the lump of
gross; if it would take the distinct knowledge of them, it must remove from
thought to thought; but God takes all distinctly particularly at once.

God knows all things from everlasting, before ever the World had a Being:
Men and Angels may know what is, when it is, but cannot know it as God does,
before it was; Acts 15.18. Known to God are all his Works, from the beginning
of the World. Before he erected the curious frame of the World, he knew all the
Rooms and Furniture in it, all the motions and actions of all the Inhabitants
of it. He does by one pure, simple, undivided, eternal act of his Understanding
know all things perfectly, immediately, distinctly, every moment.

6. God is incomparable in his Truth and Faithfulness: Truth is that Attribute
in God, whereby he is in himself, as he reveals himself to be, and in his
sayings and doings, as he speaks and acts.

God is Truth in himself, and Truth toward his Creatures: He is Truth in
himself, 1. As he truly is, and really existeth: Hence he is styled the true
God, Jer 10.10. John 17.3. in opposition to Idols, or false gods, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
So he is truly infinite, truly all-sufficient, truly eternal, truly immutable,
etc. 2. As he is the unchangeable Archetipe and Idaea of all true things
without himself, so all created things are true, as they answer their patterns
in his mind. 3. In his immanent Actions, as his Decrees, and eternal
Resolutions, are all certain, and attain a punctual accomplishment, Psalm.
33.11. He is never deceived nor disappointed in his Purposes.

God is Truth toward his Creatures; 1. In his Works, as all his Actions of
Creation, Preservation, Government, Redemption, are real, and not chimera's or
appearances, Rev. 15.3. Psalm. 111.7. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 25.10.

2. In his Words, all he says is Truth: His Precepts are true, a perfect Rule
of holiness, without any defect, Psalm. 119.86. All thy Commandments are
Faithfulness, verse 142. Thy Law is the Truth. All his Promises are true, and
shall be performed: Not one good thing fails of all that the Lord our God
has promised, Josh. 23.14. Hence the Gospel, the compendium of all the
Promises, is often called The Word of Truth, James 1.18. And the Covenant of
Grace is called Sure Mercies, Isa. 55.3. All his Praedictions are true, and
come to pass in their Season, Hab. 2.3. Rev. 22.6, 7. These are true and
faithful Sayings, Genesis 49.10.

His Threatenings are true, and fail not, Romans 2.2. of their accomplishment, 2
Kings 9.26, 36.

He is Truth it self, John 14.6. John 17.6. Abundant in Truth, Exodus 34.6.
Truth, Truth: The Lord God of Truth, Psalm. 34.5. A God that cannot lie, Titus
1.2. All lying arises either from forgetfulness; Men break their word, because
their Memories are slippery; but Oblivio non cadit in Deum; He is ever mindful
of his Word, Luke 1.72. To remember his holy Covenant, Psalm. 106.46. Psalm. 111.
5. He will ever be mindful of his Covenant. Or from weakness, some would, but
want power to make good their Promises; though they were able when they
promised, yet they are by some Providence or other disabled, before the day of
performance comes, but the strength of Israel cannot lie, 1 Samuel 15.29. The
Rock, the eternity of Israel cannot lie; Or from Wickedness, some can, but will
not make good their words, but God cannot be charged with any wickedness: Psalm.
92. ult. There is no unrighteousness in him, 1 Kings 22.23. Ezekiel. 14.9.

Men may be true, Psalm. 15.4. Angels are true; but neither Men nor Angels are
true as God is, let them be put in the Scales with God; And Men of high degree
are Vanity, and Angels of the highest degree are a Lie: to be laid in the
Balance, they are altogether lighter then Vanity, Psalm. 62.9. Read over God's
Truth in himself, and you will see how far Angels come short thereof: Are they
the Exemplar of all things? are all things true as they agree with the Idaea's
in their minds? Consider his Truth toward his Creatures; Can it be said of an
Angel, as of God, The Angel that cannot lie has promised? Titus 1.2. Are they
under an absolute impossibility of deceiving? Surely if they be considered in
themselves, it was as possible for them to lie, as for the Father of Lies. It Is
said of God, It is impossible for him to lie, Heb. 6.18. But this cannot be
spoken of Elect Angels considered in themselves. God is so true, that he only
is true, all to him are Liars, Romans 3.4. Revel. 3.7, 14.

CHAP. IX. God incomparable in his Mercy and Patience.
7. GOD is incomparable in his Mercy: Mercy is an Attribute of God, whereby he
pittieth and relieveth his Creature in misery. It Is an Attribute which relates
to the Creature only; God knows himself, and loves himself, and glorifieth
himself; but he is not merciful to himself: It is an Attribute that relates to
the Creature in misery. Justice seeks a worthy Object, Grace is exercised
toward an unworthy Object, but Mercy looks out for a needy, an indigent
Object. God is bountiful and gracious to Elect Angels, because they could not
deserve that perfection and happiness which they enjoy; but he is not merciful
to them, for they were never miserable. Fallen Man is the proper Object of
Mercy, as being not only undeserving of the least good, but as also having
plunged himself into all evil. Mercy is an Attribute, whereby he pittieth his
Creature in misery: Hence he is said in Scripture (after the manner of Men) to
have tender Mercies, Psalm. 25.6. And bowels of Mercy, Luke 1.58. And to be
afflicted in the Afflictions of his People, Isa. 63.9. And to have his Soul
grieved for the miseries of Israel, Judges 10.15, 16. As tender Parents, are
extremely troubled for the Afflictions of their Children, Psalm. 103.12, 13. So
his Bowels are turned within him, his Repentings are kindled together, Hos.
11.8, 9. Mercy does not only pity, but also relieve the afflicted; it has an
Hand to supply, as well as an Heart to pity those that are in Distress, Isaiah
34.18. Genesis 19.16.

The Attribute of Mercy is that which God glories in, and boasts of, Exodus
33.19. Psalm. 103.8. Noble and Heroic Spirits are ever gentle and merciful: The
basest Minds are most cruel, and farthest from Mercy. God says, Fury is not in
him, Isaiah 27.4. Judgment is his strange Work, Isaiah 28.21. He does not
afflict willingly, Lament. 3.33. But delights in the Prosperity of his
Servants, Psalm 35.27. It Is not his Nature to disturb and destroy Men, it is
their Sin that forces Thunderbolts into his Hands, Isaiah 44.22. His delight
is in Mercy, Micah 7.18. The blessed God has multitude of Mercies, Psalm. 51.1.
To answer the multitude of the Creatures Miseries, Abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3.
He is said to be rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Exceeding abundant rich in mercy,
Ephesians. 2.7. His Mercy, as Oil, swims on the top of all his Attributes, is his
delight, Jer. 32.41. I will rejoice over them, to do them good. His Mercy, as
Gold, being most excellent, over-layeth all his Works, Psalm. 145.7. His tender
mercy is over all his Works. His Mercy is to all admiration: O how excellent is
thy loving kindness, Psalm. 36.7. O how great is thy goodness, Psalm. 31.19. His
Mercy is beyond all Apprehension; Thy Mercy reaches to the Heavens, Psalm.
108.4. 1 Cor. 2.9. He is styled the Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. Not the
Father of Justice or Fury.

Mercy is the Joy and Pleasure of God: Hence he is said to have a Mercy-Seat,
and to have a Throne of Grace, Heb. 9.5. Sitting is a posture of Ease and Rest,
but he rises to execute Justice, Psalm. 68.1. He does rest in his Love, Ephesians.
3.17. Mercy is the Glory and Honor of God. When Moses desired to see the Glory
of God, Exodus 33.18. The Lord proclaims, The Lord God gracious, merciful, Exodus
34.6, 7. When God promises to do great things for his People, That he will
give them Health, abundance of Peace, cleanse them from all their Filthiness,
and pardon all their Iniquities, Jer. 33.7, 8, 9. He gives us the fruit of it,
verse 9. And it shall be to me for a Name of Joy, a Praise and Glory before all
Nations. His Mercy is his Riches, his Treasure; Hence he is said to be Rich in
mercy, Ephesians. 2.4.

God is merciful in all he does, universally merciful: All his ways are Mercy
and Truth, Psalm. 25.10. The whole World is a Volume written within and without
with Characters of Mercy. He is merciful to all Men; Psalm. 145.9. Shows mercy
to thousands, Exodus 20.6. Exodus 34.7. Math. 5.45, 46. He is merciful at all
times. His mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 118.1. Psalm. 136.1, 2, 3. He is
merciful in all respects; He gives all sorts of Mercies, 1 Timothy 6.13. Ephesians.
1.3. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.

Men are merciful, Prove. 11.17. Psalm. 37.26. So are Angels in a sense; but none
of them comparable to God: The tender Mercies of the Wicked, yea of the
righteous Men, yea of Angels, are Cruelties to the Mercies of God. Have they
such Pity, such Bowels for miserable Creatures as God has? Have they such
Power, such Ability, to relieve afflicted Ones as God has? Can they afford
preserving, protecting Mercy, as God, Job 10.12. Pardoning and forgiving Mercy,
Micah 7.18. Purifying and renewing Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Saving and eternal Mercy,
Tit. 3.5, 6. O how infinitely short do they come of him. He is so incomparable
in Mercy, that Mercy is said to belong only to him: Unto thee, O Lord,
belongs Mercy, Psalm. 62.10. Unto thee, and none but thee. He is so merciful,
that when his Bowels conflict with justice on the behalf of Sinners, and get
the upper hand, he rejoices in the Victory; Mercy rejoices against Judgment,
James 2.14. He is so merciful, that he dispenses with his own Institutions,
for the sake of it, Hos. 6.6. Math. 9.13. with Math. 12.7. Once more, he is so
merciful, that he is upbraided with it, as if he were too fond of that
Attribute, and loved it overmuch, Jonah 4.2. Was not this my saying in my own
Country? for I knew that thou wast merciful. Thou did send me to Preach
Destruction and Desolation to Nineveh, but when I received the Message, I knew
all would be prevented by mercy, and that to Preach such a Threatening, was but
to disgrace and dishonor my self, as a false Prophet, before the men of
Nineveh; for I thought then, what is now come to pass, that notwithstanding the
peremptoriness of the Message, Mercy would interpose, and prove me false.

8. God is incomparable in his Patience: Patience is that Attribute in God,
whereby he bears with Sinners, and forbears or defers their Punishment; or
that, whereby he expects and waits long for their Conversion. He is a God
slow to anger, Psalm. 103.8. He waits on Men to do them good, Isa. 30.18. He
is long-suffering, 2 Pet. 3.7, 9. Nay, He endures with much long-suffering the
Vessels of Wrath, Romans 9.22. He is the God of Patience, Romans 15.5.

The Patience of God is the more admirable, if we consider,

1. How perfectly he hates Sin, Psalm. 5.4. Hab. 1.13. Prove. 6.16. And how
offensive it is to him, it grieveth him, Ephesians. 4.30. It presses him as Sheaves
press a Cart, Amos 2.13. He is broken with their whorish Hearts, Ezekiel. 6.9.
Though he be infinitely perfect, that no Sin can be hurtful to him; yet he is
so infinitely pure, that all Sin is hateful to him.

2. What an affront Sin is to him; A contempt of his Authority, therefore
called a despising him, 1 Samuel 2.30. An ecclipsing his Honor, therefore called
a dishonouring him, Romans 2.23. A contention with him for Mastery, therefore
called a fighting against him, Acts 5.39. Job 15.25. A violation of his
Commands, therefore called a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. It affronts
his Wisdom, therefore called folly, 2 Samuel 24.10. His Justice, therefore
called unrighteousness, 1 John 1.6, 7. His Patience, therefore called a
despising his long-suffering, Romans 2.4. His Mercy, therefore called a turning
his Grace into wantonness, Jude ver. 4. His Truth, therefore called a Lie, Isa.
44.20. It must be infinite Patience, to bear with that which is the Object of
infinite hatred.

3. Who they are who thus dare and provoke him? They are his Creatures, Psalm.
100.2. whom he has infinitely obliged, Lament. 3.22, 23. And laden with
innumerable Blessings, Psalm. 116.12. And loved unconceiveably, John 3.16. And
seeks daily to overcome with his kindness, Psalm. 130.5. Hos. 11.1. Yet these
turn Rebels and Traitors, devise and endeavor his Ruin, and ioyn with Satan,
his Arch-enemy, in order thereunto, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Job 15.25, 26.

4. That he knows all Men's Sins, the number of them, the nature of them, all
the aggravations they admit of: He knows their Thoughts, Words, Actions,
Psalm. 139. I know all their Wickedness, and all their Sins, Amos 5.12. Ezekiel.
11.5.

5. That he has Power in his Hands to avenge himself, when he pleases; He can
look, speak, think, his Creature into Hellfire: Here is the Miracle, He that
is great in Power, is slow to Anger, Nah. 1.3.

6. That he is the more provoked, because of his Patience: The Revenues of
Heaven are at present impaired by it; Good Men hereby question and quarrel with
his Providence, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 4. Jer. 12.1, 2, 3. Bad Men hereby are
encouraged to continue in Sin, and to judge Him an Abettor of their
Profaneness, Eccles. 8.11. Psalm. 50.21.

7. That he bears notwithstanding all this, Year after Year, many Years,
forty Years with the Jews, Psalm. 95.10. With the old World 120 Years, Genesis 6.3.
With the Amorites 400 Years, Genesis 15.13, 14.

8. That he does not only forbear them, but also do them good: He continues
Life, and Health, and Food, and Raiment, and Friends and Relations; nay, the
Gospel and Salvation, and seasons of Grace, and tenders of his Love and Favor,
and of everlasting Life, Acts 17.17, 18, 27, 28. Luke 19.41. Job 21.14, 15, 16.
2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

Men are Patient: Moses was the meekest man on Earth, Numb. 12.12. But could he
bear as God? No. When the Israelites provoked him, he was impatient, Psalm.
106.33. They provoked his Spirit, that he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. The
Apostles were good men, yet upon a little affront, they call for Fire from
Heaven, Luke 9.54. If God should be as impatient toward the most patient Men,
as they are toward others, woe would be to them that ever they were born.

But though Men come short; yet, are not Angels as patient as God? Surely No,
Angels cannot bear like God with such a froward peevish piece as man is: The
Lord told Moses, That he would not go up in the midst of them, least he should
consume them for their Sins; but he would send an Angel before them, to drive
out the Canaanites, Exodus 33.2. Yet verse 4. When the People heard these evil
Tidings, they mourned; and no Man did put on his Ornaments. What evil Tidings?
1. They should have an Angel for their Guide and Guard, that was both stronger
and wiser then any Men. 2. An Angel that should drive out their Enemies, (God
undertaketh for that) and bring them into the best Country under Heaven. 3. God
gives them the reason why he declines their immediate Conduct, least their
stubbornness should provoke him to destroy them; yet they weep and mourn at
these tidings. Alas, they knew if God could not bear with their Provocations,
much less could Angels; and therefore if Angels be their Guides, they must
perish. If they could tire out infinite forbearance, and drain an Ocean; they
must needs quickly tire out finite Patience, and drain a little Stream: How
soon would limited forbearance, and a drop of patience be spent. God is so
incomparable in his patience, that he is called The God of all Patience; not
only because he has all manner of patience in him, but because he has
ingrost it all to himself.

CHAP. X. God incomparable in his Attributes, as they are from him, as they are
his Essence, as they are all one in him, as they are in him in an infinite
manner.
2. I Shall show more specially the difference between God and his Creatures,
in reference to these communicable Attributes.

1. These Attributes are all essential to God: They are from God, as well as in
God. He is their Author, as well as their Subject: But in Men and Angels they
are all derivative; though Truth, and Justice, and Holiness, may be in them,
yet they are not from them, but from God. God is not obliged to any but himself
for them; He can thank only himself that he has them, but Angels and Men are
not obliged to themselves, but to him for them. When the high God would lay Job
low, by manifesting the vast difference between himself and Job; He bids Job be
obliged to himself for his Excellency, Job 40.10.
Deck thy self with Majesty and Excellency, array thy self with Glory and
Beauty. To be decked and arrayed with Majesty and Excellency, notes, 1. The
extent and abundance of it, the whole man is covered with Raiment. To be
clothed with shame, is to be extremely reproached, Psalm. 35.26. To be arrayed
with humility, is to be very humble, lowly in an extraordinary degree, 1 Pet.
5.5.2. The publikeness of it; our Deckings and Rayments are visible, we cannot
go abroad, but all see our Clothes. God speaks to Job to this purpose, Job,
thou have talked very presumptuously, and carried thy self as if there were no
great distance or difference between Me and thy self, as if thou were like me,
and and equal to me: If thou art, let me see it; Deck thy self with Majesty and
Excellency, array thy self with Glory and Beauty. I can deck my self, and array
my self with all these in the highest degree, and will not be beholden to any
others for their help: I am clothed with Majesty, but no Creature lent an hand
for the making up, or putting on those Clothes. Psalm. 104.1. I have covered my
self with light as with a Garment, Psalm. 104.2. But neither Man nor Angel
assorded me the least assistance therein. Do thou as much for thy self as I
have done for my self, and then indeed thou may compare with me. God might
make the same offer to Angels which he does to Job, and none of them would or
could accept it. Dependence is of their essence, as they are Creatures; and
they can no more be separated from it, then from themselves.

2. These Attributes are the very essence of God; not Qualities or Properties,
as in Men and Angels. The holiness of God is the holy God: Once have I sworn by
my Holiness, Psalm. 89.36. ( i. e. by my self,) that I will not lie unto David.
For Heb. 6.13. God having no greater to swear by, swore by himself. The Power
of God is the powerful God, the Truth of God is the true God, the Wisdom of God
is the wise God. All his Attributes are himself, his Essence: In Men and
Angels, their Wisdom, and Power, and Justice, and Truth, are Accidents, and
differ from their Substances; and this is apparent, because Angels and Men may
be, and are, without these Attributes, as Devils and wicked Men. In them these
Properties are one thing, and their Essence is another thing, so that they may
be separated. An Angel may be an Angel, and not holy, nor wise, nor just, etc.
A Man may be a Man, and not powerful, nor patient, nor merciful; and the reason
is, because these Properties are really distinct from the Essences of Men or
Angels; but in God they are his very Being and Essence; they are himself, and
can no way be separated from him, no more then he can be separated from
himself: God could not be God, if he were not most wise, most holy, most just,
most patient, etc. God's Attributes are one most pure Essence diversely
apprehended of us, as it is diversely manifested to us. God's punishing the
Wicked, is his Justice; God's performing his Promises, is his Faithfulness: His
relieving the Miserable, is his Mercy: His bearing with the Guilty, is his
Patience; so all are his Essence, himself.

3. Those Attributes are all one in God: His Justice, is his Mercy; and his
Wisdom, is his Patience, and his Knowledge, is his Faithfulness; and his
Mercy, is his Justice, etc. Though they are distinguished, in regard of their
Objects, and in regard of our Apprehensions of them, and in regard of their
Effects: yet they are all one in themselves, and this flows from the former
head, because they are the Essence of God, and his Essence is a pure undivided
Being. In Men and Angels, these Attributes or Perfections are different and
several, for they may have one without the other: Their Righteousness is one
thing, and their Power another thing, and their Truth a third thing: For we see
in Angels some that are strong and powerful, that are not righteous or
faithful; and among Men, some have one of these Perfections who have not
another; yea, though in good men all these perfections are in some degree, yet
all are not in any one in the same degree; there is scarce any Saint who is not
more eminent for some spiritual excellency then for others. But in God they are
all one and the same. As when the Sunbeams shine through a yellow Glass, they
are yellow; a green Glass, they are green; a red Glass, they are red; and yet
all the while the beams are the same: Or as when the Sun shines on Clay, it
hardens it; on Wax, it softness it; on sweet Flowers, it draws out their
fragrancy; on Dunghills and Ditches, it draws out their ill savours: yet
still it is the same Sun, and the same Influences; the difference lies in the
Objects and the Effects. So the great God, who is always working in the World,
when he works toward the Wicked in punishing, he is righteous; toward the
Godly in saving them, he is merciful; yet still the same immutable God.

4. All these Attributes are in God in the highest degree; yea, beyond all
degrees: These communicable Attributes which are in Angels and Men in degrees,
and limited, (for a finite Substance will not admit of an infinite Property)
are in God infinitely. Immensity, like a golden Thread runs through all his
communicable Properties: His Understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. So his
justice is infinite, his Mercy is infinite, and all the rest: They have no
bounds, no limits, but his own will and pleasure. He never acted to the utmost
in any of them; he never put forth so much Power, but he could put forth more
if he pleased: He never exercised so much Patience, but he could exercise more
if he would.

Hence it is, That in Scripture that they are affirmed of God not only in the
concrete, but also in the abstract. He is not only loving, but Love, God is
love, 1 John 4.7. He is not only wise, but Wisdom, Prove. 9.1. Wisdom has
built her House: He is not only good, but goodness; I will make all my
goodness (i. e. my self,) pass before thee, Exodus 33.19. He is not only holy,
but holiness: Look down from Heaven, the Habitation where thy holiness
dwells, Isa. 63.15. Therefore these Attributes of God must be boundless,
because they are his Being himself.

CHAP. XI. God incomparable in his Works, Creation and Providence.
Thirdly, GOD is incomparable in his Works, as well as in his Being and
Attributes: None has such a strong Hand, such a stretched out Arm, or can do
like him. O Lord (says Moses) thou have begun to show to thy Servant thy
Greatness, and thy mighty Hand: For what God is there in Heaven or on Earth,
that can do according to thy Works? Deuteronomy. 3.24. He is a God doing Wonders,
Exodus 15.11. His Doings are like his Being: He works like a God, Isa. 28.29. He
is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working: His Works are all wonderful,
Psalm. 86.10. Thou do mavelous things, thou art God alone. He does miranda
stupenda; so that it is said of him, Numb. 23.23. What has God wrought? His
Works are great, Joel 2.21. Honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111.3. Perfect,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. God thundereth marvellously with his Voice, great things does he,
which we cannot comprehend, Job 37.5. The Works of Men and Angels are little,
small; some mean things they do by Divine concurrence; but his Works are great
and unsearchable, which we cannot comprehend. If Creatures do great things, (in
a sense, or comparatively,) yet they may be found out; their Fellow Creatures
have a Clue which will lead them into all their Labyrinths, and a Line which
will sound the bottom of all their Actions; but God's Works cannot be
comprehended by the understandings of any Creature: O the depth of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his Ways, and Doings past finding
out, Romans 11.33. His Footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77.19. Yea, He does great
things, and unsearchable and mavelous things without number, Job 5.9. till
there be no number. If Creatures could do great things, and mavelous and
unsearchable; yet you might soon reckon up all such works of theirs, one great
mavelous unsearchable thing were enough for the whole Creation; But God does
great things and unsearchable, yea mavelous things without number. His ways
are not as Man's ways, as far as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so far
are his ways above the ways of man, Isa. 55.8, 9. No ways like his; Among
all the Gods, there is none like unto him; neither are there any Works like
unto his Works, Psalm. 86.8. Whether you consider the matter of his Works, and
the Works themselves, or his manner of Working.

1. His Works themselves, and therein I shall (pass by his internal Works, both
personal and effectual, and) mention only his external Works.

1. He is incomparable in what Works he is pleased to do, or has done.

1. Creation, Herein he is incomparable: Creatura non potest creare, The
Creature cannot create; Ex nihilo nihil fit with them: Man may do something
toward the emendation of the form, but he cannot produce matter, no nor mend
it when it is before him. A Goldsmith may make a sparkling Jewel, but then you
must give him Gold and precious Stones to make it of; he can put the matter
into a better form, but he is so far from making matter where there is none,
that he cannot mend the matter which you give him: He cannot make Gold of
Silver, nor Diamonds of common Stones. Man's work may exceed the matter, but
man's work cannot make the matter, exceed it self. But God can not only make
the matter to exceed it self, (as in man, who is formed of the Dust of the
Earth, he has such curious Parts, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, etc. such Members,
Eyes, Cheeks, Ears, etc. Such Characters of Beauty in the whole, that he looks
nothing like his Parent Earth, the matter of which he was made,) but also make
matter: He has brought something, nay all things out of nothing. All the
Angels and Men cannot create one grain of Corn, one pile of Grass, one mote of
Dust; but the great God has erected the stately Fabric of Heaven and the
Earth, with the curious steps and stories thereof, and the various Creatures
and Furniture therein, of nothing. Hereby he proves himself the true God, The
living God that made Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, Act. 14.15. He
proves his Deity hereby, Jer. 10.10, 11, 12. The gods that have not made the
Heavens and the Earth, shall perish from the Earth, and from under the Heavens:
He has made the Earth by his Power, He has established the World by his
Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by his discretion; i. e. Can you be so
foolish and sottish, as to imagine that blind, dumb, deaf, dead Idols can
compare with him, who created you, and all things beside. When God would
proclaim his Sovereignty, and incomparable Excellency, he challenges Job,
Where wast thou, when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? declare, if thou
have understanding: Who has laid the measures thereof, or stretched the line
upon it? Whereupon are the Foundations thereof set? or who laid the
cornerstone thereof? Job 38.4, 5. God would here denote the exactness and
acurateness of his Works, and so he alludes to men, who when they would set up
a strong, stately, neat, compact Dwelling, lay the Foundations and corner
Stones, and all the rest by line and measure: But that which God would
principally intimate here, is his own Omnipotency, and man's Impotency: Where
wast thou, when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? etc. Did thou then lend
me an helping-Head how to do it, or an helping-Hand in the doing of it? Surely
No, I did all my self. Those innumerable Beings which are on Earth, and in the
Ocean; yea, that are included within the vast Circumference of the highest
Heavens, are all made by him out of nothing: Through Faith we believe that the
Worlds were made by the Word of God, so that things which are seen were not
made of things that do appear, Heb. 11.3. The great God had no materials to
make the great House with, he did not frame it of his own Essence, or any
pre-existent matter, Isa. 45.12. Yet such admirable qualities are every where
intermixed, matter and form, subject and and accidents, power and goodness,
wisdom and order; a rare symmetry, exact proportion, and beauty in the whole; a
dependent subordination, and useful subserviency, in every part so equally
poised, that it is hard to determine which bears the greatest weight in the
mighty work, and gives abundant cause to cry out with the Psalmist, O Lord, how
mavelous are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 104.24.

2. He is incomparable in regard of Providence: 1. For Preservation none is
like him, nay, none beside him does this; O thou Preserver of Men, Job 7.20.
Thy Visitation preserves my Spirit, Job 10.12. God is unlike to Men; The
Carpenters or Masons build Houses, and then leave them to the care and charge
of others; but God keeps up what he sets up. His Providence succeeds
Creation, and is indeed a continual Creation: Thou preservest Man and Beast,
Psalm. 36.6. Not Food, or Air, or Sleep, but Thou preservest Man and Beast: And
not only Men and Beasts, but all things subsist by him, Colos. 1.17. That Hand
alone which made all, can maintain all; and that Power only which produced out
of nothing, must preserve from nothing; Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move,
and have our beings. That Being which gave us our Beings, must uphold us in our
Beings; Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power, 1.
Sustinendo, As a Pillar, or sure Foundation, upon which they stand. The Air
which surrounds the Earth and Ocean, cannot bear a Feather, yet in it hangs
the massy weight of Earth and Sea: Job 26.7. He hangs the Earth (i. e. Earth
and Sea, the terrestrial Globe,) upon nothing: His Power is the only Pillar
that bears them up. 2. Influendo, As a Fountain from which they derive all
their virtue and operations: The beings and motions of all his Creatures depend
wholly upon his concurrence. If he suspend his Influence Coctum secundum,
according to the Schoolmen, the Fire will not burn, Dan. 3.27. Neither can the
best Eyes see, though the faculty be well disposed, and the object be colored,
and at a good distance, Genesis 19.7. as has been hinted before. It Is natural to
the Sun to run his Race strongly and swiftly; yet if he does not concur as
swift as the Sun is, he cannot creep a Snails pace; he stands still in
Giboah, Joshua 10.13. Job. 9.7.3. Constringendo, As a Sovereign Bond and
Ligature, by which the parts of all things hold together, and are kept as water
in a Vessel, from flowing abroad to their dissolution. No Man, no Angel, can
bear its own weight, much less the weight of another Creature: Every Creature
is like a Glass without a bottom, which cannot stand alone, but must always be
in hand.

It Is impossible for the Creation, or any part of it, to bear up a moment, if
God should forget it, and deny his actual concurrence to it. It does constantly
depend on God, as the Figure of the Seal imprinted on the Water, which being
withdrawn, the impression is instantly defaced. God is to the World, as the
Soul to the Body, which alone can actuate and move it, without which it cannot
stir at all, but is as a dead Corpse.

2. For Gubernation, He governs all, and neither Men nor Angels can govern
themselves. The great Family of the World would soon lose its beauty; yea its
being, if he did not maintain its harmony and concord, by guiding them in their
motions, keeping them in their several stations, and directing them to their
ends: The Lord has established his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom
rules over all, Psalm. 103.19. One Creature would most cruelly devour another;
Beasts would prey on Men: All Creatures would become their own Enemies and
Executioners; The whole Earth would be turned into an Acheldama, and a
Golgatha, a Field of Blood, and Place of Skulls; yea, into an Hell, if he did
not order, and guide, and govern all. Treasons, Incest, Slaughters, Parricides,
would over-whelm the whole World, pervert the order of Nature, turn all into
Confusion and Destruction; if he did not keep the Reins in his own Hands, and
govern all things, in every of their actions, every moment.

He governs the highest, even the Governors themselves on Earth, that seem to
be above all Government: Kings and Princes seem to be absolute, and wholly at
their own disposal; Who may say to a King, What do thou? Many will tell us,
That their Hands are their own, to do what they please; but more will
acknowledge, that their Hearts are their own, to think as they please. But
alas, they cannot command their Hands to do what they will, their Hands are
ruled and overruled by him, Act. 4.28. Herod and Pontius Pilate were gathered
together, to do what thy Hand determined to be done. In like manner, their
Hearts are not in their own Hands, to think as they will, but in God's Hand, to
think what he will: The Heart of the King is in the Hand of the Lord, and he
turns it as the Rivers of Water, which way he pleases, Prove. 21.1. As the
Husbandman turns the Sluices into his Ground, this way, or that way, into this
Channel or that Channel, as he thinks best for his own advantage; so God
turns the Hearts of Kings this way or that way, which way he sees most for
his Glory: Prove. 16.9. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs
his steps. No man is Master of himself, so much as of his Thoughts; that Heart
that devises its way, is directed in those devices by God. The Sun is higher
then an earthly Prince, and seems to be his own guide; he acts naturally, and
so necessarily: But if he speak to the Sun, it rises not; and he seals up
the Stars, Job 9.9. He has a Negative Voice upon the motions of all Beings.

He governs the lowest as well as the highest: As none are so high, as to be
above his Precepts; so none are so low, as to be below his Providence: The
highest must remember him, and he does not forget the lowest; Are not two
Sparrows sold for a Farthing, yet not one of them falls to the ground without
your Fathers providence, Math. 10.29. Sparrows seem to fly at liberty, and to
fall casually; but even their flight is directed by God, and their fall ordered
by him: They neither fly nor fall accidentally, but providentially.

He governs the most stubborn Creatures, those which seem wholly
ungovernable: The Winds, the high Winds, Whirle-Winds seem to cast off and
scorn all Rule and Government; but these Winds are at his will: Stormy-Winds
fulfill his Word, Psalm. 148.8. When they rush forth with such irresistible
force, that neither Men, nor Trees, nor Horses can stand before them; He rides
on their Wings, and has them more at command then a skilful Rider has an
Horse, to turn this way, or that way, at his pleasure, Psalm. 104.3. Psalm.
18.10. They are all at his beck: He causes them to blow, Psalm. 147.18. And
cease them, Matthew. 8.26. The wise man tells us, He has them in his fist,
Prove. 30.4. He can hold them fast, or let them loose, as a man, what he has in
his fist.

The Waves seem rougher then the Winds: The Waters are moist Bodies, that are
with much difficulty contained in their own bounds, especially when the Winds
cross them, and contend with them; but he sits on the Floods, Psalm. 29.11.
As a Prince on his Throne, enjoining and forcing Obedience and Submission: He
binds the Waters in a Garment, Prove. 30.4. As Women their sucking Infants in
Mantles, with swadling-Bands, which they cannot get out of; though the Sea be
such a Giant, such a Monster, that it swalloweth up thousands, and burieth them
in its Belly, that it makes all to shake and tremble, when it roareth and
rages; yet to God, it is but a little Infant, which he orders as he pleases,
and can lay to sleep, or make quiet in an instant, when it is never so
tempestuous: When I made the Cloud the Garment thereof, and thick Darkness its
Swadling-Band, Job 38.9. Some earthly Princes heated with Passion, and drunk
with Pride, have cast Shackles into the Sea, threatening it with bondage, if he
did not obey them. Xerxes commanded so many strokes to be given the Sea, as a
Punishment of its Rebellion against his will; but such actions are the highest
folly and madness. Many have had great Command at Sea, but none ever had the
Command of the Sea, save God. As tempestuous and outrageous as it is, it is his
quiet Prisoner, and stirs not without his leave, nor otherwise then he
lengthens its Chain: I set Bars and Doors, and said, Hitherto shall thou come,
and no farther, and here shall thy proud Waves be stayed, Job 38.10, 11.

It may easily be proved, that the Sea is higher then the Earth, and why then
does it not overflow it, and drown its Inhabitants? surely no reason can be
given, but the Command the great God has over it; Psalm. 104.6, 7, 8, 9. The
Waters stood above the Mountains; At thy rebuke they fled, at the Voice of thy
Thunder they hasted away: They go up by the Mountains, they go down by the
Valleys, unto the place which thou have founded for them: Thou have set a
bound, that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the
Earth. The Waters did once cover the Earth, till God broke up for them his
decreed place, Job 38.10. And commanded them into their appointed Channels.
They have a propensity and inclination still to cover the Earth again: What
does their constant beating upon their Banks with rage and fury, and now and
then encroaching upon the Earth, and getting ground of it signify? but their
desire and longing to beat down all before them, and turn the dry Land into a
Sea. The only reason why they do not accomplish their ends, is, because the
great Governor of the World has set them their bounds, which they cannot pass.

Some men are extreme stubborn and refractory, as immovable as Rocks, resolved
and fixed for their own Wills and Ways; but even these God orders at his
pleasure. The King of Babylon seemed an untameable Beast, he had forraged many
Countries and Kingdoms, and trampled on many Idols and false gods; and he
comes in a full career against the People of God, like a Lion greedy of his
prey, no way doubting but to tear them in pieces, and devour them, as you may
read in 37. and 38. Chapters of Isaiah. But mark how God governs this wild Ass,
and has this Monster at command, Isa. 38.29. I will put my Hook into thy Nose,
and my Bridle in thy Lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou
came. I will put my Hook into thy Nose, an allusion either to a Fisher, when
he has the Fish fast on his Hook, draws it which way he will, Job 41.1. Or
to such Rings as men put into the Noses of Bears to keep them in, and govern
them with: My Bridle into thy Lips, Ezekiel. 19.4, 9.
my Bit in thy Mouth, and my Curb about thy Jaws, an allusion to them that ride
Horses, who with Bridle and Bit, rein and restrain them, and keep them within
compass, Psalm. 32.9. James 3.3. As if God had said, because thou ravest and
ragest like some huge unruly Fish, or some fierce wild Beast, I will take thee
with my Hook, and I will ring thee, and curb thee, and lead thee, and draw thee
whither I list.

The Devils are more untractable then Winds, and Waves, and Men: They have
great Power; hence called The strong man, Luke 11.21. And Powers, Ephesians. 6.12.
Their union does much increase their strength, Vis unita fortior: They are so
much one in their Confederacies, and all their Conspiracies, that they are
called The evil One, The wicked One, Matthew. 13.28. The Devil, 1 Peter 5.8.
Because though they are many thousands, yet they agree and unite against God,
as if they were all but one. They have much knowledge, subtilty, and policy, to
direct their Power, Vis consilii expers, etc. Their excellent Natures, their
great Observation of Persons and Actions; their long experience of some
thousands of years in the World, must needs speak their Wisdom, or rather
Craftiness, to be great.

Add to these, their innate implacable hatred of God, which makes them employ
all their Power, and improve all their Policy to offend and displease him, to
break from under his Yoke and Subjection; yet in spite of all their Might,
their Craft, their Malice, he governs them as a man does his Prisoners, whom
he has in Fetters: He has reserved them in Chains of Darkness, Jude verse 6.
He has them ever in the Chains, 1. Of their own terrifying affrighting
Consciences, which allow them no rest Day or Night: Indeed, all time is a dark
dreadful time to them, and all places are dark dismal places to them; they are
wherever they go as Prisoners with Fetters upon them, yea such Shackels as
enter into and pierce their Spirits in Chains of Darkness. 2. In Chains of
Divine Providence: God governs their Persons, and all their motions; they go
no whither but as he pleases, though they go up and down in the Earth. As
subtle a Spirit as the Devil is, he cannot touch Job, Job 1.12. No, nor the
Swine without God's leave, Matthew. 8.31. He that would read more of the
incomparableness of God in his Providence, may see it incomparably set forth by
God's own Mouth, in the 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. Chapters of Job.

CHAP. XII. God incomparable in the Work of Redemption; He can do all things.
3. HE is incomparable in the Work of Redemption: And truly, this Work is his
Masterpiece, pure Workmanship; and indeed all his Works of Creation and
Providence are subordinate to this: All his Attributes sparkle most gloriously
in this, Psalm. 102.16. All his Angels in Heaven admire and adore him for this,
Revel. 4.10, 11. This is the Work of all his Works, which he is so mightily
pleased with, and reapeth so much Glory and Praise from, Isa. 42.1. Isa. 43.21.
No Angels, no Men, no not all together, could with all their united Worthiness
redeem one Soul: None of them can redeem his Brother, or give to God a Ransom
for him: For the Redemption of the Soul is precious, it cease for ever, Psalm.
49.9, 10.

None beside God had pity enough for man's misery, or Wisdom enough to find out
a Remedy, or Power enough for his Recovery.

None had pity enough for man's Misery; Boundless Misery called for boundless
Mercy; One deep for another: But where is such Mercy to be found among the
Creatures? Man was a Child of Wrath, had plunged himself into an Ocean of Evils
and Fury, and this required an Ocean of Love and Pity, but Creatures at most
had but drops; but the Creator had infinite Grace for infinite Guilt, and
infinite Mercy for infinite Misery, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6, 7, 8. In the day of thy
Nativity, thou wast cast out, to the loathing of thy Person; thy Navel was not
cut, neither wast thou salted with Salt, nor washed with Water. Here is misery
indeed, but what help or compassion from Creatures? truly none: No Eye pitied
thee, to do any of these things unto thee; (who then had pity enough?) Then I
passed by thee, and saw thee in thy Blood; Then was my time of Love, and I bid
thee live; yea, when thou wast in thy Blood, I said unto thee live. God has
great Mercy for great Misery, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Abundant Mercy for abundant Misery,
1 Peter 1.3. A Plaster altogether as broad and as large as the Sore, John
3.16. 1 John 4.9. Ephesians. 3.19. Therefore the Holy Ghost observes, Luke 1.7, 8.
In the Work of Redemption, the tender Mercy of our God from on high has
visited us.

None had Wisdom enough to find out a Remedy: Had the Creatures had pity
enough, and kindness enough, they had not wisdom enough to make Justice and
Mercy meet together, and Righteousness and Grace kiss each other. If God should
have offered Man his Pardon and Life, upon Condition, that he with Angels
should consult, and find out some way to satisfy his infinite Justice, that
was offended by Sin; Alas, poor man must of necessity have perished; what
Creature was able to undertake the satisfaction of infinite Justice? It would
have Bankrupt them all to satisfy for one of the smallest Sins. And who could
have thought of God, the Creator to undertake it? who durst have presumed to
entertain such a motion in his Heart? Could it have entered into the mind of
Men or Angels, that the Law might be fulfilled in its Commands and Curse, the
Glory of Divine Justice and Holiness salved, and miserable man eternally saved.

No Creature would have thought of a way to reconcile the Justice and Mercy of
God, no Creature could have thought of any way for it, nay, no Creature durst
have thought of such a way as God has found out. No, He that made the World by
his Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. when it had unmade it self; new made it by his
Wisdom: Hence the Redemption of man is called (...), the manifold, the curious,
the embroydered Wisdom of God; such Wisdom as passed the Knowledge of Angels,
Ephesians. 3.10. And the Redeemer is called The Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. In this
Work is infinite Wisdom, because in this Work infinite Justice and infinite
Mercy do meet, Romans 3.24, 25. Ephesians. 2.5, 7. 1 John 4.9, 10.

Again, None had Power to have gone through with the Work, if they had had
Wisdom to have found out a way: There was so much to be done in order to man's
Recovery, that it would have undone all the World, if they had undertaken it.
The Powers of Hell must be overcome, the Curse of the Law, and Wrath of the
Lawgiver, must be born; Sin that was so strong and fast in the Heart of Man,
must be subdued, Grace and Holiness, against which Man had an emnity, must be
infused; and what Power less then Omnipotent could effect either of these? God
who discovered great Power in creating the World of nothing, discovered much
greater in redeeming the World when it was worse then nothing. In the former he
had no opposition, in the latter, his Law, Justice, the Devils of Hell; nay,
Man himself did resist and oppose him: It had been impossible for the Mediator
to have born up, and held out under all those contests with the Powers of
Darkness, the Malediction of the Law, the Fury of his Father, if the Almighty
everlasting Arms had not been under him, Isa. 42.1, 2. Behold my Servant, whom
I upheld, Isa. 49.8, 9. Therefore you read of Power, great Power, mighty Power,
greatness of Power, exceeding greatness of Power, put forth in the Work of
Redemption; Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to
usward? who believe according to the working of the mighty Power which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. And the Redeemer is called
The Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. The Arm of the Lord, Isa. 53.1. His Strength,
Isa. 27.5. Once more we read, Thy Redeemer is mighty, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, Jer. 50.34.

2. He is incomparable (not only in what he has done, but also) in what he
can do. He can do what he will, nay he can do much more then he will do.

He can do what he will; His Arm is as large as his Mind, and his Hand equal to
his Heart. His will and pleasure is the only boundary of his Strength and
Power: Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and Earth, and the
Seas, and in all deep Places, Psalm. 135.6. Psalm. 115.3. Can this be said of Men
or Angels? Can they do what they please? surely No. But the Lord does what he
has a mind to do: He is of one mind, and who can turn him? and what his Soul
desires, that he does, Job 23.13. His Heart only can limit his Hands, and his
Strength is determined by nothing but his will. It was the saying of a Prince,
that he could bear a Circle about his Head (meaning his Crown) but he could not
bear a Circle about his Feet, he would go and come at his own pleasure, and do
what he thought fit; but all the Princes in the World have Fetters about their
Feet, and Chains about their Hands. They cannot go whither they please, Isa.
37.33, 34. Zenacherib would needs go up to Jerusalem, and brings an Army
against it for that end, but his Feet were fettered: Thus says the Lord
concerning the King of Assyria, He shall not come into this City; by the way
that he came, by the same shall he return. Neither can they do what they
please: As they go (not whither they will, but) whither God pleases; so they
do (not what they will, but) what God pleases, Acts 4.27, 28.

It Is Gods incomparable Prerogative to go whither, and do what he will: God
does not do many things that he can, but he does all things that he will: He
can do more then he will. He cannot do what is sinful, he cannot lie, Titus
1.2. He cannot deny himself, 1 Timothy 2.13. He cannot do that which implies a
contradiction: He cannot make himself a Creature, or make a Creature a God,
because the doing of these things speak weakness and imperfection, but
whatsoever speaks power or perfection, that he can do: He is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. A man may
ask much, this World, the other World, a thousand Worlds after them, millions
of Worlds after those, better Worlds, greater Worlds; the Sovereignty and
Dominion over them; the Command and Rule of them for Ages, for Generations, for
ever: A man may conceive more then he can ask, the Mind of Man is much larger
then his Tongue: His apprehension does far exceed his expressions, especially
of such a man whose mind is enlightened and enlarged, (for of such the Apostle
speaks) and not contracted and narrowed to sublunary sensual Objects: But God
can do more then we are able to ask or think, yea abundantly more; so much
more, that we cannot think how much more; nay, exceeding abundantly more (...),
valde abundanter, above abundance.

Is any thing impossible to God, Luke 1.37. With God all things are possible,
Math. 19.26. He is good at every thing that is good: Men are good, some at one
thing, some at another thing, so are Angels; but no Man, no Angel, is good at
all things; God only can do every thing, as God only can be every thing: He
only that is universal in his Being, is universal in his doings. He can make
millions of Worlds in a moment, and unmake them again as soon: He can kill and
make alive in the twinkling of an Eye; He can build up, and pluck down, take
Nature off its Hinges, and set it on again; make the Waters when they run never
so violently, to stand still; stop the Sun in its full career; keep the hottest
Fire from burning, or so much as singing an Hair. Shall the Sun go backward
(says he) ten degrees or forward, 2 Kings 20.9, 10. Take either, it is all one
to me; choose which thou likest best: To me both are equally easy.

CHAP. XII. God incomparable in the manner of his Working: He works
irresistibly, arbitrarily.
2. IF you consider the manner of his Working, He is incomparable therein also.

1. He works irresistibly: He works so, as none can hinder him: All the
united Wisdom, Power of Men, of Angels, cannot stop him at his Work. The mighty
King Nebuchadnezzar was taught this Truth, when he was grazing among the
Beasts, Dan. 4.35. He does according to his will in the Armies of Heaven, and
among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his Hand. Mark, He does
what he will, and none can stay his Hand; the Prayers of his People have
sometimes stayed his Hand, when he was going to slay and destroy, but it was
because out of his Grace he stayed it himself. Alas, what Creature can see, or
know, or reach his Hand, that is invisible and omnipresent, Isa. 48.10. My
Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure. The Counsels of Men do not
always stand, he makes them to fail and fall: He brings the Counsels of the
Heathen to naught, and makes the Devices of the People of none effect, Psalm.
33.10 But none can make his Counsel void, or his Devices invalid.

What he will do he does, and there is no withstanding him: If he will bring an
Enemy against a Nation, none can prevent their coming: Calling the Ravenous
Bird from the East, the Man that executes my Counsel from a far Country,
(Cyrus that should seize on Babylon, as a Ravenous Bird on his Prey) yea, I
have spoken it, and I will bring it to pass; (Let me see who shall hinder it,)
I have purposed it, and I will do it. I would see who dares undertake to oppose
it, Isa. 40.11, 12.

If he will deprive Men of their Honors and Grandeur, of their Estates and
Treasures, of their Might and Power; there is no contending with him, it must
be done; Job 9.4, 12. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? If he will
take away, nothing shall stand in his way. The four great strong Monarchies of
the World, that successively were the dread and terror of the Earth, were
taken away by him, and who hindered him? All their Policy and Power could not
prevent him, or hinder their Ruin, Dan. 2.44.

God has a Negative Voice upon the motions of all the Creatures: Who is he
that says, and it comes to pass, if the Lord commands it not? Lament. 3.27.
They who reckon without him, must reckon again: They must ask his leave; as
well as have his assistance, or sit still and do nothing. Their Wheels, though
never so well oiled, stand still, or go backward, if he say Nay, to their
motion forward; He speaks to the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the
Stars, Job 9.7. No day, not the least light in the Heavens at night without his
leave; but no Creature has a Negative Voice upon the least of his Actions:
What he will do he does, and never asks Men or Angels leave. Nay, challenges
them to hinder him if they can, Isa. 43.13. I will Work, who shall let it?
Observe his Resolution, I will Work; He speaks like one in Authority, that is
above all Checks and Controls, that can make good what he purposes in spite
of all opposition; I will Work; Observe also his Challenge, who shall let it?
Would I could see the Man, the Angel, that durst stand in the way of my
motions. The Jews might think Babylon will let: I (says God) have sent to
Babylon, and destroyed all their Princes, I have broken in pieces those Iron
Bars; There is no fear that they should hinder my entrance into their City.

He can give a Supersedeas to the highest Attempts, and strongest Designs of
Creatures: He can blow on them, and they are soon blasted, all their politic
Conceptions prove abortive: Take Counsel together, and it shall come to naught,
Isa. 8.10. Their most powerful Engines prove ineffectual, Verse 9. Gird your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Some of them talked at a great, at a
high rate; We will go up against Judas and destroy it, and set a King in the
midst thereof, even the Son of Tabeal; But they speak beyond their strength,
and reckon (as we say) without their Host; Thus says the Lord God, It shall
not stand, neither shall it come to pass, Isa. 7.6, 7. But none can give a
Supersedeas to the least of his Attempts: Behold he breaks down, and it
cannot be built up again; he shuts up a Man, and there can be no opening,
Job 12.14.

2. He works arbitrarily, according to his own will: He does what he will,
and he alone may do what he will. It is argued by many, that some Princes are
not accountable for what they do to any Men, but all hold they are accountable
to God. They are his Stewards and Deputies, and must give an account to him of
their Stewardships. They are his Creatures, and are, or ought to be, limited by
his Laws, and so must be responsible to him for their Carriages and Government.
No King is absolute or arbitrary in his Governments, because all Kings are his
Subjects, and owe Allegiance to His Majesty, and Obedience to his Commands: But
God is absolute and arbitrary, and may do what he will do; every thing that he
does is just, because he does it: He does what he will in Heaven and Earth, and
none can say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. He is responsible to none for
any of his Actions; none may question him, much less quarrel with him for what
he does: Angels are far from being arbitrary, His will, not their own, is their
Rule, Psalm. 103.20. Ye Ministers of his, that do his Pleasure. He only that is
above all Law, is above all Transgression, 1 John 4.3. And he whose will is the
only Rule of Rectitude and Righteousness, may well do what he will, Romans 12.2.

He has an absolute illimited Propriety in all the Works of his Hands: He is
the great Proprietor of all the World, and therefore may dispose of all at his
pleasure, Psalm. 24.1. Matthew. 20.13, 15. May I not do what I will with mine own?
Friend, I do thee no wrong; Though men may have a civil Right to their Estates,
and a natural Right to themselves and their Children; yet the Original in all
is still God's. He divests himself of nothing, by lending any thing to us, or
trusting us with it; and therefore he may use what is his own, at his own
liberty and pleasure, and none may question or quarrel With him for it.

Again, He is Supreme, and so above all answering, or accounting for any thing
he does: He is the most high, Psalm. 92.1. It Is no disparagement to Men or
Angels to be under a Law; nay, it is essential to them as they are Creatures:
But he that is Supreme, and gives all Laws to others, is under no Law himself:
Indeed, if he had a Superior, he might be called to account by him: But why
strivest thou against him? he gives no account of any of his matters, Job
33.13. Why strivest thou against him? Not by open force, but secret murmurings,
and logical arguings, against his providential Dispensations; It Is vain, for he
gives no account of any of his matters. He is not bound to tell thee what he
does, or why he does it: He has received nothing from thee, and so not bound
to account to thee, Romans 11.35. Thou have no Authority to call him to account;
what Man or Angel has Power to call him to account? In the next Chapter the
Holy Ghost does fully speak for our purpose, Job 34.10, 12, 13. Far be it from
God, that he should do wickedly; and from the Almighty, that he should pervert
Judgment: Who has given him a Charge of the Earth? Whose Deputy is he in the
Government of the World? If he be a Deputy or Viceroy to any Superior Power,
then he must keep close to the Instructions, and act according to the
Commission he receives from them, or be accountable for his wanderings and
deviations; But who has given him a Charge over the Earth? What Man? what
Angel? where is he? what or who is he that has given him a charge? If there
were one higher then God to give him a Rule, then if he swerved from it, he was
faulty; but because he is higher then the higest of Beings, and his own Law,
therefore he may do what he will without blame: Who has enjoined him his way?
or can say unto God, Thou have wrought Iniquity? Job 36.23. God's way is his
method of Working, his manner of governing the World: Now says the Holy Ghost,
Who has any authority over him, to enjoin him his way of working, the Path in
which he should walk, that in case he stepped aside, he might say unto him, Thou
have wrought Iniquity? No, not any; and therefore its desperate presumption for
any to complain of him what ever he does: Who art thou that replyest against
God? Romans 9.20. He is a bold Man indeed that will contend with his Maker; Who
art thou? what manner of Man? what monster of Men? Who art thou, a clod of
Clay, a lump of Earth, a sink of Sin, a firebrand of Hell, that thou dare
chop Logic with God? For shame set still, lay thy Hand on thy Mouth, and be
silent.

CHAP. XIII. God incomparable in his Working: He does the greatest things with
ease, and without any Help.
3. HE works at all times without weariness, and does the greatest things
with ease: As there is nothing too hard for God, so there is nothing hard to
God: He does the hardest things that are with the greatest ease. Indeed, the
great God does the greatest and hardest things with the same ease that he does
the least things: It Is all one to him, whether his Work be small or great,
easy or hard to others; all is easy alike to him.

In the Creation, though the building be large and vast, yet with what ease did
he set it up? He did not blow or sweat, no nor so much as stir at his Work. The
whole World consists of the caelestial and terrestial Globe, and both were
the product of his Word: For the Heavens, Psalm. 33.6. By the word of the Lord
the Heavens were made, and all the Host thereof by the breath of his Mouth. It
was but a word, a breath, that produced that vast circumference of the Heavens,
and all those great Luminaries there: So for the Earth, He spoke, and it was
done; he commanded, and it stood fast, verse 9. He only spoke the word, and
even non-entities obeyed, and became Beings. Therefore in the story of the
Creation, Genesis 1. we find in every Days-work, God only commanding, and and
immediately all things concurring, verse 3, 9, 12.

In his Works of Providence, he does all things with unconceiveable ease.

If he destroy and pull down, it is done with ease; They are crushed as a Moth,
Job 4.19. How easily does a Man crush a Moth between his Fingers? with more
ease does God crush his stoutest Enemies. He destroys the highest, the
greatest, the strongest, the Lions, young Lions, with a breath, with a blast:
By the blast of God they perish, by the breath of his Nostrils they are
consumed, Job 4.9, 10. By a blast, a breath; it is easy to breath, to send
forth a blast for a Man; but much easier for God, who breathed into Man the
breath of Life: This can put him to no pain, no toil, no trouble at all.
Zenacherib comes against Jerusalem with a great Army of Warriers, and had, as
he says, Counsel and Strength for War: God undertakes to deal with him on the
behalf of his own People, and to destroy him; but see with what ease God does
it, 2 Kings 19.17. I will send a blast upon him: I will never trouble my self
to use my Artillery, or draw out my great Ordnance of Heaven, my Thunders and
Lightnings against so many thousand Soldiers; I will only blow upon them,
that shall be all.

He destroys with a word; If he do but speak, it is done: His saying, is
doing: At what time I speak concerning a Nation, to pull down, and to destroy,
Jer. 18.7, 8. When the Prophet would speak the certain ruin of the Philistines,
he does it in this manner, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Seacoasts, the Word
of the Lord is against you, Zeph. 2.5. i. e. The case is woeful, your condition
is desperate, the whole World cannot save you; for the Word of the Lord is
against you. Men may talk, and boast, and threaten what they will do, when all
the while their Words are but Wind, and their threatened Folk live long; but the
Word of God, like Lightning or Mildew, blasteth wherever it goes, and burns
up to the very root. Julius Caesar told Metellus, (when he would have prevented
his robbing the Roman Treasury,) Young Man be quiet, or I Will lay thee dead at
my Feet: And then to magnify his own Power; adds, It is harder for me to
speak it, then to do it. But this is certain, it is as easy for God to do any
thing, as to speak of it; yea, he does what he will with a Word. Now how easy
is it to speak? He destroys with a Look, with a glance of his Eye; and surely
that is easy to him that is all Eye, that made the Eye: In the Morning-Watch
the Lord looked through the Pillar of Fire on the Host of the Egyptians, and
troubled them, Exodus 14.24. He darts out beams of Death from his Eyes: One look
from God will take away the life of the greatest of his Adversaries. He
destroys with an hiss, O how little! how easy a thing is hissing! Isa. 7.18.
I will hiss for the Flies of Egypt, and the Bees of Assyria, and they shall
come, etc.

He destroys with a turn of his Hand, Psalm. 81.13, 14. I would soon have
subdued their Enemies, and turned my Hand against them that hated them. A turn
of his Hand would have subdued the proudest Enemies of Israel, and have stabbed
them to the Heart.

He delivers his People with the greatest ease: Whatsoever their Straights
be, though various and difficult, yet he helps them out with ease. When they
were in Captivity, scattered up and down as Exiles out of their own Country, he
brings them Home; but how? truly, He says to the North, Give up; and to the
South, Keep not back, etc. Isa. 43.6. And both hearken to his Word, That his
Sons come from far, and his Daughters from the ends of the Earth. When the
Prophet would beg of him to help his afflicted People, he only desires him to
Command Deliverance for Jacob, Psalm. 44.4. If he will it, and command it, the
Work is done.

He succeeds his Ordinances, and makes them effectual, for enlightening the
Blind, and enlivening the Dead (great Works) with ease: He says, Live, and the
dead Sinner lives, John 5.24. He commands success, and Ordinances are
effectual: There the Lord commands his Blessing, even life for evermore,
Psalm. 133.3.

Yea, the Ocean, that is such a frightful Monster, which makes such an horrible
Noise, and opens its Mouth, roaring and raging, as if it would certainly
devour us, is quelled and quieted with ease by him, Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11. When
the Sea was tempestuous, and frighted the Disciples, that they awake the Lord
Jesus; with what ease does he cause a Calm, Peace, be still, Matthew. 8.27. (As a
Mother would still a crying-Child, Hush, be quiet, peace, no more, be still,)
and immediately there was a Calm.

4. He works wholly by his own Power, without the least help from any other:
Creatures are all Instruments, and act in the virtue of the principal
Efficient. Angels and Men act not in their own, but in the strength of God;
they have not some help from God, but all the Power by which they work, from
God: But God acts wholly in his own strength, he never had, nor desired an
helping-hand from any of his Creatures.

In the Work of Creation, he erected this curious large Fabric without any
Tool or Instrument, Isa. 44.24. I am the Lord that made all things, that
stretches forth the Heavens alone, that spreads abroad the Earth by my self.
Mark, he made the Heavens alone, had none with him to assist him; and he made
the Earth by himself, called none from Heaven to his Aid. As he said to Job,
Where wast thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? declare, if thou have
understanding, Job 38.4. Thou wast far enough off from giving any help; so he
may say to Angels, Where were ye when I stretched out the Heavens? declare, if
ye have understanding. Some give that reason why they are not mentioned in the
Creation of the World, in the first of Genesis, to assure us, that God did not
use their help in his Work. The Heavens are compared to a Curtain, Psalm. 104.
and ^o a Tent, Isa. 40.22. Now we know that when Curtains or Tents that are
very large, are to be stretched out, as the phrase is in that, Isa. 44.24. there
needs many Hands to it, one hand will not do it, many pair of hands must be put
to it; but God spreads out those wide large Curtains of Heaven alone, Job
9.8. He borrowed not one hand to it: Have thou with him spread out the Sky,
which is strong as a molten Looking-Glass, Job 37.18. Was God beholden to thee
for affording him thine Arms in the unfolding and spreading that broad vast
piece.

In works of Providence, He does some great things alone by himself; Job 26.7.
He hangs the Earth on nothing, without an Atlas to bear it up, and he
preserves Moses forty days without Food, Exodus ^2. And he does all things
without the help of his Creatures, even there, and then when he makes the most
use of his Creatures. He uses Angels and Men in the Government of the World;
he uses many means, as Food and Raiment, and Physic and Sleep, for the
preservation of our Health and Lives; but he does all, as much and as surely as
if he made not use of any means at all. He is the Soul of the World, that
actuates every thing in it: Hence we read, That Instruments are called his
Sword, Psalm. 17.14. His Rod, Isa. 10.5. What can the Sword or the Rod do,
without an Hand to cut or scourge with them; therefore when his Rod boasts as
if it could scourge of it self, Isa. 10.12, 13. and as if it were the Hand too;
By the strength of my hand have I done it; I have removed the Bounds of the
People, and robbed their Treasure. God quickly contradicts such vain babbling,
and confutes such vain glorious boasting, verse 15. Shall the Axe boast it self
against him that heweth therewith, or the Saw magnify it self against him that
shakes it? Thou poor proud vainglorious Wretch, Thou art a mere Axe, a Saw,
and can no more move or cut of thy self, then a Saw or an Axe that lies on
the ground, which no man medleth with: Thou talks arrogantly and saucily, as
if thou did all, when thou did nothing: I did all, thou wast all the while
but the Axe and Saw in my Hand, which I made use of.

1. Whether God have little or great means, means or no means, it is all one to
him; there is not a pinn to choose, as we say, for he does as much when he has
means, as when he has none, 2 Chronicles. 14.7. It Is all one with thee to help with
many, or with them that have no Power. It Is not the least difference to him,
it is not so much as the smallest dust in the Balance to turn the Scale of
Victory, whether God have many or few, any or none of his side.

God never made use of any Creatures, because he had the least need of them, or
the least help by them, but partly because it is his pleasure; he uses them
because he will use them: It Is his pleasure by the foolishness of Preaching, to
save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1, 21. Not that he has the least aid from
Preachers; so it is his pleasure by Food and Sleep to preserve man's life; not
that he has any help from them: Thy Visitation preserves my Spirit, Job
10.12. Partly from his own Honor. Hereby he magnifieth his Sovereignty, and
shows his Dominion over all his Creatures, that they are all at his beck, and
he can with a stamp of his Foot, or a glance of his Eye, or an hiss of his
Mouth, call them from the uttermost parts of the World, to execute his Command.
My Hand has laid the Foundations of the Earth, my right Hand has span'd the
Heavens; when I call, they stand up together, Isa. 48.13. The Flies,
Caterpillars, Locusts, Stars in their courses, etc. all come at his call.
Hereby he magnifieth his Power, that can do such great things by weak means: He
got himself glory on Pharaoh, when he made pitiful contemptible Creatures, as
Lice and Flies, such Plagues to him.

And by opening the Eyes of the blind, and quickening the Dead, by such weak
poor Instruments as Men are, his strength is exceedingly exalted; We have this
Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the Power might be of God,
2 Cor. 4.7. Hereby he magnifieth his Wisdom viz. in discovering the fitness and
aptitude of his Creature to those ends and purposes for which they were
created. The use of a Tool discovers its worth, by discovering its
serviceableness to that for which it was made. Partly to endear Creatures one
to another; their mutual serviceableness each to other, causes the greater
amity and unity between them, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22, 23.

In spiritual things also God works alone, even when he has many Ordinances
and Ministers to serve him: Thou workest all our Works in us, and for us, Isa.
26.12. Not any Visions, or Prophets, or industry of our own; but thou workest
all. What is Paul? what is Apollos? Paul planteth, Apollo waters; but God
gives the increase. So then (Observe) He that planteth is (a great Apostle?
No,) nothing, and he that waters is (an eloquent excellent person? No,)
nothing; but God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. God does not use
Preachers, because they help him in the conversion of Souls, but (as I said
before) because it is his pleasure, 1 Cor. 1.21. And he turns it to his
honor, 2 Cor. 4.7. Therefore it is often seen, that Ministers of the largest
Gifts, of the greatest Grace, are not often the most successful in their
Labors; because God would have us know, that it is not the Parts or Piety of
the Preacher, but his Grace and Spirit that does the Work: They are nothing, he
is all in all. He made light the first day of the Creation, and not the Sun or
Stars till the Fourth, to tell the World, that he can enlighten it without the
Sun. It is a great Honor to God that he has so many millions of Creatures at
his will and pleasure, that he has so many Eyes to see for him, and so many
Ears to hear for him, and so many Hands to work for him; but it is a greater
Honor to him that he needs none of them, He can do all without them; that
though they are serviceable to him, yet they are not necessary to him. For God
and all his Creatures do no more, can do no more then God without any of his
Creatures.

CHAP. XIV. God is incomparable in his Word: He speaks with incomparable
Authority, Condescension and Efficacy.
Fourthly, GOD is incomparable in his Word; He speaks after an unspeakable
manner, Never man spoke like him, (no, nor Angel,) his Enemies themselves being
Judges, John 7.46. Men may speak high, and speak holily; Angels may speak
higher and holier, but neither speak like God: Behold he exalts by his Power,
who teaches like him? Job 36.22. Behold I wonder at it, he exalts by his
Power, is good at acting; who teaches like him? Is good at instructing, and
best at both, and beyond all that ever were. Who teaches like him? The words
are a Challenge to the whole World: Bring forth the Man, let me see the Angel,
that can speak or teach like God. He does not not say, Who teaches beside God?
There are many Teachers beside God, the inanimate Creatures are Teachers, the
Heavens by their constant regular motion, the Earth by its fecundity and
fruitfulness, according to the law of their Creation, teach Man Obedience and
Proficiency, Isa. 48.13. The irrational Creatures are Teachers: Man is sent to
School to the Ant and Swallow, and Ox and Ass, to the Beasts of the Field, and
the Fowls of the Air, to learn Providence and Prudence; to learn Wisdom, to
discern and improve his Opportunities, and gratitude to his Father and
Benefactor, Prove. 6.6. Jer. 7.7, and 8. Isa. 1.5. Job 12.8, 9. Men are Teachers
one to another; Parents and Ministers do, or should, teach those that are
committed to their Charge or Trust, Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 4.6. Angels are
Teachers: The Angel taught Daniel, and helped him to understand, Dan. 10.14. And
surely of all finite, they are the most learned and able Masters: But he says,
Who teaches like him? Though many teach beside God, yet none teaches like
God; none speaks like him, whether you consider the manner, the matter, or
the effect of his Speech.

1. He is incomparable in the manner of his speaking.

1. He speaks authoritatively, and in his own Name: Good Men and good Angels
may command, but it must be (as subordinate Magistrates) in the Name and
Authority of their Prince and Sovereign; but God commands in his own Name and
Authority: God gives Authentity to whatever he speaks, and he speaks with
Authority when he speaks. God speaks as one that has Right and Power to
Command, and as one that, upon his own account, expects to be obeyed: I am
the Lord, is enough to warrant Obedience to the whole Decalogue, Thou shall
have no other God; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. For I
am the Lord thy God.

His Authority is the highest, the greatest reason of any Precept, and the
strongest warrant for Obedience; Therefore Thou shall not swear by my Name
falsely, (why?) I am the Lord: Thou shall not curse the Deaf, nor lay a
stumbling block before the Blind, (why not? the Deaf cannot hear if I do curse
them, nor the Blind see if I do lay a stumbling block before them,) I am the
Lord, etc. Levit. 19.12. etc. It Is said of Christ, He taught as one having
Authority, and not as the Scribes, Matthew. 7. ult. He did not beg attention, but
enjoin it; nor beseech Obedience, but command it. As when Princes Enact Laws,
they do not entreat, but require Obedience at the peril of their Subjects. This
is the Word of the Lord, and Thus says the Lord, and the Mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, is sufficient to awe and require Subjection from all that hear
it. God is his own Authority, not so Men or Angels: They speak from God, but he
from none but himself. His Word is a Light, Psalm. 119.104, 105. that discovers
it self; And therefore it is called The Testimony of the Lord, Psalm. 19.7.
Because it bears witness to it self, and needs not testimony from Men or
Angels. What the essential Word speaks, may be spoken of the declarative
Word: It receives not Testimony from Man, John 5.34. Men need Grounds and
Reasons, and Witnesses too, to prove and vouch what they say to be true, and to
be so as they speak; but the Word of God is a sufficient authentic Testimony
to it self; It Is his own Proof, because what Truth it self speaks, must of
necessity be true.

2. He speaks condescendingly, to the condition and understanding of those to
whom he speaks: He considers the Natures and Tempers, and Capacities of his
Hearers, and accordingly speaks to them: He does not (as some Ministers) speak
in an unknown Tongue, or soar into the Clouds, exceed the Capacities of his
Hearers, that he might be wondered at, not understood; but he observes their
Weakness and Infirmities, yea their dullness and incapacity, and teaches them
as they are able to hear him. There are Depths in his Word for Elephants to
swim in, (to tell the World what and how he could speak, to exercise our
industry, and prevent our contempt of it for its plainness,) and there are
Shallows for Lambs to wade through, that none might be discouraged. Christ is
our Priest, and the Priests Lips teach knowledge, and he is a merciful Priest,
Heb. 2.16. Condescending in what he teaches, and in the way of his teaching,
to the capacities of his Hearers.

In what he teaches: How chary was Christ of charging his Disciples with any
thing that they could not brook, John 16.12. I have many things to say unto
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. I have some harder Lessons to teach you,
but ye are young Scholars, and not able yet to learn them, till ye have been
longer in my School, and have attained more ripeness of understanding;
therefore I will not trouble you now with them, but leave them to my Spirit,
who shall prepare you for them, and enable you to learn them: Your Stomachs are
weak, and yet must have that only which is of light Digestion, Milk, not
strong meat, 1 Cor. 3.2. Your Backs are not strong, and therefore I will lay on
you none but light burdens, But ye cannot bear them now; and therefore ye shall
not hear them now, least ye should be offended and discouraged at them. When
the Jews enquired of Christ, why his Disciples did not fast often, as well as
the Disciples of John, and the Pharisees: Observe the reason our tenderhearted
Lord gives, Math. 9.15, 16, 17. No man (says he) puts new Wine into old
Bottles, least the Wine burst the Bottles; or sows an old Garment to new
Cloth, least the rent be worse. Alas, says he, my Disciples are young
Beginners, Babes in me, at best but little Children, not strong Men, or
Fathers, and therefore they must not be called presently to the Austerities or
Severities of Religion, least they, poor Souls, should be discouraged in their
Work, and faint under it: I must proportion their Burden to their Backs, and
lead them their own pace, as they are able to go at present. Hereafter indeed
they shall be called to suffer great things for my Names sake; they shall be
hated and persecuted of all men, but then they shall be fitted for those
Severities, and undergo them with courage; but yet such deep Points, and
obscure Notions, must not be offered to Novices.

In the way of his teaching, he is very tender and condescending; He
accommodates his Discourse to their Apprehension, Mark 4.33. He spoke as they
were able to bear it; Not as he was able to speak, (he was able to read
Lectures above the capacities of Angels) but as they were able to bear it.
Therefore he spoke so much to them in Parables, because they might the better
understand him: For though a Parable would make Truth more obscure, (and so
Parables and Dark-Sayings are conjoined, Psalm. 7.78. and to speak in Parables,
is opposed to speaking plainly, John 16.26. John 16.29.) yet a Parable
revealed, unvailed, (as Christ did usually to his Disciples, Matthew. 13.17, 37.)
makes Truth more clear. It gives us the advantage of viewing heavenly Truth in
earthly Glasses, the Species and Reflections of which we are most able to
conceive; Therefore our Savior says, If I have told you earthly things, and
ye believe not, (or cannot understand) how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly, John 3.12.

The Instructions of Christ were like Water, Deuteronomy. 32.2. which he powered into
those narrow-mouthed Vessels by little and little, as they were able to receive
it; or as Rain, which he distilled on his Hearers (as Rain on the mown Grass) by
drops, and drop after drop, to refresh them; not by Floods to drown them. Jacob
considered the Children were young, and the Cattle were with young, therefore
drove gently, least by overdriving he should wrong them, Genesis 33.13. So our
Lord Jesus considers what Men are, how impotent and infirm, and will not
over-drive, over-do, least he should undo them, Isa. 28.9, 10. He gives Precept
upon Precept, Line upon Line, Here a little, there a little.

Will Men or Angels teach with such compassion, with such condescension? It is
a Rule of one of the Ancients, That he who will teach Children, must himself be
a Child: He must frame and fashion himself to them, and be as one of them, or
else he will never teach them. How soon would the dullness and untowardness of
Man tire out the patience of Men and Angels, and provoke them to give over
teaching them: God's incomparableness herein is fully proved in the
incomparableness of God in his Patience, in Chap. 10.

3. He speaks effectually: As he has Power to command us, so he has Power to
enable us to obey his Commands. Men and Angels may tell Men their Duty, but
they cannot teach Men their Duty; they cannot strengthen them, or empower them
to obey: He speaks so as Men hear, and believe and live; He that has heard
and learned of the Father, comes unto me, John 6.45. We have a saying, Ex
quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, Every man will not make a Mercury: Some so dull
and blockish, that none can improve them, or do good upon them, i. e. no
Creature can; Isa. 32.4.
but God can make the dull, the blind, the most ignorant, to conceive and
consider, and apprehend and understand the darkest and most difficult Points by
speaking to them, Isa. 48.17. He teaches to profit; There is a Power that
accompanies his teaching, that does the Work. When he says, Let there be
Light in a dark Mind, there is Light; it is so: He is a God that commands
Light to shine out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. When he says, Let there be life in
that dead Soul, there is life, it is so, John 5.24. Men and Angels may call
long enough to the Blind to see, and the Dead to live, and all in vain. But if
a God say to a Sinner that lies rotting in the Grave, almost eaten up of the
Vermin of Lusts, unsavory, and stinking in the eyes of all men, Lazarus,
Sinner, come forth of thy cursed carnal condition; The man that was bound Hand
and Foot, manacled and fettered by the Devil, his Jailer, comes forth, is
loosed of his Bonds, and lives for ever.

As the Mariners said of Christ, He speaks with Authority, and commands the
Winds and Seas, and they obey him; What manner of Man is this? Math. 8.27. So I
may say, O what manner of God is this, for he speaks with Authority, and the
high winds of violent Passions, and the fierce Waters of boisterous
Corruptions, and they obey him; they fly, they fall before him? Can Men or
Angels speak at this rate? will Sin die at their word? will the Soul live at
their command? How long may they call to Sinners to arise from the Dead, before
they will, before they can answer their call?

But if God speaks, the most obstinate, hardened Sinner obeys his Voice,
submits to his Will, and yields himself up to his Word; nay, the very
Devils are forced to leave their beloved Mansions, the Souls of Men, and to
seek and setttle their Habitations elsewhere. He commands, and the unclean
Spirits come out of Men, Matthew. 8.32. If he please but to say, Get thee behind
me Satan, that Prince of the Powers of the Air, that god of the World, who
crows so much on his own Dunghill, the Hearts of the Unregenerate, sneakes away
like a Coward, and must in spite of his Teeth obey his Command, Math. 4.10,
11. Yea, God ejecteth him with a word speaking, out of his strongest Holds, the
Souls of old, senseless, seared Sinners, and leads Captivity captive, and makes
this Jailer, who laid so many in Irons, his Prisoner and Captive.

CHAP. XV. God is incomparable in his Word: In its Purity, Mysteries,
Prophesies.
2. GOd is incomparable in the matter of his speech, as well as in his manner
of speaking: If you consider the Purity, Mysteries or Predictions thereof.

1. The Purity of its Precepts: His Word is the most pure, perfect, exact Rule
of Righteousness that is imaginable: It commands good, nothing but good, and
all good, at all times; It forbids evil, all evil, and nothing but evil, and
always: The Commandment is holy, and the Law is holy, just, and good, Romans
7.12. Holy, as it is a Copy of the Divine Will; Just, as it is correspondent to
the highest reason; Good, as it is most beneficial to the rational Creature. It
is holy, as it relates our Duty to God; Just, as it respects our Duty to our
Neighbors; Good, as it concerns our Duty toward our Selves. It is Holy, as
consecrated to the Service of God; Just, as a transcript of the pure Law of
Nature; Good, as it is the measure and standard of all goodness in the
Creatures. It is Holy, in what it enjoins us to do; Just, in what it forbids us
to do, and good in both. What Laws in the World are in any degree comparable to
the Laws of God? The Mohammedan Laws which have gained so much credit in the
greatest part almost of the known World, are impure Laws, allowing Revenge,
Poligamy, and commanding Slaughters, Oppressions, etc. for the Propagation of
their Religion.

The Laws of the severest Heathen Lycurgus, etc. contained but the Carcass and
Body of Purity, had nothing of the Soul and Life thereof. How many Sins against
the very Law of Nature did that Lacedemonian Lawgiver allow of? and where he
or any of the rest did forbid Sin, it was in the outward actions, not in the
inward affections: Their Laws did rather Command the covering of Sin, that it
might not appear abroad, then the killing of Sin, that it might not be at all:
Their Laws were defective as to persons, some Men were usually privileged, and
not bound to them; as to the parts of men, they gave the inward man liberty,
though they restrained the outward, as to Punishments; the greatest Penalty
they could think of, or impose, was a Temporal Death; They never dreamed of an
Hell in another World. But O how pure! how perfect is the Law of God! Thy Word
is very pure, says David, Psalm. 119. So pure, that there is not the least
mixture, falsehood or error in it: It commands all, and nothing but, conformity
to the mind of the great Sovereign, and Lord of all things: The Law of the Lord
is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. So perfect, that it is not deficient in any thing; It
commands purity in the whole man, in every faculty of the Soul, in every
member of the Body: It commands purity in this whole man, at all times, in
all companies, in all conditions, in all relations, in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Psalm. 119.1, 2.

It Is apparent to common sense, that fallen man could never dream of such
strict exact Precepts, no, he is so far from it, that he is wholly contrary
thereunto, Romans 8.7. And Angels could not imagine them, unless God had
signified his mind to them. For all holiness being a conformity to the Will of
the most high God, they could not discern what was holy, what was unholy, any
farther then they could discover the Will of this incomparable God.

2. The mystery of its Doctrines: It contains such Depths, such bottomless
Profundities, that could not possibly have been imagined by Men or Angels, had
not God revealed them. It acquainteth us with things far above the reach of
created Reason, (though not contrary) yet being told us are so correspondent,
that there is no ground left for the questioning them. What the great Apostle
says upon occasion of one mystery, we may say upon the whole: O the Depth! O
the Depth of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. O the Depth of the
holy Scriptures! There is a Depth in them, that none can fathom, because a
Depth in them that has no bottom; Great is the mystery of the Bible: Who could
think of a Woman's coming into the World without a Woman, as Eve; of a man's
coming into the World without a man, as the Son of man; nay, without man or
woman, as Adam? who could think that the same Woman should be a Mother and a
Virgin? But these are small mysteries; who could think that many thousands,
millions, living many Miles and Ages distant, should be fellow members, and be
truly one Body, sympathising with, serviceable to, rejoicing in the welfare of
each other; and all be united unto, receive influence from, and live wholly by
one Head, as far from them as Heaven is from the Earth? Ephesians. 5.27, 28, 29, 30.
Coloss. 2.19. Who could have thought that three really and personally distinct,
should be equal, and one in nature and essence? 1 John 5.7.

Who could have imagined, that God should become Man, infinite become finite,
the Creator a Creature; the Father of Spirits become Flesh, and the Lord of
Life be put to Death? Who could conceive, that he who made all things of
nothing, should be made himself of a Woman, made by him: That he whom the
Heavens, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, should be contained in the
narrow Womb of a Woman: That the only Bread of Life should be hungry, the
only Water of Life be thirsty; the only Rest be weary, the only Ease be
pained, and the only Joy and Consolation be sorrowful, exceeding sorrowful
unto Death?

Who could have imagined, that one, yea millions should be rich by another
poverty, filled by another emptiness, be exalted by another disgrace, healed
by another wounds, eased by another Pains, be absolved by another
Condemnation, and live eternally by another temporal Death? Who could have
imagined, that infinite Justice and infinite Mercy should be made fast Friends,
and fully satisfied by one and the same action; that the greatest fury and the
greatest favor, the greatest hatred and the greatest love should concur in, and
be manifested by one and the same thing? Could Men or Angels speak such
Mysterles? surely No. Several Mysteries in the Scriptures were hid from whole
Ages and Generations of Men; Which in former Ages was not made known to the
Children of Men, Ephesians. 3.5. No nor to Angels neither, Verse 10. To the intent
that now unto Principalities and Powers, might be made by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of God.

3. The Prophesies and Predictions of the Word: Neither Men nor Angels can
foretell those things which depend not on natural Causes, or which may not be
deduced from moral or political Grounds, and even in such things as these are,
they may be, and have been deceived. Therefore it was the subtilty of the old
Serpent to deliver his Oracles often in ambiguous words, and in deceitful
Speeches, that whatsoever happened, his Credit might be salved, as his Aio te
Aeacida Romanos vincere posse, and Ibis redibis nunquam per bellae peribis,
etc. But God fore-tels what has no print of any footing in Nature, what
neither moral nor political Principles can direct unto, and never fails in his
Predictions. He fore-tells the Birth of Cyrus, 100 years before he was born,
Isa. 48.28. The Birth of Josiah, 200 years, 1 Kings 13.2. The Conversion of the
Gentiles and falling off of the Jews, above 2000 years before it came to pass,
Genesis 9.27. Isa. 49.6. Isa. 54.9, 10. He fore-tells the Birth of Chirst, near
4000 years before he came into the World, Genesis 3.15. And it is very observable,
how punctual and particular he is herein, (as knowing how much the welfare of
the World did depend upon the Knowledge of the true Messiah,) he tells you long
beforehand, of what Tribe he should come, of Judah; of what Family, David's; of
what Person, a Virgin; where he should be born, in Bethlehem; whence he must be
called, out of Egypt; what his condition should be; in general, full of Sorrows
and Griefs; in particular, that he should be disgraced and reviled, tempted,
betrayed, apprehended, deserted by his Father and Brethren; that he should die,
be pierced, not have a Bone broken; be buried, make his Grave with the Rich and
the Wicked, and rise again from the Dead, and reap the fruit of all his
Passion, to his full satisfaction.

He has foretold the state of the World, and the Church, in the Revelations;
from the Primitive times, to the dissolution of the World, though it is written
in shorthand and in dark Characters.

And can any Men or Angels foretell such things? God challenges all the gods
to do this; Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that
ye are gods, Isa. 41.21, 22, 23. The certain Prediction of future Contingents,
is such an inseparable Prerogative of the Deity, and such a special Privilege
of the Original of all things, that he ingageth to own their Supremacy, and
acknowledge their Sovereignty, who can do it. It Is such a Jewel in his Crown,
that none ever shared in it: I have declared the former things from the
beginning: I did them suddenly, and they came to pass: I have even from the
beginning declared it to thee; before it came to pass, I showed it to thee,
Isa. 48.3, and 5. It Is peculiar to him, who works all in all, to foreknow
and foretell whatsoever shall come to pass, Acts 15.18. Known to God are all
his Works, from the beginning of the World; yea, from all eternity. For he
stood on the high Mountain of eternity, and thence had a full view of all that
his will would produce, and whatsoever should come to pass.

CHAP. XVI. God incomparable in his Word, as it is converting, affrighting and
comforting.
3. GOD is incomparable in the effects of his Word: His Words are Works, they
are operative, as well as declarative of his Pleasure. What he speaks has
Power and Virtue in it, as well as Weight and Value.

1. It is efficacious in converting the Soul: The word of God can stop the tide
of nature, when it runs with the greatest violence; yea, it can turn it the
quite contrary way: Let a man be in the height of his Strength, in the heat of
his Youth, ruffling and bussling among the Sparks of the times, taking a large
draught of carnal Pleasures, and having a full gust of sensual Delights, making
his whole life but a diversion from one Pleasure to another, (as if he were
sent into the Earth, as Leviathan into the waters, only to play and sport
there,) when this man is in his best estate, in the Zenith of Health and
Strength, in the Meridian of his Age, promising himself a long day of life, and
putting the day of death far from him, and thereby giving himself the more
liberty to the service of his Lusts; yet if the word of God come to this man,
who sucketh in Wind as the wild Asses Colt, it makes him pluck in his Plumes,
bid adieu to his foolish Pleasures, leave his most beloved Lusts, loath himself
for ever loving them; it alters the man's Palate, that is bitter now which was
sweet before; and he cannot savor what formerly was his heaven and happiness;
it changes the bent and frame of his heart, that now he forsakes with
detestation what formerly he followed after, as his only felicity and chiefest
good; The wild man is tame, the obstinate man is pliable, and the distracted
man is recovered to his wits, Psalm. 119.9. Men and Angels may persuade, but God
only can prevail. The words of Creatures may work for an outward reformation,
but the word of God alone for an inward renovation: He only that made the Heart
can mend it. Humane Counsels may do somewhat toward the hiding of the
corruptions of Nature, but Divine instructions are only effectual for the
healing of corrupted Nature: The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
Soul, Psalm. 19.7. Converting the Soul; The Law of man may bind the Body to its
good behavior, but the Law of God alone can bring the Soul to its good
behavior. To turn a Lion into a Lamb, Darkness into Light, a Stone into Flesh,
Death into Life, (all which is done in conversion) can be effected by the Word
of none but a God, Isa. 11.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 5.8. Ezekiel. 26. Ephesians. 2.1, and 5. No
word but his can take a Cions off from its own natural stock, and ingraft it
into a new stock, Romans 11.17. James 1.21. 2 Cor. 10.4. Acts 2.41. Acts 4.4.

2. It is efficacious in affrighting the Sinner: He speaks (not as Men or
Angels, to the Ears only, but) to the hidden-man of the Heart, and shatters it
in pieces; he plants, his Batteries of Threatenings, and Terrors, and Curses,
against the inward man of the Conscience, and puts it into an Ague of trembling
and shaking Fits, (as we see in Herod, Acts 24.27.) and levels it to the
ground. This word in the mouth of a poor Prisoner at the Bar, frights the proud
sturdy Judge on the Bench. When God speaks, he makes the best people afraid,
and cry out, Let not God speak to us, least we die, and the best of that people
exceedingly to quake and fear, Exodus 19.19. Heb. 12.21. The Voice of the Lord
is terrible, it shakes the Cedars of Lebanon, it shattereth the Oaks of
Bashan, Psalm. 29. Those that were Monsters of Mankind for Cruelty and
Barbarousness, for Stupidity and Searedness, by his Word have been terrified in
their Spirits, wounded in their Consciences, cut to the Heart, and forced to
call out, Sirs, What shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.37.

The most stubborn senseless Sinner, whom neither Mercies nor Miseries could
move or melt, who mocked at the Curses of the Law, and the Wrath of the Lord;
and as Leviathan laughed at the shaking of those Spears, whom (as the man
possessed with the Devil) no Cords could hold, no Chains could fasten, but he
burst all asunder; when the Word of the Lord has been spoken to him, instead
of flying in his face (as formerly when men have spoken to him) he has fallen
down at his feet, been filled with fears and frights, felt the very Fire of
Hell flaming in his conscience, and become a very Magor Missabib, fear or
terror to himself round about: The Word of God has stuck in his Heart, as the
Arrow in the side of the Buck, allowing no ease; whithersoever he has gone in
the night, scaring him with Dreams, and terrifying him with Visions; in the day
admitting no rest in his Flesh, nor quietness in his Bones, forcing him in all
Places, and in all Companies, still to carry his Jaylour, his Tormentor, his
Executioner, along with him; and at last, that he might escape a partial and
temporal, to leap into a total, an eternal Hell: Ah, who knows the Power of
his Anger? of his angry word; or is able to fear him according to his wrath,
Psalm. 90.11. I may challenge every Man, every Angel, as God himself does Job,
Have thou an Arm like God? Can thou thunder with thy Voice like him, Job
40.9. If he utter his word of fury, the Rocks are rent in pieces, the most
stony hearts are melted; the Mountains are moved, the highest and firmliest
seated Sinners are shaken out of their places and senses, the foundations of
the World tremble and quake, the strongest Pillars are troubled, the whole
frame and body of Nature is affected with a Palsy; Psalm. 18.13. The Lord
thundered in the Heavens, the highest gave forth his Voice, (what follows?)
Hailstones and coals of fire.

3. It is efficacious in healing the wounded Spirit: When God takes the Sword
of the Spirit into his own Hand, and wields it with his own Arm, it makes work,
it makes wounds to purpose in the consciences of men; the sleepy Soul is now
awakened, the secure Soul is now affrighted, the senseless Soul is now affected
with his sins and misery, ( Acts 2.37.) the man tastes the bitterness of his
original and actual corruptions, feels the weight of Divine fury and
indignation, finds the Poison to work in his Bowels, and wracking him with
extremity of pain; Psalm. 38.4. Job 6.10
There is no rest in his Flesh, because of God's anger; nor quiet in his Bones,
because of his sins: The arrows of the Almighty are within him, and his terrors
set themselves in array against him. The unquenchable fire flasheth in his
face, and destruction (in his thoughts) is ready to lay hold of him; in this
condition he knows not what to do, Prove. 18.14.
for a wounded Spirit who can bear? He tries Creatures, but they can afford
him no ease; Miserable Comforters are they all to him, and Pyhsicians of no
value: It Is the same hand that wounded, that alone can cure him; it is the same
word that bruised him, that must bind him up; let God but speak to this Soul
that is thus sunk down into Hell, and it will be lifted up to Heaven: Fools,
because of their Iniquities and Transgressions, are afflicted, their Soul
abhoreth all manner of meat (they are so sick, that they can relish, take down
nothing,) and they draw near to the gates of Death, (they are almost in, they
are on the brink of Hell;) what course must be used for their cure? truly this,
He sent his word and healed them, and delivered them from their Destruction,
Psalm. 107.17, 18, 19, 20. No Herb in the Garden of the whole World can do these
distressed Creatures the least good. Friends may speak, and Ministers may
speak; yea, Angels may speak, and yet all in vain; the wounds are incurable for
all their words: But if God please to speak, the dying Soul reviveth. His word
is the only Balm that can cure the wounded conscience; he sends his Word and
heals them. Conscience is God's Prisoner, he claps it in hold, he lays it
in fetters, that the iron enters the very Soul; this he does by his word, and
truly he only who shuts up, can let out; all the World cannot open the iron
Gate, knock off the shackles, and set the poor Prisoner at liberty, till God
speak the word.

David professed, he had quite fainted, had it not been for this Aqua vitae,
this Cordial water; I had perished in my affliction, but thy word comforted me,
Psalm. 119.92. The boistrous Billows went over my Soul, and I had sunk in those
deep Waters, had not thy Word bore me up.

CHAP. XVII. If God be incomparable: 1. How great is the malignity of Sin,
which contemns, dishonors and opposes this God.
I Come now to make some application of this great and weighty Truth: It may be
useful by way of Information, Counsel and Comfort.

First, By way of Information: If God be so incomparable, that there is none on
Earth, none in Heaven comparable to him; It may inform us,

1. Of the great venom and malignity of Sin, because it is an injury to so
great, so glorious, so incomparable a Being. The higher and better any Object
is, the baser and the worse is that action which is injurious to it: To throw
dirt on Sackcloth is not so bad as to throw dirt on Scarlet or fine Linen. To
make a flaw in a pebble or common stone, is nothing to the making a flaw in a
Diamond or precious stone. Those opprobrious Speeches, or injurious Actions,
against an ordinary person, which are but a breach of the good behavior, and
bear but a common Action at Law; if against a Prince may be high Treason,
because of the execellency of his Place, and Majesty of his Person: The worth
and dignity of the Object, does exceedingly heighten and aggravate the Offense.
How horrid then is Sin, and of how heinous a nature, when it offends and
opposes not Kings, the highest of men; not Angels, the highest of Creatures:
But God, the highest of Beings, the incomparable God, to whom Kings and Angels;
yea, the whole Creation is less then nothing. We take the size of Sin too low,
and short, and wrong, when we measure it by the wrong it does to our selves, or
our Families, or our Neighbors, or the Nation wherein we live; indeed herein
somewhat of its evil and mischief does appear, but to take its full length and
proportion, we must consider the wrong it does to this great, this glorious,
this incomparable God: Sin is incomparably malignant, because the God
principally injured by it, is incomparably excellent. It Is one thing to
displease and offend man, a poor slimy worm, a mean shallow Creature, of the
same make and mold with our selves, and another thing to displease and offend
God, that unconceivable immense Being: If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him, (an humane Judge may undertake to determine and comprise
Offenses between them that stand upon the same level) but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2.25. Here the case is altered,
here is a pitiful finite Creature offending an infinite Creator; what man dares
arbitrate this difference, nay who can intercede and interpose between these
too?

Hence, hence it is that there is no less then an infinite demerit in sin,
because its an injury to an infinite Majesty. Nothing discovers sin to be so
great an evil, as its opposition to so vast, so matchless, so great a good, so
incomparable a God.

The evil of sin appears somewhat in the injury it does to our Estates, (
Prove. 23.21. The Drunkard and Glutton shall come to poverty, and idleness shall
cloth a man with rags.) To our Names ( The name of the Wicked shall rot, Prove.
11.7.) To our Families ( A wicked man troubles his own House, Prove. 15.27. and
Prove. 3.33.) To our Neighbors ( One sinner destroys much good, Eccl. 3.18.)
To our Nation ( Jer. 18.7, 8. Psalm. 107.34. He turns a fruitful Land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.) To our Bodies ( Who
has woe? who has sorrow? who has wound? without cause? They that tarry long
at the Wine, Prove. 23.29, 30. Prove. 5.11.) To our Souls, He that sins
against me, wrongeth his own soul, Prove. 8. ult. But all this discovers nothing
of sins evil, to that which is discovered by the injury it does to the
incomparable God, because our Estates, our Names, our Families, our Neighbors,
our Nations, our Bodies, our Souls, are all nothing, infinitely less then
Nothing to the great God, the incomparable. This, this is the only Glass that
discovers the horrid ugly features, the monstrous frightful deformities of sins
face, that it is a wrong to the blessed God, to him who is the high and lofty
one, Isa. 57.15.

1. In that sin is a breach of this incomparable God's Law, a violation of his
Command, a contradiction of his Will: Whosoever sins, transgresses the Law,
for sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. Neither the greatness nor
smallness of our obedience or disobedience is to be valued, according to the
greatness or smallness of the thing commanded or forbidden, nor according to
the greatness or smallness of the good or hurt done to man by it, but according
to the greatness of the Person, who commands or forbids.

2. In that it is a contempt of this incomparable God's Authority, a slighting
his Dominion, a denying his Sovereignty; Who is the Lord, that I should obey
his Voice? (Exodus 5.2.) is the Voice of every Sinner: We are our own (say they)
Who is Lord over us, Psalm. 12.4. They know no Maker, and therefore own no
Master: For this cause the Sinner is said to cast the incomparable God behind
his back, as not worth minding or regarding, 1 Kings 14.9. And to despise him
as some mean inconsiderable Being, 1 Samuel 2.30. 2 Samuel 12.9. and 10.

3. In that it is a dishonouring this incomparable God, whose name alone is
excellent; It lays him low, who is the most high, Psalm. 92.1. Through
breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God, Romans 2.23, 24. It is ill to reproach a
common man, worse to reproach a Noble man, or a Prince; but O how bad is it to
reproach the great God! to blaspheme that worthy Name: Sin lays the honor of
this incomparable God (which is more worth then millions of Worlds) in the
dust, and trampleth on it. The Romans when they would mark one with ignominy,
and brand him with reproach, would put him out of their Senate, or any place of
Credit in which he was, and pull down his Statue or Monument, if any were
erected to his Honor. Sin degrades and dethrones God, it will not allow him to
be the Lord and Supreme of the World, and it defaceth his Image wherever it
finds it, as one contrary expels another: It disgraceth his Justice, thence is
called Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.6. His Wisdom, thence is called Folly, Prove.
5.23. His Patience, thence is called Murmuring, Jude 16. His Power, thence is
called Weakness, Romans 5.8. His Mercy, thence is called Unthankfulness, Luke
6.35. His Knowledge, thence is called Ignorance, and a work of Darkness, 1 Pet.
1.14. Ephesians. 5.8. His Truth, thence is called a Lie, and lying Vanity, Psalm.
58.2. Jonah 2.8. In all these, and every way, it disgraceth his Holiness, which
is his Glory, and the glory of all his Attributes, Exodus 15.11. thence is
called Filthiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Uncleanness, Romans 1.24.

4. In that it is a fighting with, and (to its power) a destroying this
incomparable God: The murder of any man is heinous, it is horrid, it is against
nature, and it is the extremest mischief that one Creature can do to another,
Genesis 4.10. Math. 10.28. The murder of a Father or a Sovereign is far more
heinous, as being more against Nature, and against more engagements to the
contrary. He is cursed that mocketh his Father; and his Heart smote him who did
but cut off the skirt of his Kings Garment, thought his Enemy; what a Monster
then is he that kills either? but O what a Monster! what a Devil is that which
destroys (as far as it is able) the good, the gracious, the great, the
glorious, the incomparable God? Truly, sin is such a Monster, such a Devil,
that were its power equal to its spite, and its strength answerable to its
malice, the living God should not live a moment.

Omne peccatum est Dei-cidium, All sin is God-murder: The Sinner hates God,
Romans 1.30. and hatred ever wishes, and, as it is able, works the destruction
of its object: The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14.1. i.
e. It is a pleasing thought to him, to suppose there were no God; as to guilty
Prisoners, to imagine there were no Judge to arraign and condemn them; whom we
fear as hurtful to us, we hate, and wish he were taken out of the way: In order
hereunto the Sinner strives with God, and contendeth with him, Job 34.7.
fights against him, Acts 5.39. He stretches out his hand against God, and
strengthens himself against the Almighty: (He puts forth all his force, and
venteth all his strength,) He runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the
thick bosses of his Bucklers; Runs upon him as one Enemy upon another,
furiously, without fear, and, as he is able, gets him down, sets his Feet on
his Neck, trampleth on him, and crusheth him, Job. 15.25, 26.

O how odious! how loathsome, how abominable is sin, that breaks the Law,
slights the Authority, dishonors the Name, and to its utmost dethrones and
destroys the Being of this incomparable God, this self-sufficient, independent,
absolutely perfect, eternal, incomprehensible, infinite Being, which alone
deserves the name of Being, and to which all other. Beings are no Beings.
Reader, should this God of Glory appear to thee, as once to Abraham, and show
thee a glimpse of his excellent glory, that is above the Heavens; should he
discover to thee but a little of that greatness which the Heavens, and Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain, of that duration which had no beginning, has no
succession, knows no ending; of those perfections that admit of no bounds, no
limits, that are incapable of the least addition or accession to them, and then
should say unto thee (as when he appeared to Saul) Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? Man, man, why despisest thou my Commands? why despisest thou my
Authority? Sinner, how dare thou dishonor my Name, and seek my destruction?
What would thou then think of Sin? O what would thou then think of thy self
for thy sins! Should thou not have other thoughts of sin, and of thy self for
sin, then ever yet thou have had? Would thou not even loath thy self, for
being so base, so vile, so unworthy; yea, so mad, as to offend and affront, and
fight against such a God? would thou not cry out as Job, I have sinned
against thee, and what shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men, Job 7.20.
I have sinned against thee, an incomparable, infinite, unconceivable Being: I
have wronged thee, the most high, most holy, most blessed God, and what shall I
do unto thee? what amends shall I make thee? what reparation shall I give thee?
It is impossible for me, should I weep and wail, and lament and grieve millions
of Ages, to make the least satisfaction for the injury I have done to such a
Majesty. Or would thou not say as he in another place, Lord, I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eyes see thee; wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6. Lord, I have heard of thee
somewhat by thy word, and by thy works, they have told me somewhat of thy
beauty and glory, and excellency; howbeit I believed them not, but now mine
Eyes have seen thy Majesty and Royalty, and Sovereignty, wherefore I abhor my
self, that ever I should transgress thy godly Will, that ever I should
blaspheme thy great Name, that ever I should despise thy Supremacy, and fight
against thy Majesty. Ah I Reprobate, turn away mine eyes from my self, cannot
endure to behold my self; my stomach is turned against my self, I loath my
self, that ever I should presume, and dare to contest and contend with, to
wrong and injure thine Excellency; I recant all that I have been, all that I
have done against thee, and repent, am unfeignedly grieved for it, heartily
wish I had never been so, never done so, but since what is past cannot be
recalled, I will as far as I can be revenged on my self, for my impudency and
distraction, I will lie in the dust, lick the dust, own my self to be much
baser and viler then the dust, I will abhor my self in dust and ashes.

This, this is the venom, the malignity of sin, that it is opposite and
contrary, offensive and injurious to the incomparable God. This is the
consideration which should humble us most for our sins: This was the weight
that pressed David down most, and laid him so low in the day of his Repentance;
Against thee, Psalm. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight: Though he had sinned
against the Enemies of God, in occasioning their blasphemies; against the
friends of God, in grieving their Spirits; against his whole Kingdom, in
provoking God to plague them; though he had sinned against Bathsheba, in
defiling her Body and Soul; against Vriah, both in the matter of his Wife and
Life, and against his own Body and Soul; yet he looks upon these, though great
in themselves, yet little, nothing comparatively; the Head of the Arrow that
pierced his heart, was this, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.13.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. The injury which he did to himself and
others, was so inconsiderable, in comparison of the injury he did to God, that
he passes it quite by, in his penitential Psalm, and sticks wholly upon this,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. This is the strongest the weightiest
Argument to drive and dissuade from sin; none is like it. When Moses would
couch all Arguments in one, he uses this instead of all, Number. 32.23. But if ye
will not do so, (i.e. perform your promise to assist your Brethren, till they
have conquered their Enemies, and are settled in their Possessions; what then?
what great harm if they do not? Is it not that they sin against their Brethren,
and wrong their own Souls? No, but) Behold (mark it, it is worthy your
attention, and most serious consideration,) ye have sinned against the Lord,
the great, the mighty, the almighty, the incomparable God.

CHAP. XIX. If God be incomparable, how great is the madness and misery of
impenitent Sinners?
SEcondly, if God be such an incompararable God, it informs us of the madness
and misery of Sinners.

1. Of their madness in daring to offend him, and to contend with him. 2. In
wilfully losing this incomparable God.

1. How great is their madness in daring to offend him? yea, in daring him to
his face? Reader, if thou should see a man without any cause striving with an
whole Army, hacking and hewing, and provoking them to kill him, you would think
surely the man is mad, otherwise he would never thus wilfully run himself into
a certain ruin. I tell thee every time thou wilfully breakest his Laws, thou
actest more like a distracted man; for thou fightest against that God who is
stronger than millions of Armies, who is Almighty; and thou provokest him to
destroy thee who can wink thee into the other world, and look thee into the
eternal Lake, and hiss thee into Hell flames. Man, art thou Gods match, that
thou offerest to enter the List with him? Do ye (says the Apostle) provoke the
Lord to anger? Are ye stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. It Is one thing to provoke
men to anger, and another thing to provoke the Lord to anger. Man has but a
little heart, and a small hand; his anger and power cannot at utmost exceed
finite; but Gods heart and hand, his anger and power are both infinite. If the
wrath of a King be a Messenger of Death, what think thou is the wrath of
immensity, and the stroke of Omnipotency? What then is the wrath of a God?
Sinner do thou know what thou do when thou breakest his Laws, slightest his
Love, dishonourest his Name, grievest his Spirit? I tell thee thou provokest a
God who is incomparable in holiness, and has threatened thy destruction; who is
incomparable in power, and can accomplish what he has threatened; and who is
incomparable in truth, and cannot but make good with his arm, what he has
spoken with his mouth: Woe be to him that striveth with his Maker: let the
Potsherds strive with the Potsherds of the earth, Isa. 45.1. God is a God of
Peace, he hates strife; but if men will be striving, he wishes them rather to
meddle with those that are their matches, poor silly worms like themselves, and
not to strive with their Maker, who is infinitely their Superior in authority
and power, and every perfection. Here is sawciness indeed, for a pitiful
nothing to challenge Almightiness to Battle. Who (in his wits, in his senses,
that were not quite distracted) would set Briars and Thorns against me in
Battle? I would go through them, I would burn them up all together, Isa. 27.4.
Briars and Thorns are not match to a fire; how easily, how speedily, how
certainly does the fire consume them as soon as it lays hold of them? how
much less is weak man a match for God, who is a consuming fire? When the Roman
Poet was desired to make Verses against his Emperor, he answered, Nolo in eum
scribere qui potest proscribere, I Will not jeer and jest with him that can kill
me in earnest. Our Savior tells us, What King going to war against another,
sits not down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with 10000 to meet
him that comes against him with 20000? or else while the other is a great way
off sends to his Ambassadors, and desires conditions of Peace, Luke 14.31,
32. O that when the Devil and flesh entice the Sinner to sport with and make a
mock of Sin, Prove. 10.23. he would but consider, it is ill jesting with edged
tools, it is ill jesting with unquenchable Burnings; for how can his heart
endure, or his hands be strong in the day that the great God shall deal with
him? Ezekiel. 22.14.

2. Again, How great is their madness, who will venture the eternal loss of
this God, this incomparable God, for every base lust? what a mad man is he, who
will stake a Million against a Mite, a Crown against a Crum, Substance against
Shadows, all things against nothing, the blessed boundless God against a
moments sensual delight. Was not Shimei bereft of his wits, to hazard his life
for a little uncertain worldly profit by his Servant? The Lord Jesus does most
fitly call him a fool, who would hazard and lose the incomparable God for a
little corruptible Gold, Luke 12.20. The Spirit of God speaks the Prodigal to
be beside himself, when he left bread, bread enough, bread enough in his
Fathers house, for husks, and not a Belly full neither, and among Swine, Luke
15.18, 19, 20. and when he came to himself, he considered what a mad man he
was, to wallow among Swine, and feed on such brutish fare, which could never
fill his belly, when he might have been feasting among the Children of God in
his Fathers house, with plenty of what is bread indeed, able to satisfy a
capacious Heaven-born Soul. Friend, think of it seriously, the next time thou
art tempted to Sin, will this Oath, or this Cup, or this Theft, or this
Wantonness, or this neglect of Duty balance the everlasting loss of the
incomparable God? will this lust, this moments pleasure make amends for the
loss of him who is eternal life, and a River of unconceivable and unchangeable
pleasures? shall I be so besotted, bewitched, distracted, as to lose real
mercies for lying vanities, the fountain of living waters for Broken Cisterns,
the food of Angels for the worlds scraps; a precious Soul, an inestimable
Savior, an incomparable God, for a toy, a trifle, a poor empty gilded
nothing? Did ever any in Bedlam buy so dear, or sell so cheap, or manifest the
like madness?

2. Of the misery of Sinners. They shall lose this incomparable God for ever;
nay, they must have him for their everlasting enemy.

1. Their misery consists partly in this, that they must depart for ever from
this incomparable God, Math. 7.23. Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Math.
25.41. Depart from me ye cursed. O how dreadful a sound will the word Depart
make in the Sinners ears? yea, what a deep wound will it make in his heart?
Depart from me; Ah! whether do they go, that go from God? To depart from riches
and honors, and carnal comforts for ever, will affect and afflict him to
purpose who places his happiness in them; to lose health, and liberty, and
friends, and relations for ever, is no inconsiderable loss to him that knows
not where to have them made up. To lose the Ordinances of God, seasons of
Grace, the tenders, entreaties, invitations of the Gospel for ever, is such a
loss that a sensuallist is incapable of conceiving the greatness of. To lose
the Communion of perfect Spirits, the company of glorious Angels, the blessed
exercises of the Heavenly Host for ever, will not a little affright and amaze,
and vex and terrify the wicked, when they once come to have their eyes opened,
and their Consciences awakened in the other world: But to depart from the
incomparable God for ever, to lose the only Paradise of pleasures, the only
fountain of living Waters, the only author of true felicity; to lose the
unsearchable Mine of Riches, the inexhaustable well of Salvation, the
inestimable Sun of Righteousness; to lose the dearest Father, the wisest Guide,
the strongest Shield, the sweetest Love, the closest Friend, the tenderest
Mercy, the richest Grace, the highest Honor, the only happiness; to lose the
Lord of Life, the Lord of Glory, the Lord of Lords; to lose the God of Hope,
the God of all Grace, the God of all Consolation, the God of Peace, the God of
Gods, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the incomparable God; and to
lose him totally and for ever, is the loss of all losses, is such a loss as no
tongue can declare, no mind can conceive, is such a loss as never was the like
before it, nor shall, nor can be the like after it. He that has lost God, has
nothing left that is good, he has lost all that was worth having or saving.
Lord whether shall we go, if we go from thee? thou have the words of eternal
life, Joh. 6.68.

Reader, how great is the Sinners loss in the other world, how great soever his
gain is in this? Ah where is his hope though he has gained, when God shall
take away his Soul? Job 27.8. Can the greatest gain Counter-ballance the loss
of him to whom the whole world, yea, millions of worlds are trash and trifles?

The greatness of any loss is to be measured by the excellency and value of
that which we lose; therefore if God be so incomparable in all perfections, the
loss of Sinners, who lose this God totally and eternally, must be an
incomparable loss. As there is no gain equal to the gain of a God, all other
gains are but painted Babies or Butterflies to this; so there is no loss equal
to the loss of a God, all other losses are but Bug-bears to fright Children
with to this; this is a loss with a witness, a loss which nothing can
countervail, supply, or make up, in which all that is good is gone for ever. As
Micah said to the Israelites, when they asked him what he ayled to cry out so,
Ye have taken away my God, and what have I more? Judge. 18.22. So will the
Sinner in the other world, screech horribly, and complain heavily of his
deceitful Flesh (which now he makes such provision for) Thou have taken away my
God, and what have I more? I am poor, a beggar, nothing worth, worse than
naught, wholly ruined, utterly undone by thee, I have lost my God, and with him
all that is good.

Reader, if thou live without God, ponder, O ponder in the midst of all thy
gettings what thou art loosing; yea, what thou shall loose (if thou do not
return) for ever and ever. Did the Disciples weep and wail, that they should
see the face of a good man no more on earth, Sorrowing most of all, for the
words that he spoke unto them, that they should see his face no more, Acts
20.38. And do thou think it will not fill thy heart with sorrow, and cut it
with anguish, to hear the blessed God, the incomparable God say to thee,
Sinner, farewell, farewell for ever, thou shall see my face no more for ever?
Believe it, those words will sound more dolefully in thine ears, than thou art
now aware of; they will be a Passing Bell to all thy hopes, and joys, and
comforts, and delights; they will be a knell to Toll the Death and Burial of
whatsoever may be refreshing and reviving to thee, of all thine ease, and rest,
and liberty, and peace, and health, and strength, and friends, and relations,
and all that may in the least conduce to thy comfort or happiness. Now possibly
thou can be merry enough without God, thou had rather have his room than
his company, preferrest a life without him, before a life with him; and say
unto him, Depart from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14.
And the reason of this Atheism and Profaneness, is thine ignorance; thou
know not what a fountain of life, what bowels of love, what an hive of
sweetness, what an ocean of happiness the blessed incomparable God is, neither
believe what Scripture speaks hereof: but when once thou enterest into the
other world, and have lost this God irrecoverably, thou shall know what thou
have lost; but then, if ever, that saying of the wise man will be verified, He
that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccles. 1.18. And then thou shall
believe the truth of the glass of Scripture in its representations of the
beautiful face of God, though thy faith will be the faith of a Devil, to thy
terror, and torment. Ah Sinner, when thou shall know and believe what a vast
treasure, what a River of pleasure, what a perfect good, what fullness of joy,
what solid comfort, what real satisfaction, what a weight of glory thou have
lost for ever, without the least hopes and possibility of regaining, and lost
for base, vile, sordid lusts, for a little foolish brutish momentany pleasure;
what thoughts (think thou) will then seize thee? what anguish and remorse
surprise thee? Ah how will thou loath, and hate, and curse thy self for thy
folly and madness? thou will gnash thy teeth for envy at them that sit at
Heavens Table, feasting with the fruit of the tree of life, and drinking of the
pure Rivers of water which flow from the throne of God, and the Lamb; and thou will weep and wail for thy own distraction, that thou should refuse the
offers of all those dainties, and delicates, and delights, when they were made
to thee in the day of thy life; that thou should shut thy own mouth, and
wilfully refuse all those rich and costly Cordials, and shut the door of heaven
and happiness against thee with thine own hands. Ah Sinner, little, little do
thou know at the present what it is to lose this God. Other losses may be
corrective, but this is destructive; God whips in others, but he Executes in
this; Other losses may be the part of his Children, but this is the Portion of
Devils. All joy, all comfort is stabbed to the heart, pierced through, the heart
blood of it is let out with this one word (sharper than any two-edged Sword)
Depart. Write this man comfortless (as it was said of one Jer. 22.) ult. a man
that shall not prosper all his days. Write this poor Soul comfortless, a Soul
that shall not have a bit of bread, a drop of water, a glimpse of light, a
moments ease, or crum of comfort, all the long day of eternity. Ah Friend,
think of it betimes, Woe be to thee if God depart from thee, Hos. 9.12.

2. Their misery consists in this also, that they shall have this
incomparable God for their enemy. As there is no friend like God, and therefore
their privative misery must be great, exceeding great, unconceivably great; so
there is no enemy like God, and therefore the positive misery of Sinners must
be matchless and beyond all comparisons. The greater any ones power and anger
are, the greater their misery is who fall under the stroke of that power, and
the force of that anger. God is incomparable in power, he works arbitrarily,
irresistably, omnipotently; he has a mighty and an almighty arm: God is
incomparable in anger, his anger roots up, pulls down, kills, makes horrid
slaughters, removes the mountains, shakes the foundations of the earth, is a
consuming fire, burning and wasting all that comes near it. Thou, even thou art
to be feared, Psalm. 90.
for none may stand when thou art angry. Woe therefore to them that have this
God for their Enemy; it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, Heb. 12.23. David chose rather to fall into the hands of God than men, 2 Samuel 24.14. because he was a child of God (though afflicted sharply by him; for
love can consist with anger, though not with hatred) and therefore desired,
since he must be scourged, to be whipped by a loving Father (who would consider
his strength (what he could bear) as well as his fault and offense, and
accordingly use his rod) rather than by a cruel enemy, who hated him, and had
not the least mercy or pity for him. Beside, this world is the Stage whereon
the mercy of God acts its part (Justice must have its course and solemn
triumph in the other world.) He is here good to all, his Sun shines, and Rain
falls upon the just and unjust, Ps. 145.9. Math. 5.45. Therefore it is better
for any man upon earth to fall into the hands of God, than the best Friend or
nearest Relation in the world. But the Sinner is the object only of Gods wrath,
of his hatred, of his abhorrency, after death; God then puts off all pity, all
tenderness, all bowels toward him; and the other world is the place wherein
his Justice (that is now clouded and eclipsed) shall shine forth in its full
force and strength, and appear in all its beauty and brightness. And therefore
it must of necessity be a fearful thing for a poor creature to fall into the
hands of the living God; to have nothing but his naked flesh, his own weak
Soul, to bear the stroke of infinite power, set on and urged to strike home, by
infinite anger, and that for ever.

All the wrackings and torturings, the extreme pains and aches, the violent
Convulsions and consternations, the dreadful horror and anguish, the
everlasting chains of darkness, the never dying worm, and the fire that never
goes out of the Devils and damned, are but the expressions and fruits of the
matchless power and anger of this incomparable God. Therefore they are called
Wrath, Romans 2.4. the wrath of God, John 3. ult. and wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.
ult. Reader, think of it; if the wrath of a King, (a man like thy self, though
clothed with more civil power and strength) be as the roaring of a Lion (which
makes all the Beasts of the Forest to quake and tremble, Amos 3.6. Prove. 10.12.
) what then is the wrath of an Almighty infinite God? If he wound his friends,
the objects of his eternal choice, the travail of his Beloved Sons Soul, those
on whom he intends to glorify the riches of his love and grace for ever (in
the day of his anger, for their disobedience) with the wound of an enemy, yea,
with the wounds of a cruel one, Jer. 30.14. if he break their bones, and cause
the Arrow of his Quiver to enter into their Reins; if he fill their Souls with
bitterness, and make them drunk with wormwood; if he makes them water their
Couches with Tears, and go mourning all the day long; if his anger causes them
to roar uncessantly, and his terrors make them distracted; if he be to them as
a Bear lying in wait, and as a Lion in secret places; How will he wound thee
his enemy? how will he deal with thee whom he infinitely hates? what a Bear,
what a Lion, what a Fire will he be to thee? how unable will thou be to stand
under, and yet how impossible to avoid the weight of his Omnipotent arm and
infinite anger? Lay it to heart timely, and make thy peace with him through his
Son, that thou may prevent it. Sure I am thou would not fry in flames, or
boil alive in a Furnace of scalding Lead a thousand years, for this whole
worlds command 10000 years: Ah why then should thou for a little profit, a
little pleasure, a little honor for a few days, (for thy life is but a
vapor) bring thy self under a necessity of frying in the flames, and boiling
in the Furnace of the Almighty Gods anger for ever and ever? O friend be wise
on this side the other world.

CHAP. XXI. If God be incomparable, how monstrous is their Pride who compare
themselves to the incomparable God.
THirdly, If God be such an incomparable God, it informs us, what abominable
Pride and desperate presumption they are guilty of, who compare with, and
prefer themselves before this God. If he be so transcendently excellent in his
Being, Attributes, Word, and Works; how desperately saucy and impudent are they
who put themselves in the balance with God? Behold all Nations to me are as
nothing, yea, less than nothing, and vanity: To whom then will ye liken me? or
to what will ye compare me? Isa. 40.17, 18. To liken God to any is the grossest
Idolatry, and to liken any to God is the highest arrogance. Babylon that sets
her self in the Throne of God, and exalts her self above all that is called
God, is the mystery of iniquity, the man of Sin, in truth the dregs of the
very Devil, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. It Is a debasing God, not to adore him, and admire him
according to his excellent Majesty, and vast immensity; what a debasing then is
it of God to compare him to poor pitiful nothings, as all Men and Angels are to
him? He debaseth himself to open his eyes upon men, upon Angels, to behold
things that are done in Heaven and Earth, Ps. 113.5. But he will not debase
himself to compare with Men and Angels, he scorneth to put himself into the
Scales with them, he is infinitely above and beyond all Comparatives, all
Superlatives. Comparisons (we say) are odious; but no comparison that ever was,
has in the least degree that odiousness which this has, for a Man or an Angel
to compare with their Maker. The slime, and clay, and earth, may very much
better compare with the Potter; both are narrow limited beings, both are earth
and clay; yet the Potter would think it a great dishonor to him, (who has a
body curiously wrought, and an Heaven-born spiritual immortal soul) and
desperate arrogance in the clay and dirt which he trampleth on, to compare with
him. And is it not greater pride in man to compare with God, when there is an
infinite distance between them in all things? yet so ambitious and arrogant is
man, that he dares to do this. Angels and Adam both aspired to equal their
Maker, they would needs be independent and self-sufficient, they endeavored to
cut off the entail, and to hold wholly and only of themselves; but they ruined
themselves, and made themselves baser than beasts, by aspiring thus to raise
themselves to that impossible pitch of a Partnership with God.

It Is a favor, that Men and Angels may be like God in some rays and beams of
his holiness and purity; but it is impossible for Men or Angels to be like God
in the rich Jewels of his Crown, his independency, absolute perfection,
self-sufficiency, infiniteness and supremacy. He stamped some impressions of
himself upon his creatures, but he took no impressions of his creatures upon
himself; if they were made in his likeness, he was not made in their likeness;
it is devilish impudency and blasphemy, for the highest Creature to weigh with
the Creator. This was Lucifer's pride, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt
my Throne above the Stars, I will be like the most High, Isa. 14.13, 14. But
his pride got a fall, and a shrewd one too. God cannot brook a Rival, he cannot
bear an equal, there must be but one Sun in the Heavens. A Prince may take it
kindly from his Subjects, if they endeavor to imitate him, in his mercy,
justice, temperance, chastity, and in those things that are general and common
to him and them; because hereby his Subjects honor him, (for by their
imitation of him, they acknowledge excellency in him) but if his Subjects shall
undertake to imitate him in his regalia, those things that are proper to him as
a King, should they aspire to make Laws, to make Peace and War, to wear the
Crown, sway the Scepter, and ascend the Throne, he could not bear it, but would
judge them Rebels guilty of High Treason, and worthy of death; because hereby
they extremely dishonor him, viz. in making themselves equal to him, and
robbing him of that Superiority which God has given him: So God is pleased and
delighted that Men and Angels should resemble him in those perfections of his,
that are common and communicable; as to be patient, and meek, and loving, and
righteous, and heavenly, and holy; because hereby they glorify him, Math.
5.16. But if the creatures should go about to be like him in the peculiar
Cognisances of the Deity, his Self-sufficiency, Independency, Governing others
at their will, Enacting Laws to oblige the Consciences of others, exacting
Worship from their fellow Creatures; so God cannot, God will not suffer it, for
hereby they go about to rob him of his Supremacy, to dethrone and ungod him.
How often does God tell us in Scripture, to quel such presumptuous thoughts,
that he is not man's fellow, man's familiar? God is not a man, Numb. 23.29. I am
God, and not man, Hos. 11.9. He is not a man as I am, says Job 9.32 v. Though
God was pleased out of his infinite grace to become man, that man might once
more be like God in those communicable properties forementioned; yet he will
not permit it, nay, it is altogether impossible, for man to become God, and be
like him in the special prerogatives of the Deity: There is still an infinite
distance between the divine and the humane nature. They who prate of being
Godded, and turned into the essence of the Deity (as some have impudently and
blasphemously written) are either intollerably weak, or devilishly wicked, or
both. Now because many are guilty of the strange presumption to compare with
God, who little think it, I shall very briefly name two or three sorts of men.

1. Such as quarrel with the Precepts of God, as if they were too strict, too
precise, too pure, and that God commanded more than was needful, Psalm. 2.2.
Romans 8.7. This is a comparing with God, yea, a preferring our selves before
God; and such speak as if they would be in Gods Throne to make Laws, and as if
they would enact better Laws, more conducing to, and convenient for the welfare
of mankind. Because man has vitiated his nature, and distempered all his
faculties, he is angry at God for enjoining him a strict diet, and forbidding
him what would feed his Disease. A foul Stomach loatheth the wholsomest food.

2. When men question the Providence of God, as if they were not good, and
wise, and righteous, these compare, yea, prefer themselves before God; their
voice is like Absolom's, O that I were Judge, things should not go thus at six
and sevens; See here is none to do justice to you; O that I governed the world,
there should be no such disorders as are now, no such inequality amongst men,
The righteous should not perish, nor the wicked flourish as they do: These
ways are not equal, Ezekiel. 33.13, 17. These men contend with God for
Sovereignty: Why strivest thou with him? Job 3.13. These men accuse God of
folly, and think themselves wiser; but shall he that contendeth with God
instruct him? Job 40.2. He that complains of Gods dealings, undertakes to teach
God in what manner and by what means the world should be better governed: These
men compare with God for justice; nay, condemn him of injustice, Job 40.8. Will thou condemn me, that thou may be Righteous?

Gods ways are often secret, his paths are in the Seas, and his goings in
deep waters, Psalm. 73.19. and because men cannot fathom them, therefore they
find fault with them. He writes his mind often in shorthand, in dark
Characters; and because poor blind man cannot read them, therefore he wrangleth
with them, Thy Judgments are a great deep, Psa. 36.9.

3. When men tax the Decrees of God, as if they were unrighteous, partial, and
ordered with respect of persons, they then compare with God, as if, in case
they had been at Heavens Council Table when all things were debated and
concluded, there should have been more mild and moderate, more just and
righteous resolves and conclusions. These men think and speak evil of the
things they understand not; and it would become them better to mind Faith and
Repentance, and ensure their effectual Calling, than pry into or meddle with
those secrets of Heaven. No man has a line long enough to measure God by; his
eternal works and ways are beyond all our understandings and apprehensions,
and so much fitter for our admiration than curious disquisition, Romans 9.17, to
24.

4. Once more, Those Princes, or Masters, or Parents, which command what God
forbids, or forbid what God commands, compare with God, and usurp his
authority; for their power to command, and right to be obeyed, must (in their
conceits) be equal to Gods, or else why do they give Laws in opposition to his?
or how can they expect to be obeyed? They who command divine worship to Bread
and Wine, and places, or any creature, compare with and prefer themselves
before God: which is desperate pride and presumption, 1 Kings 21.9, 10, 11. 2 Samuel 13.28.

CHAP. XXII. If God be incomparable, then incomparable Service and Worship is
due to him.
FOurthly, If God be an incomparable God, then incomparable Service and Worship
is due to him. All service must be suitable to its object. The higher the
Prince, the higher honor he does and may expect. The Heathen were sensible of
this, that such worship must be given to their Deities as was suitable to them;
therefore the Persians who worshipped the Sun, offered to him a flying horse,
noting strength and swiftness; because the Sun was strong to run his race. God
is a great God, and therefore must have great worship. Solomon gives this
reason why the Temple, the place of Gods worship, must be great, 2 Chronicles. 2.3.
The House which I build is great (why?) for great is our God above all Gods. A
great Palace is most suitable and becoming a great Prince. It reflects upon
God, it is a slighting him, to give him any thing that is ordinary; as it is to
a King to be put off with common entertainment at the houses of his Subjects.
As he is the best, so he will be served with the best. Cursed be the deceiver;
who has in his stock a Male, and offers to the Lord a corrupt thing. Why,
what is the matter, that there must be such care about, and choice of his
Sacrifices? God himself gives you the reason, and a good reason for it, For I
am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the
Heathen, Mal. 1.10. Petty Princes may be owned and served with petty Presents;
but a great King, a great Sovereign, must have great Sacrifices.

When the Prophet had described the incomparable excellency of God, how all
Nations were to him as the least drop in a Bucket to the Ocean, and the small
dust in the balance to the whole earth, as nothing and less than nothing, he
presently infers, Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor all the Beasts thereof
for a burnt offering, Isaiah 40.15, 16, 17. Lebanon abounded in all Spices for
incense and perfumes, and in Cattle for Sacrifices and Burnt Offerings; but all
the Spices and perfumes there, all the Beasts and Cattle there, were below, and
insufficient for so incomparable a Being: he is so great that no service can be
great enough for him.

1. This incomparable God calls for incomparable awe and reverence. Excellency
commands awe. Should not his excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall
upon you? Job 13.11. should not the vastness of his perfections provoke you to
awefulness in your conversations? His name alone is excellent, Psalm. 148.13.
The greater distance between any persons, the greater reverence is expected.
The Husband is the head of the Wife, therefore she is commanded to reverence
her Husband, 1 Cor. 7. Ephesians. 5. ult. There is a great civil distance between
Masters and Servants, therefore the command runs, Servants be obedient to your
Masters with fear and trembling, Ephesians. 6.5. But now between God and us there is
an infinite distance, and therefore there ought to be (if it were possible)
infinite reverence, (he is so vastly above and beyond all others in excellency,
that he alone deserves the name of excellency) therefore his name is holy and
reverend, Psalm. 111.10. and he is to be greatly feared. The greatest excellency
calls for the greatest reverence. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised, he is to be feared above all Gods, Psalm. 96.4. This use David makes of
Gods incomparableness, Who in the Heavens can be compared to the Lord? who
among the Sons of the mighty can be likened to the Lord? What then? what
follows on this? God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of his Saints,
and to be had in reverence of all them that are round about him, Psalm. 89.6, 7.
Because in our whole conversations we must walk with God, therefore we are
commanded to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Prove. 23.17. But
because in Ordinances we have more immediately and specially to do with him
(then we are said to appear before him, Psalm. 42.2.) therefore we are bound
therein to be most aweful and reverential. Subjects show most reverence in the
presence Chamber of their Sovereign. O with what awe and dread should mortals
appear in the presence of him who inhabiteth eternity! should dust and ashes
draw nigh to the mighty Possessor of heaven and earth? Eccl. 5.1, 2. Keep thy
foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear than to
give the Sacrifice of Fools; be not rash with thy mouth, let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God (but why all this care and caution?) for
God is in Heaven, and thou art on Earth. His incomparable Majesty calls for
incomparable reverence: Majesty is dreadful. He is clothed with Majesty, Ps.
39.1. (All over Majesty) therefore let all the earth stand in awe of him. He is
adorned, surrounded with Majesty, therefore we must be filled with the awe of
him. Isa. 2.10, 19, 20. Fear and Majesty are three times conjoined. His
incomparable power calls for incomparable reverence. Power is aweful; and the
greater the power is, the greater awe is required, Math. 10.28. Fear not them
that can kill the Body, and can do no more; but fear him who is able to cast
Soul and Body into Hell. As if Christ had said, I know you are of timorous
spirits, and men of fearful tempers, ye are apt to tremble, and to be frighted
at every thing; well I will direct you, how you may make this passion
advantageous to you, viz. by turning the stream into its proper channel, by
placing your fear on its proper object; I will tell you of one worthy of your
fear, who deserves to be feared, So Luke 12.4, 5. I will forewarn you whom ye
shall fear, (I will offer you an object meet for your fear) Fear him, who after
he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him.
You are apt like Children to be frighted with Bug-bears, and to dread them that
can only raze the Skin, and pinch the Flesh, and at the most can but take from
you a life that will fall of it self within a few days: well I Will advise you
whom to stand in awe of, fear him that can kill you and damn you, that can send
your bodies to the grave, and your souls to unquenchable flames; yea, I say
unto you, fear him.

2. This incomparable God, calls for incomparable humility, and lowliness of
Spirit from us. The height of God must lay man low, and the matchless
excellency of God make him base in his own eyes. When we behold our selves in
the Glass of those that have little or nothing that is good or praiseworthy,
or that have less than our selves, then we spread out our plumes, and are puffed
up with pride, and judge our selves comely creatures; but if we would behold
our selves in the glass of the Incomparable God, in whose sight the Heavens are
unclean, in whose presence Angels vail their faces, to whom ten thousand Suns
are perfect darkness, and all the world less than nothing; how should we pluck
in our plumes, and abhor our selves for our pride. Man never comes to a right
knowledge of himself, what a pitiful abominable wretch he is, till he comes to
a right knowledge of God, what an excellent incomparable Majesty he is. As when
men stand high, and look downward on those below them, that are meaner and
viler than themselves, their heads are giddy, and swim with conceitedness, they
then are some body in their own opinions; but when they look upwards to the
Great God, the Sun, the Soul, the substance of all worth and excellency, that
Meagrum or high-mindedness is prevented. The best men upon a sight of God, the
incomparable God (though the more excellent he is, the more cause they have of
joy, in having so rich a portion, yet) instead of loving, have loathed
themselves, and instead of admiring, have abhorred themselves. When Isaiah saw
the God of glory sitting on his Throne, in his brightness and beauty, encircled
with Millions of celestial Courtiers, covering their faces, (as ashamed of
their drops in the presence of the Ocean) and crying Holy, Holy, Holy, (as
apprehending his purity beyond all their expressions, and his perfections
exceeding all their apprehensions) what thoughts had he of himself! O what a
poor pitiful contemptible creature did he think himself? yea, what an uncomely,
loathsome, abominable creature was he in his own eye? Woe to me, says he, I am
undone, I am a man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts,
Isa. 6.4, 5.

3. This incomparable God calls for incomparable love, the top, the cream of
our affections. Good is the object of Love. Amor est complacentia boni,
according to the Moralists; the greater therefore the good is, the greater love
it requires; and God being the greatest good, must have the greatest love.
This is the great and first command, Math. 22.37. this is (as I may say) the
only command, Deuteronomy. 10.12. this is all the commands in one, Romans 13.10. Love is
the Decalogue contracted; and the Decalogue is love opened, and explained. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
strength, with all thy mind, Math. 22.37. God being the greatest perfection,
must have the greatest affection. The greatest love (for God is Love, 1 John
4.8.). calls for the greatest love. He deserves the greatest extensively, the
heart, soul, mind, strength; the greatest intensively, all the heart, all the
soul, all the mind, all the strength. Reader, thy love to him must be so great,
that thy love to thy father, mother, wife, child, house, land, and life, must
be hatred in comparison of it, and in competition with it, Luke 14.26. The
truth is, there is nothing worthy of our love like God; nay, there is nothing
worthy of our love beside God. All our Friends, and Relations, and Estates, and
worldly Blessings, are nothing lovely, but as they are his creatures, his
comforts, instruments for his glory, and as they have relation to him: Nay,
Sabbaths, Sacraments, seasons of grace, are no more lovely than as they are his
institutes, and means of communion with his Majesty. I love the habitation of
thy house (why? because) it is the place where thine honor dwells, Psalm.
28.8. Once more; grace it self is not lovely, but as it is the image and
conformity unto, the pleasure and delight of, that which fitteth and makes
meet for the love, embraces, and fruition of this incomparable God. Desire and
Delight are the two acts of love, distinguished only by the absence or presence
of the object. When the object beloved is absent, the soul acts toward it in
desire: When the object is present, the soul acts toward it in delight. The
former is the motion, the latter the rest and repose of the soul. Now the
Incomparable God must have incomparable desires, panting, Psalm. 42.2. longing,
yea fainting, out of vehemence of desire, Psalm. 119.20, 40, 80. God must be
desired above all, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire beside thee. The Incomparable God must have
incomparable delight. I will go to the Altar of God my joy, of God my exceeding
joy, Psalm. 43.4. The soul must be ravished, extasied in the presence and
enjoyment of God, Cantic. 2.4.

4. The Incomparable God must have incomparable trust. The more able and
faithful any person is, the more firmly we trust him. Now God is incomparable
in power, he has an Almighty arm; incomparable in faithfulness, he cannot lie,
Tit. 1.2. It Is impossible for him to lie, Heb. 6.18. Therefore God must have
our surest love, and firmest faith, Heb. 6.18. Romans 4.20. We must esteem his
words as good as deeds; and rely on all he promises, as if it were already
performed. We must not stagger or waver, but draw nigh to him with full
assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. His bonds must be looked upon (for they are as
good) as ready money; and we must rejoice in hope of the good things promised,
as if we had them in hand, Romans 5.2, 3.

5. This incomparable God must have incomparable obedience in the whole course
of our lives. The more virtuous, or gracious, or honorable, or excellent, the
person is with whom we walk, the more we weigh our words, and ponder the paths
of our feet, and watch over our selves. God is incomparable in purity, in
jealousy, in Majesty, in excellency; therefore they who are ever under his
eye, and in his presence, and who walk with him, must walk (not as they do when
with ordinary persons, carelessly and negligently, but) circumspectly,
accurately, exactly, to an hairs breadth, as on a ridge, (...), Ephesians. 5.15. His
law must be kept (to a tittle, in every punctilio) as the apple of the eye,
Prove. 7.2. which is offended with the least mote of dust. And this obedience
must be not only at some seasons, and in some actions, but always, and in all
things. As he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

All our service to this incomparable God must be incomparable. Little service
is unsuitable to a great God, 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2. David the King said unto all
the Congregation, Solomon my Son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and
tender, and the work (i. e. of building the temple) is great; for the Palace is
not for man, but for the Lord God. Now I have prepared with all my might for
the house of my God, etc.

Fifthly, If God be an incomparable God, it informs us of his infinite grace
and condescension, to take so much notice of, and do so much for man. The
height of the Person that bestows a favor, and the meanness and unworthiness
of the object on whom it is bestowed, does exceedingly advance and heighten the
grace and goodness of him that does it. O what grace is it then for the most
high, the God of heaven, the God whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, to
manifest such respect to vile sinful dust and ashes, yea, to them that are
rebels and Traitors against his Majesty, and thereby worthy of Hell. David
admireth it, and is amazed at it, Psalm. 8.1. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is
thy name in all the earth! and thy glory is above the heavens. What follows?
What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest
him? That God, the excellent God, the God famous in all the earth, the God
glorious above the heavens, should mind man, poor silly simple man, weak frail
dying man, sinful filthy polluted man, lost wretched miserable man, could not
but affect the heart of David with admiration and astonishment. What is man
that thou art mindful of him? He is altogether below thy thoughts, and unworthy
to be a moment in thy mind: Or the Son of man that thou visitest him? he does
not deserve to be visited by the beasts of the earth, much less to be visited
by the Angels of Heaven, and least of all by the God of heaven; He may well say
as the Centurion, Lord I am unworthy that thou should come under my roof,
neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee, Mat. 8.8. David wonders
that God should mind man so much as to make the heavens, and those glorious
Lamps there, for his use and comfort: When I consider the heavens, the work of
thy fingers, the moon and the stars which thou have made; what is man that thou
art mindful of him? But how much more cause had he to wonder, that the heaven
of heavens, the God of heaven, the Sun of righteousness, the light of lights,
should do so much, and be so much himself for the good and comfort of man?

God does manifest much grace and condescension in taking such care of men's
bodies and outward concerns. You would think it a great grace and condescension
in a King, to take care night and day of a poor beggar, to see to it himself
(and not to leave it to servants or any others) that he have food, and raiment,
and liberty, and peace, and safety every day, that his bed be made well and
easy for him every night, that when he is sick he have physic, and cordials,
and tendance, and should constantly visit him himself in person, that in all
his wants he be supplied, in all his weaknesses supported, in all his dangers
defended, and in all his distresses delivered; If this King should never stir
from this beggar, but do all this in his own person; if he himself should
spread his table, and provide his food, and be at the sole charge of his
garments, and put them on, and make his bed, and stand by him all night while
he slept, to prevent any evil that might befall him, and go up and down with
him all day to protect him, and counsel him, and relieve him, as occasion
required, you would be amazed at the favor and kindness and condescension of
this Prince. Believe it Reader (surely seeing is believing) the King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, he whose name is I am, he to whom all the Kings and Princes
and Potentates of the world, are dross and dirt and dung, the Incomparable God
does more than all this, very much more for thee every day and every night, and
that in his own person: He sends thee all thy bread, and drink, and clothes,
and makes them refreshing to thee; he provides thy habitation, and lodging, and
commands sleep for thee; He is with thee continually in all thy outgoings,
incomings, to preserve thee alive, to enable thee to thy motions, to succeed
thy lawful undertakings, to relieve thee in thy necessities, and to defend thee
from all thine Adversaries. And is not this condescension worthy of all
admiration? O what grace is it, that the incomparable God, who has millions of
glorious Angels waiting on him, and ten thousand times ten thousand, always
ministering to him should thus wait on, and watch over poor crawling worms,
night and day for good, Act. 7.2. Job. 7.20. Psalm. 4. ult. Hosea 2.8. Genesis
32.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 34.3, 4, 5. Heb. 1.3. Psalm. 145.5, 7. Job wonders that God
should condescend to correct man for his faults. What is man that thou do
magnify him, that thou set thine heart upon him, that thou visitest him
every morning? etc. Job. 7.17, 18. How much then does God condescend to be his
constant guide and guard, to keep him night and day least any hurt him? O the
grace of this God! This incomparable God does much more magnify his grace and
condescension in the care he is pleased to take of men's precious souls: Herein
he shows the riches of his mercy, the exceeding abundant riches of his grace,
Ephesians. 2.5. and 7. Reader, is it not condescending grace in the highest degree,
nay beyond all degrees, for this self-sufficient, absolutely perfect,
incomparable God, when the soul of man lay naked, starving, restless,
encompassed with enemies, unpittied of all creatures, weltring in its blood,
gasping for breath, ready every moment to fetch its last, and to be siezed on
by Devils dragged to their Dungeon of darkness, there to fry in untollerable
flames for ever; for him to look on man in this loathsome condition with an eye
of favor and love, to cloth it with the righteousness of a God, to feed it
with that flesh which is meat indeed, and with that blood which is drink
indeed, to give it rest in his own bowels and bosom, to bind up its wounds,
and raise it from the dead, and make it free from the slavery of Satan, and his
bondage to sin, and death, and hell, and to adopt it for his own child, accept
it as perfectly righteous, marry it to his only begotten, the heir of all
things, dwell in it by his own blessed Spirit, and carry it on eagles wings,
and conduct it safe through the wilderness of the world, and in spite of all
the Lions and wolves and serpents and adders and Giants and Anachims and
Canaanites that opposed it, to bring it to an heavenly Canaan, to fullness of
joy, and rivers of pleasures, and crowns of life, and weights of glory, there
to reign in and with his own incomparable Majesty for ages, generations,
millions of ages, yea unto all eternity? Friend, friend, what is condescending
grace, if this be not? Alas the incomparable God had no obligation to man, he
stood in no way need of man, he is incapable of the least good by man; he would
have been as happy as he is at present, if the Race of mankind had been ruined
and had perished: Besides, he was infinitely disobliged by man, and had all the
reason in the world to destroy him; and yet he is pleased to be as studious of
man's welfare, and as solicitous about it, as if it had been his own. Abigail
wondered that David anointed to a Kingdom should take her to be his wife, she
scarce judged her self worthy to wash the feet of his servants, 1 Samuel 25.41.
May not thou wonder more that the incomparable God should marry thee to
himself, who art unworthy to be his servant? David admired that God should do
so much for him: have thou not cause to say as he did, Lord, what am I, and
what is my Fathers house, that thou have brought me up hitherto, pardoned,
instructed, renewed me, taken me into thy own Family! and yet, as if this were
a small thing in thy sight, thou speak of thy servants house for a great
while to come, thou art pleased to speak of thy servant for an everlasting
kingdom of honor and pleasure, 2 Samuel 7.18. And this condescending grace, or
gracious condescension, is much the more admirable, if we consider the means by
which this great work of man's recovery was effected. The incomparable God that
is so great, so high, without all bounds, beyond all understanding, becomes a
weak weary hungry contemptible man. Reader, here is amazing condescension: The
Lord of all becomes a servant, the Lord of glory becomes of no reputation, the
bread of Life is hungry, and the only rest is weary, and the Prince of life is
put to death. This is that which Angels pry into with such astonishing
pleasure, that God should become man, the Lawgiver be made under the Law, he
that tempts no man to evil, neither can be tempted to evil, should be
violently tempted many days together by all the powers of darkness, the only
blessing should be made a curse, that Liberty should be in bonds, and truth
itself belied, and justice condemned, and heaven be laid in the belly of the
earth. This is marvelous grace indeed, such as passes all knowledge, Ephesians.
3.18, 19. If all the glorious Cherubims and Seraphims, Angels and Archangels,
had condescended to have been turned into Toads and Serpents, it had not been
by the thousandth part so great a condescension, as for the incomparable God to
become man: for, those Heavenly Spirits, and Toads and Serpents, do convenire
in aliquo tertio, meet in the Genus of Creatures; there is but a finite
difference between the former and the latter. But God and Man meet in no Third,
in no Genus, between them there is an infinite distance. There never was, there
never shall be, there never can be the like condescension.

CHAP. XXIII. Labor for acquaintance with the Incomparable God: Motives to it.
The knowledge of God is sanctifying, satisfying, saving.
SEcondly, This Doctrine may be useful by way of Counsel.

1. Study the knowledge of this God, who is so incomparable. We are all
ambitious to be acquainted with persons that are eminent and excellent in
place, or power, or parts, or piety, and judge it our interest, and an honor
to us so to be. If we could hear of one as strong as Sampson, whom no cords
could hold, who could slay hundreds with a Jaw Bone; or of one as old as
Methuselah, who could tell us what was done in many Centuries of years; or of
one as wise as Solomon, who could speak to the nature of all creatures, and
answer the hardest Questions we could put to him; or of one as Holy as Adam in
innocence, or the elect Angels, who never broke the law of their Maker, but
were as pure and perfect as when they came immediately out of his hands: How
should we throng, and thrust, and crowd to such men? what pains should we take?
what cost should we be at to obtain the favor and honor of their
acquaintance? Surely (we should think) we could never view them enough, or
value them enough, or know enough of them, or discourse enough with them: But
alas, what are such men (if we could find them in the world) to the blessed
God? what motes, what drops, what poor pitiful Nothings? what is a strong
Sampson to the Almighty God, but as straw, as chaff, as rotten wood, as all
weakness? what is the Age of Methuselah to the duration of the eternal God (to
whose Age Millions of years add not a moment) but as a minute, as nothing?
Psalm. 39.5. What is the wisdom of Solomon to all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, which are in the only wise God, but a curious web of folly? Coloss.
2.9. What is the holiness of an Angel to the holiness of God, but as a candle
to the Sun, yea, as perfect night and darkness to the Noonday? O therefore,
how should thou labor to know this God? how industrious should thou be to
be acquainted with him? When the Queen of Sheba had heard of the extraordinary
knowledge and abilities of Solomon, she came from the utmost parts of the earth
to see his person, and to hear his wisdom. But behold, Reader, a greater than
Solomon is here. Solomon was an Idiot, an Innocent, to this object, which I
request thee to know. The understanding of God is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. There
is no searching of his understanding, Isa. 40.28. Indeed it is bottomless, and
therefore can never be found out. His knowledge can never be known fully, no
not by Angels themselves. Do men beat their brains, and consume their bodies,
and waste their estates, and deny themselves the pleasures of the flesh (as
many Heathen have done) for the knowledge of nature, of the heavenly bodies,
and their motions, of the Sea and its ebbing and flowing, of the earth and the
creatures thereon; when after all their search, they were still at a loss; and
for all the knowledge they attained, they proved but learned Dunces? what
would thou then do for the knowledge of the God of nature, of the mighty
possessor of Heaven and Earth, of him to whom all things are less than nothing,
of him, the knowledge of whom will make thee wise to Salvation. O Friend, this
is the only knowledge worth seeking, worth getting, worth prizing, worth
glorying in, Jer. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in
his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, nor the rich man
glory in his riches. Worldly knowledge, strength, wealth, are not worth
glorying in; what then is? The next verse tells you, But let him that glories,
glory in this (in what?) that he understands and knows me, that I am the
Lord, etc. This is a jewel that a man may boast of, and glory in, that he
knows me, that I am the Lord.

There is an excellency in all knowledge. Knowledge is the eye of the Soul, to
direct it in its motions; it is the lamp, the light of the Soul set up by God
himself to guide it in its actions. The understanding of man is the candle of
the Lord, Prove. 20.27. Without knowledge the Soul is but a Dungeon of darkness,
and blackness, full of confusion and terror: But there is an incomparable
excellency in the knowledge of this incomparable God. The object does elevate
and heighten the act. There is a vast difference between the knowledge of
earthly things, and heavenly things; between the knowledge of wise, strong,
faithful, merciful, just, holy men, and the only wise, omnipotent,
unchangeable, righteous, most holy God. Only before I proceed to the urging
this Use, I would desire thee Reader to take notice, what knowledge of God it
is which I am pressing thee to labor for; it is not a mere notional
speculative knowledge (though a knowledge of apprehension is a duty, and
necessary, Ephesians. 5.17. Psalm. 143.8. Heb. 8.9, 10. but an experimental knowledge:
Thou have made me to know wisdom in my secret parts, Psalm. 51.6. (The heart is
called the secret part, because known only to God, 1 Kings 8.39.) such a
knowledge as affects the heart (with love to him, and fear of him, and hatred
of what is contrary to him; true knowledge takes the heart as well as takes the
head, Psalm. 1.6. 1 Kings 8.38. Phil. 3.10.) and influenceth the life, 1 John
2.4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar,
and the truth is not in him. Coloss. 1.9, 10. John 10.4, 5. Right knowledge,
though it begin at the head, does not end there, but falls down upon the heart
to affect that, and flows out in the life to order and regulate that, Coloss.
1.10. We pray for you, that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will,
in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding (for what end, and to what purpose)
that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work.

To enforce this Use, I shall give thee two or three Motives, and as many means.

To encourage thee to study the knowledge of this God, consider these three
properties of it.

1. The true knowledge of this God will be a sanctifying knowledge. If thou
have any thing of a man, I mean of Reason in thee, holiness (which was thy
primitive perfection, which is the Image of the incomparable God, and will fit
thee for his special love and eternal embraces) will be a strong and cogent
argument with thee. Now this knowledge of God will conform thee to God, render
thee like unto him, who is the pattern and standard of all excellency. As I
said before, knowledge is the eye by which we see God, and the vision of God
causes an assimulation to him. But we all with open face beholding as in a
Glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of our God, 2 Cor. 3.18. The Blackamore that often
looked on beautiful pictures, brought forth a beautiful Son. We are often
changed into the postures and fashions, yea and dispositions of those whom we
much converse with on earth: surely then acquaintance with the gracious and
Holy God, will make us in some measure to resemble him.

Other knowledge pollutes and defiles the soul: Oftentimes, the more men pick
the lock of Natures Cabinet, and look into her riches, and treasury, her
secrets and mysteries; the more Atheistical they are, and forgetful of the God
of Nature. Hence Religio Medici is irreligion; they see so much of the
operations of nature, that they ascribe the principal efficiency to the
instrument. And hence the wisdom of the Philosophers (counted the wisest men in
the world) is folly, 1 Cor. 3.19. And though they professed themselves to be
wise, yet they became fools, and were guilty of all manner of wickedness, Romans
1.22. to the end. And what was the reason, but this, they knew not God, with
all their knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.21. Ignorant heads are ever accompanied with
irreligious hearts, and both are attended with Atheistical lives, Ephesians. 4.18.
The Apostle tells us of the Heathen, that they were estranged from the life of
God (an holy life) through the ignorance that was in them, because of the
blindness of their hearts. So Hos. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. But the knowledge of God
purifieth the soul. As the Sun conveyeth heat along with its light, so grace is
multiplied through the knowledge of God, 2 Pet. 1.2. When Moses had conversed
with God in the Mount, his feet shone, that the Jews could not behold him. When
a Soul has once acquainted himself with the blessed God, his life will shine
with holiness; therefore David counsels his Son Solomon, to know the God of
his Fathers, and to serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind; first, to
know him; then to serve him, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

This knowledge must needs be a sanctifying knowledge, because it renders sin
abominable, the world contemptible, God honorable, and the soul the more
humble.

The knowledge of God will render sin most abominable to the Soul, it renders
sin to be exceeding sinful. The miseries that befall us in our estates, names,
bodies, souls, nay, all the curses of the Law, and torments of the damned, do
not discover the ugly loathsome features, and monstrous deformed nature of sin,
like the knowledge of this incomparable God. Job confesses his sin, Job 42.2.
I uttered things that I understood not; nay, he abhors himself for his sin,
v. 5. But whence came he who sometime justified himself too much, now to abhor
himself? He gives us the reason or cause of it, I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, (I had some knowledge of thee before) but now mine eyes see
thee (I now have a clearer and fuller knowledge of thee) wherefore I abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes. The more we know the greatest good, the
more we shall hate the greatest evil.

The knowledge of God will render the world contemptible to a Christian. None
undervalue the Creature, but those who have had a sight of the Creator; neither
can any trample on the riches, honors, and pleasures of this world, but those
who know him who is the riches, and honors, and pleasures of the other world.
They who never saw the Sun, wonder at a Candle: and they who never knew the
blessed God, wonder at, and are fond of poor low things, mean, small, pitiful
things on earth: But the whole world, with all its Crowns, and Scepters, and
Diadems, and Delights, is but a dunghill to him that has seen the incomparable
God. Moses could refuse the honor of being the adopted Child of a Kings Heir,
reject the pleasures of Pharaoh's Court, and prefer the reproaches of Christ
before all the Treasures of Egypt, when he had once got a sight of the
Incomparable God, Heb. 11.25, 26, 27. For he saw him that was invisible.

The knowledge of God will render God more honorable in our esteems. The more
we know of many things and persons, the more we slight and despise them. The
more we know sin, the more we loath it; the more we know our selves, the more
we abhor our selves; but the more we know God, the more we love him, and the
more we admire him. The reason of all the contempt and affronts which we offer
to God, is our ignorance of him. The whole world lies in wickedness, as a
beast in its dung, or vermin in their slime, 1 John 5.19. but the reason is
what Christ speaks, Joh. 17.25. Father the world has not known thee; for the
Apostle says, had they known, they would never have Crucified the Lord of
Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. They who know God, cannot but see infinite reason why they
should love, and fear, and honor, and please him all their days. Why do you
think is God so much wondered at, and worshipped in his Church, more than in
other parts of the world? Why does he inhabit their highest praises, Psalm.
22.3. and greatest blessings and thanksgivings, but because he is known more
there than in other parts of the world. In Judah is God known (therefore) his
name is great (his name alone is excellent) in Israel, Psalm. 76.1.

The knowledge of God makes us humble. We never are so low in our own eyes, as
when we see the most high God. The more we know of men that are more vain, and
foolish, and wicked than our selves, the more we are exalted and puffed up; but
the more we know of God, of the great God, the incomparable God, the most holy
God, to whom we are as nothing, less than nothing, worse than nothing; the more
we abase our selves.

When David is acquainted with the excellency of God, O Lord, my Lord, how
excellent is thy name in all the earth, and thy glory is above the Heavens!
Psalm. 8.1. What low, little, diminutive thoughts, has he of himself and
others? v. 4. What is man? or, what is the Son of man? What a poor, pitiful,
contemptible thing is man? What a vain, empty, insignificant nothing is the Son
of man? We are ashamed of our rush Candles, or Glowworms, and hide our heads
in the presence of the Sun. The holiest man abhors himself for his unholiness
before the most Holy God. So Job 25.2. Dominion and fear are with him, v. 3.
There is no number of his Armies, v. 5. Behold even to the Moon, and it shines
not, and the Stars are not pure in his sight: How much less man that is a worm,
and the Son of man that is a worm? v. 6. A worm is the most despicable
contemptible creature, every beast trampleth on it; such a creature is man in
his own apprehensions, when he once understands the incomparable God.

When Isaiah had seen the Lord of Hosts, though he were an Holy man, he cries
out, I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the Lord
of Hosts, Isa. 6.3, 4. He never saw so much of his own uncleanness, as when he
saw him in whose presence the Heavens are unclean. Other knowledge, like wind
in a bladder, puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.2. but the knowledge of God, as fire nigh
the bladder, shrinks and shrivels it up to nothing.

2. The knowledge of God is a satisfying knowledge. A man may know much of
Creatures; and the more he knows, the more unquiet and restless he is; his
knowledge, as wind to the stomach, may fill, and pain, and trouble him, but
cannot satisfy him: for, Creatures are not that savory meat which the
heaven-born spiritual immortal Soul of man would have, and must have, if ever
it be contented. The greatest Students, who have wearied and tired out their
brains, and bodies, in the search of Natures secrets, have found by experience,
that they spent their strength for what is not bread, and their labor for what
will not satisfy; and they have known the truth of the Wise man's saying, He
that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccles. 1.18.

That knowledge which satisfies, must be of an object that is suitable, in its
spirituality, to the nature of the Soul; in its all sufficiency, to the
manifold necessities of the Soul; and in its immortality, to the duration of
the Soul; if either of these be wanting in it, the Soul cannot receive
satisfaction by it, because without all these the Soul cannot be perfectly
happy; and till it find that which can make it perfectly happy, it will be
restless. If it meet with an object that is suitable to its nature, yet if it
be not answerable to all its wants, it will still be complaining (wherein it is
unsupplyed) and so unquiet? If it meet with an object that is suitable to its
nature, and answerable to all its wants, yet if it be not eternal, it must
needs be full of fears and troubles in the fore-thoughts of its amission of so
great a good, which would imbitter the present possession of it; For the soul
being incorruptible and immortal it self, cannot but desire that good which
will run parallel with its own life; and if it desire it, nothing will fully
satisfy it, till it obtain such a good. Now nothing in this world is suitable
to the Souls nature (the Soul is spiritual, the things of this world are
carnal) nor answerable to the various indigencies of the Soul (the Souls wants
are many, and in a manner infinite; besides, they are spiritual, as, pardon of
Sin, peace with God, peace of Conscience, etc. when the good things of this
life are particular, finite, and bodily) nor equal to the Souls duration (the
Soul will abide and continue after millions of ages and generations, for ever
and ever; but this world passes away, and all the good things thereof.) But
this God, whom I am persuading thee, Reader, to know and acquaint thy self
with, is in all these respects perfect, and so will satisfy thy soul. God is a
spiritual good, a Spirit, Joh. 4.23. the Father of Spirits, and so suitable to
the nature of thy soul. He is an universal good, all good, and so answerable to
the many wants of thy Soul. He is an eternal good, a good that never dies,
never fades, a good that only has immortality, and so is equal to thy souls
duration; therefore the Disciple cries out to Christ, show us the Father, and
it suffices, Joh. 10.8. and David tells us, that he is fully pleased in having
God for his portion, Psalm. 14.5, 6.

Give any man both that which he would have, and that which he should have, and
he is contented. If indeed you give a man what he would have, supposing it be
that which he should not have, his desires being depraved and vitiated, he
cannot be contented when he has what he desired, because lusts are unsatiable,
and sinful desires never satisfied: (thence the Heathen Emperors had their
Inventors of new pleasures; and possibly that may be the meaning of that place,
Romans 1.28. The Heathen wearied with common, invented, unnatural delights) But
give a man what he would have, suppose it be what he should have (his desires
being rectified) and he is then at ease and rest.

He who knows God aright, is fully satisfied in him; when he once drinks of
the Fountain of living waters, he thirsts no more after other objects, Joh.
4.14. Though the Soul still desires to know more of God, till it come to that
place where it shall know as it is known, as David, though satisfied with his
portion, Psalm. 16.4, 5. yet thirsted after more of it, Psalm. 63.1, 2. yet it is
quiet and contented in God. And indeed the sweetness which it tastes in
acquaintance with the incomparable God, makes it long after nearer and fuller
acquaintance with him. When Moses was once acquainted with God, he begs that he
might see and know more of his glory; and the reason is, because while God is
the object, there can be no satiety, he being the God of all joy and
consolation; neither can there be such a full acquaintance as to cease desires
after farther acquaintance, he being an object still too great for the
faculties to comprehend. The desires of the glorified are without anxiety,
because they are satisfied in the object of their desires; and their
satisfaction or enjoyment is without satiety or loathing, because they see
still infinite cause to desire him.

When the Soul once comes to know God (as the needle touched with the
Loadstone, when it turns to the North) it is then quiet, though before, like
the Dove, it hovered up and down over the waters of this world, and could find
no rest. This knowledge, if right, diffuseth into the Soul a sweet
tranquillity, silent peace, secret settled calmness, besides a ravishing
praevision, and blessed fore-fruition of its fuller acquaintance in the other
life.

3. The knowledge of God is a saving knowledge. Many perish for all their great
knowledge of Creatures; their knowledge may light them to the more dismal
Chambers of death, of blackness of darkness for ever, Joh. 15.24. And indeed
their knowledge (like many Pigs of Silver in a Vessel sinking) presses them
the deeper into Hell: but the knowledge of God is saving; God will know him in
the other world, who knows him in this; He will be so far from knowing them
hereafter who are ignorant of him here, that he will come in flaming fire to
render vengeance on them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. But he will own
them, and take acquaintance with them then, that own him and are acquainted
with him now, Psalm. 91.14. I will set him on high, because he has known my
name. God will set him as high as Heaven, who knows his name on earth.
Reader, it is as much worth as Heaven to thee to know this incomparable God.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, Joh. 17.3. It is the morning, though not the Meridian of
Heaven; it is the Bud, though not the ripe fruit of glory; it is the seed,
though not the harvest of the Inheritance above; to know the true God, and
Jesus Christ. This knowledge is of the same nature, though not of the same
measure, with that in the other world, Ephesians. 4.13. Now the Christian knows as
a Child, then he shall know as a man; now he sees God as it were at a distance
through the prospective glass of faith, but then he shall see God face to face;
Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now we know in part,
but then we shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12.

CHAP. XXIV. The Means of acquaintance with God. A sense of our Ignorance.
Attendance on the word. Fervent Prayer.
THe means which I shall offer, as helpful to the attainment of his knowledge
of God, are these.

1. Be sensible of thine ignorance of him. A conceited Scholar is no good
learner. He that thinks he knows enough already, will never be beholden to a
Master to teach him more. See thou a man wife in his own conceit, there is
more hope of a fool than of him, Prove. 26.12. This was that which locked up the
Pharisees in the dark dungeon of Ignorance: they were blind; Truth it self
called them blind, Mat. 23.16, 17. But they conceited their eyes were good, and
so neglected the means of curing them. Ye say ye see (I do not say ye see, but
ye conceit so) therefore your sin remains, Joh. 9.40, 41. therefore your
ignorance continues. When Ignorance and Confidence (which are often Twins) go
together, the condition of a man is helpless; partly, because such a person
will not take that pains in reading, and praying, and conference, and
meditation, without which the knowledge of God cannot be had, Dan. 12.4. Many
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. It Is an allusion to
Merchants that run to this and that Port, to sell out and take in commodities;
or to a Tradesman, that runs to this and that Mart or place to buy and sell,
whereby their stocks are increased. But a conceited man will never labor thus
for that which he thinks he has already. If thou diggest as for silver, and
searchest as for hid treasure, then thou shall understand the fear of the Lord,
and attain the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.4, 5. Men count digging hard work, and
will sweat at it when they dig for silver: such diligence must they use who
will get the knowledge of God. But though poor men, who are sensible of their
want of the knowledge of God, and of their woeful condition thereby, will work
to preserve themselves from perishing; yet rich men, who think they can do well
enough without it, will spare their pains, partly, because all knowledge must
be obtained from God by fervent prayer; and a conceited man will neither be
instant with God for it, nor will God give it to him. God is the God of
knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.2. And from him all true saving knowledge comes, Prove. 2.6.
The Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. As
none can see the Sun (by candle light) but by its own light; so none can know
God savingly (by the light of nature) but by light derived from himself. Now a
conceited person will not go to God for knowledge: What need I (thinks he) I
have enough already. Poverty is a friend to prayer, the poor uses entreaties,
Prove. 18.23. But pride or conceitedness is an enemy to prayer, The wicked
through the Pride of his countenance will not seek after God, Psalm. 10.4. Who
will beg that of his neighbor, which he is confident he has at home? Neither
will God undertake the instruction of proud Scholars: The humble he will teach,
the meek he will guide in judgment, Psalm. 25.9. Such as are willing to be
taught, will be thankful for their learning, and are fitted for guidance and
direction; but conceited persons are quite contrary. Therefore Reader beware of
this mist in which many miscarry. He that thinks he knows any thing,
knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. But labor to get thine heart
affected with thine ignorance, and the woeful consequents of it, Psalm. 95.10,
11. This will be a good step to knowledge. The Apostle gives thee the same
direction, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man seem to be wise, let him become a fool that
he may be wise. If thou seem to be knowing, be ignorant (in thy own sense
and feeling and apprehension) that thou may be knowing. Our Lord Jesus gives
the same counsel to the sick and dying Lacdiceans, Rev. 3.17, 18. and acquaints
her that her ignorance of her ignorance, and conceitedness of her knowledge,
was the great hinderance of her recovery.

2. Study much the works, and especially the word of God. The works of God are
a Book wherein you may read of him, and by which you may hear of him. The
heavens declare his glory, Psalm. 19.1. The earth is full of his goodness, Psalm.
33.5. As the shadow has some proportion to the body to which it relates, so
the works of God are some representation of the wise powerful gracious God, to
whom they belong, Romans 1.19, 21. The invisible things of God are seen by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. Therefore consider
the works of the Lord, and the operations of his hands.

The word of God is a glass, wherein thou may see his beauty and grace and
glory, and so see him as to be transformed into his likeness, 2 Cor. 3.18. In
the works of God you may see his steps, the prints of his feet, they are
therefore called his paths and his goings, Psalm. 77.19. But in his word we may
see his face, the comeliness of his countenance, how lovely and amiable he is;
therefore it is called a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. So that as the sight of a man's
face helps and conduces more to our knowledge of him, than the sight of his
steps; so the word of God is a far greater means of our acquaintance with him,
than the Works of Creation and Providence. Therefore I say, study especially
the word of God. The Scripture is the key of knowledge, Luke 11.52. and unlocks
the mysteries which were kept hid from Ages and Generations, and opens the
secrets of heaven to thy soul. It Is therefore called light, Psalm. 119.105. and
a Lamp, Prove. 6.23. Because it discovers hidden things, helps thee to see what
thou can not without it, and directs thee in thy motions and actions. David
had more knowledge than his enemies, (and they were subtle) than his Teachers
(and they were no dwarfes in knowledge, such as Gad and Nathan) than the
Ancient (and with the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is
understanding, Job 12.12, 13.) and what was the means of it, For thy
testimonies are my meditation, Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99. The Gospel is the
eye salve by which the blind come to see, Psalm. 19.7. The fragrancy and
attractiveness of the incomparable God, increases up and down in the world as
the Gospel is propagated. Thanks be to God who makes manifest the Savor of
his knowledge, (The knowledge of God, like a rich perfume, causes and leaves
a fragrant odoriferous scent wherever it comes) by us (the ministers of the
Gospel as the instruments hereof) in every place, 2 Cor. 2.14. The ministry of
the word is the Chariot of the Sun of Righteousness, whereby he conveyeth the
light of the knowledge of God to the world. Therefore attend on Preaching, and
give diligence to reading. Search the Scriptures, for they are they that
testify of me, Joh. 5.39.

3. Be frequent and fervent with God to give thee the knowledge of himself.
There is a twofold light requisite to bodily vision; a light in the eye, (A
blind man cannot see at noon day) and a light in the air, (the best eye cannot
see in the dark) So there is a twofold light requisite to the effectual sight
of God, viz. The light of the word, and the light of the Spirit; the word
cannot do it without the Spirit; and the Spirit will not do it without the
word, where the word is afforded: both are needful. There is a spirit in man (a
passive receptiveness, as a capable subject) But the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding, Job 32.8.

All natural abilities, all acquired endowments, all the reading and learning,
all the Teachers and Tutors in the world, cannot help one poor soul to the
saving knowledge of God. It is God that teaches man knowledge, Psalm. 94.10. He
who made light in the first Creation, only can cause light in the new Creation,
2 Cor. 4.6. But God who caused light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesus Christ. He that at first said, Let there be light (when darkness
covered the face of the world) and there was light, a corporeal light, can
command spiritual light, and the knowledge of his glory in the face of Christ,
who is the express Image of his person. Therefore the Apostle betakes himself
to God for the gift, Praying that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ would give
unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him, etc. 1
Ephesians. 17, 18. So David often, Psalm. 119.18, 34, 35, 125, 143, 144. Rev. 3.18.
Reader, art thou blind? take the Counsel of thy Savior; Go to him for eye
salve that thou may see; and be confident he that bids thee come to him for
that, will bid thee welcome when thou come, Rev. 3.18. None knows the
Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Math. 11.27.
Therefore, whoever thou art that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, go to the Sun for light, go to the Sun of Righteousness, in whom are all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.9. for the light of the knowledge
of God. Do thou not know the sinfulness and misery of a blind dark state,
that vengeance is the fruit of this ignorance, Psalm. 79.6. that God will pour
out his wrath upon them that know him not. Go therefore, as the blind man to
the Lord Jesus Christ. Cry, sigh, mourn, pray, Jesus thou Son of David have
mercy on me; though he hear not presently, hold on, continue instant in Prayer;
though the Devil and flesh rebuke thee (as the multitude him) yet hold on, call
louder, Jesus thou Son of David, Mat. 32. to 37.
Have mercy on me, Lord, that I might receive my sight. And doubt not but he
will have pity on thee, as he had on him, and touch thine eye, and give thee to
see the things of thy peace; for thine encouragement thou have his promise,
Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, Jer.
31.34. They shall all know me from the least to the greatest: So James 1.6.
Hoseah 2.20. Heb. 8.8, 9. O with what hope may thou sue these Bonds, and
plead these promises, when he that made them is a God that cannot lie (1 Tit.
2.) and therefore cannot but perform them. Again, observe how kindly he took it
of Solomon, (when he bid Solomon ask what he would) that he asked wisdom, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me wisdom and knowledge, says Solomon: And the thing which
Solomon asked pleased the Lord, 1 Kings 3.10. And the Lord said unto Solomon,
Because this was in thine heart, because thou have not asked riches, nor
honor, nor the life of thine enemies, nor long life; Wisdom, and knowledge is
granted to thee, and I will give thee wealth and honor, v. 11. When a poor
creature, sensible of its blindness and darkness, lies at the feet of God,
begging spiritual light and sight, the heart of the Redeemer is taken with such
a request, and subscribes the petition with, Wisdom and Knowledge is granted to
thee. Be but diligent Reader in the use of these means, and thou may be
confident of success: If thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice
for understanding; if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for
hidden treasure; then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God: For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes
knowledge and understanding, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.

CHAP. XXV. 2. Ex. To choose this incomparable God for our portion; with some
Motives thereunto.
2. IF this God be such an incomparable God, then choose this God for thy
portion, and take him for thy happiness. Is it possible for thee to read so
much of the incomparableness of God in his Being, Attributes, Works, and Word,
and not desire him? Thou can hardly see an excellent person, but thou art
wishing him for thy Friend, thy Companion; nor an excellent Estate, but thou
art wishing it were thine Inheritance, thy portion; and can thou hear of him
who is excellency it self originally, Job 13.11. the spring and standard of all
excellency in others, whose name alone is excellent, Psalm. 14.13. and not wish,
O that this incomparable God were my Friend, my Father, my Head, my Husband, my
Lot, my Portion? Who will give me to drink of the water of the Well of
Bethlehem? O who will help me to drink of the well of Salvation, of the
fountain of living waters, of the pure River that flows from the throne of
God, and the Lamb? Can thou hear so much of his worth (though infinitely
short) and not desire him? Is it possible for a rational creature to read of
such a bottomless treasure, of such boundless pleasure, of such an infinite
unconceivable good, and not covet the enjoyment of it? O man, where are thy
wits? whither art thou fallen? art thou a man or a beast? Ah did thou know
the gift of God, and what it is that is offered thee, thou would scorn the
highest honors, sweetest carnal delights, greatest riches, yea, trample upon
all the Crowns and Kingdoms of this world for it. It Is an ineffable privilege
that thou art a creature capable of so vast an happiness, it is a special favor
that thou have leave to aspire after such an immense inheritance; and when its
tendered to thee, will thou refuse it? will thou neglect it? O will thou not
give it all acceptance?

Having spoken in another Treatise to this particular, I shall here only offer
two or three things to thy serious thoughts, and proceed to a third exhortation.

1. Consider, what is offered thee, when the incomparable God is offered thee
for thy portion. And truly, to explain this head fully, would require the Pen,
yea, exceed the skill of an Angel. None can tell what God is, but God himself.
All the sheets in the explication of the Doctrine speak somewhat of him, but not
the thousand thousandth part of that excellency that is in him. Reader, I may
tell thee, when God is offered thee, the greatest good that ever was, that ever
will be, that ever can be, is offered thee; there never was, or can be, the
like offered thee; more than Heaven and Earth, than both Worlds, than Millions
of Worlds, is offered thee. This God who is offered thee, is the King of Kings,
the Lord of Lords, the God of Gods, the blessed and glorious Potentate, the
first Cause, the original Being, Self-sufficient, All-sufficient, absolutely
perfect, incapable of any addition or diminution. This God who is offered thee,
is the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity every moment, to whom a
thousand years, yea millions of Ages are but as one day, as one moment, whose
duration is incapable of the least accession, who is boundless in his being,
omnipotent in his power, unsearchable in his wisdom, unconceivable in his
grace, and infinite in all his perfections. He dwells in that light that is
inaccessible; before him Angels, the highest of creatures, vail their faces; to
him the whole Creation is less than nothing and vanity. This God who is offered
thee made all things of nothing, supports all things, influenceth all things,
and is all things, and infinitely more than all things. He is so needful a
good, that thou art undone without him. This was the misery of the Heathen on
earth, Ephesians. 2.12. and of the damned in Hell, Math. 25.41. the very Hell of
Hell. He is so plentiful a good that thou art perfectly happy in him, Psalm.
144. ult. thou need no more. He is the Heaven of Heavens, Psalm. 16. ult. the
safest refuge. O Friend, what do thou think of having this God for thy
portion? Is it not worth the while to have this God for thy God? will thou not
say, Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord; thou art great, and thy
name is great: Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? Jer. 10.6, 7. Again,
the God who is offered thee, is the Well of Salvation, the Lord of life, the
God of all consolation, an Hive of sweetness, a Paradise of pleasure, an Heaven
of joy. He is the richest grace, the dearest love, the surest friend, the
highest honor, the vastest treasure, the exactest beauty, the chiefest good,
and the fullest felicity. He is one that can enlarge and suit all thy
faculties, relieve and answer all thy necessities, fill up and satisfy all the
capacities of thine Heaven-born soul. God is a good which Christ died to
purchase for thee, Ephesians. 2.13. 1 Pet. 3.18. And surely if Christ thought him
worth his blood, he is worthy thine acceptance. God is a comprehensive
universal good, not one, but all good, Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Friends,
Relations, Health, Life, Earth, Heaven, this World, the other World, all the
good of both Worlds, and infinitely more; and art thou not covetous of such
wealth that is better worth than both worlds? Philip. 4.19. Psalm. 23.1. Genesis
17.1. God is an everlasting good, a good that will stand by thee, and abide
with thee when all other good things shall fail thee, 1 Timothy 6.7. Psalm. 73.25.
He is that good which thou would have if thou art well in thy wits: he is
that good which thou should have if thou answerest the end of thy Creation;
he is that good which thou must have, if thou art not eternally miserable; He
is the only suitable satisfying good, which hits the nature, and fits the
desire of the rational creature. O Reader, I say again, what do thou think of
having this incomparable God for thy God? Surely by this time thy heart may
well melt into astonishment, that he will allow thee to seek so matchless a
portion. Well, what say thou to him? Is it not worth the while to have him
for thine, to whom thou will call in the day of distress, to whom thou will cry
in a dying hour, when thy Soul stands quivering on thy lips, ready to take its
flight into the unknown Regions of the other world, when Devils will be waiting
to seize it, as soon as ever it leaves the body, to hale it to the unquenchable
flames of hell, when thy Friends and Relations shall be weeping and wailing by
thee, but unable to afford thy dying body the least Cordial, or thy departing
soul the least Comfort. Ah friend, what will thou do in such an hour, which is
hastening on thee, without the incomparable God? Believe it, though thou may
live without him, thou can not dye (without an infinite horror) without him.
Is it not worth the while to have him for thine, to whom thou must stand or
fall for ever, from whose mouth thy sentence of eternal absolution or
condemnation must come, and who shall judge thee to thine unchangeable state of
life or death? though thou may think thou can do well enough at this day
with the world for thy portion; yet what will thou do at that day, when the
world shall be in a flame, if God be not thy portion? Art thou willing or not,
to have this God for thine? What say thou? Can thou find in thine heart to
deprive thy precious soul of such an inestimable treasure, and to leave it
naked in the other world to the cruelty of Devils, and the dreadful curses of
the Law? Methinks, though I have spoken little, yet I have said enough (to one
that will but let his reason judge) to draw out thy most earnest desires after
this incomparable God.

2. Consider upon what terms thou may have this God for thy God. You may
possibly think that so boundless a good must cost you very dear, and the price
must be vast of a pearl that is so matchless: but lo, to thy comfort, all the
condition which God requires of thee, is only to accept him heartily and
thankfully in his Son. Can thou have any thing cheaper? would thou desire
him in his terms to fall lower? nay is it possible so to do, and make thee
happy? Nor can he be thine unless thou receivest him for thine. It Is a poor
favor that is not worth acceptance. Do but take him for your happiness, and
you shall have him for your happiness.

Thou give more for thy bread, thy clothes, thy house, for the needful
comforts that are for the support of thy frail body, than thou need give for
the great glorious incomprehensible incomparable God. Thou payest money for
them, but thou may have him without money and without price. One would think
that the equity of the condition should both amaze thee and allure thee.
Consider, I say, God does not require of thee things impossible to thee; he
does not say, if thou will remove Mountains, dry up Oceans, stop the course of
Nature, create worlds, I will then be thine, as great as I am; He does not say,
if thou will satisfy my justice, answer the demands of my law, merit my love
and favor, then I will be thy God; No, he himself has done all this for thee
by the death of his Son: All he desires is, that thou would accept him in
his Son for thy God. Nay, he does not require of thee any thing that is
barbarous or cruel, as the heathen Deities did (by the Devil) of their
worshipers. He does not say, if you will lance and mangle your bodies, as Baals
Priests did; if ye will go barefoot in Sackcloth long and tedious pilgrimages,
as the Papists do; if ye will offer your children in the fire, and give the
fruit of your bodies for the sins of your souls, as some did, then I will be
your God. Again, he does not require of thee things that are chargeable, to
offer the best and chief of thy flock daily in sacrifice to him; nor as he once
did of the young man, to sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor; nor
as Idolaters, to lay down such a part of thy estate for thy pardon: but he only
requires that thou would take the Lord for thy God; and will thou not do it?
Can thou deny him and thy poor soul so reasonable, so equitable a request? As
the servant said to Naaman, If the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing,
would not thou have done it? how much more then when he only says, wash,
and be clean? So say I to thee; If God had commanded the greatest things
imaginable, would thou not to thy power have done them, that thou might
enjoy the blessed God for thy eternal portion? how much more then when he only
says, Thou shall have no other God before me? O Reader, do but observe that
first Command, which contains the sum both of thy duty and felicity, and thou
art made, thou art a blessed man for ever. Take the true God in Jesus Christ
for thy God, prize him as thy God, love him as thy God, Honor him as thy God,
and obey him as thy God, and he will be thy God for ever. Do but as much for
the true God, as the covetous man does for his wealth, which is his God; as the
intemperate man for his belly, which is his God; they give their highest
esteem, their choicest affections, and their greatest service to that which
they take for their God. And surely, the true God is more worthy hereof, and
will requite thee best for them.

3. Consider, For what end God offers himself to thee. I would not have thee
mistake, because God out of his infinite pity to his miserable creatures, is
instant and urgent with them to accept of him, to think therefore that God has
any need of thee, or seeks his own happiness therein; I tell thee, if thou
had no more need of God than he has of thee, thou may let him alone: No,
it is purely for thy good, for thy real and eternal good that he offers
himself to thee: he needs thy service no more than he does the service of the
damned, of the devils, and he knows how to make use of thee for his own
glory, as he does of them, if thou foolishly rejectest his offer of himself.
Thy righteousness will not help him, Job 22.2, 3. nor thy wickedness hurt him,
Job 35.2. He offers himself to thee, not that he may be blessed by thee, but
that he may be bountiful to thee. It Is thy good, not his own, that he looks at;
the felicity of accepting him is thine own, and the misery of neglecting him is
thine own, Prove. 9.12. Men call customers to them, press them with many
arguments and entreaties to buy, that they may enrich themselves by their
customers; but God calls men to buy of him, not to enrich himself, (He is as
rich and perfect and happy as he can be) but to enrich themselves, I counsel
thee (says Christ to his lukewarm Church) to buy of me gold, (why, that he
may get somewhat by her, and enrich himself? No) that thou may be rich; that
thou (not I) may be rich. Now Reader, ponder it seriously, it is wholly for
thy own good, that thou may escape wrath and death, and attain heaven and
life, that God is pleased once more to offer himself to thee. What is thy mind
about his offer? Will thou have him for thy portion, or no? Is there any thing
unreasonable in his desire or demands? Does not thy eternal felicity depend on
thine acceptance of him? What say thou? Will thou have God for thy portion,
or will thou have the Devil for thy portion? Thou shall have an eternal
portion, good or bad. The worldlings portion of good things is but for this
world, and the godly man's portion of evil things is but for this world: Both
have immortal souls, which will abide in the other world for ever; and their
souls must have immortal portions to abide with them there for ever. Therefore,
Reader, consider what thou do, either thou must take God in and through
Christ for thy portion for ever, or hell and death and wrath and Devils for thy
portion for ever: One of the two is the portion of all the sons and daughters
of Adam. If thou will still prefer the world before God and love the creature
above God, and please thy flesh more than God; when once thou appearest in the
other world, God will rain on thee fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest,
this will be the portion of thy cup, Psalm. 11.6. But if now thou acceptest him
in his Son (for there is no making God thy friend, but by Christ) for thy
chiefest good and happiness, when all thy friends shall leave thee, and dearest
relations forsake thee, yea when thy flesh and thy heart shall fail thee, God
will be the strength of thine heart, and thy portion for ever. O friend,
consider what I have said in this Use, and the Lord give thee understanding,
that thou may know when thou art well offered, and be wise on this side the
other world.

CHAP. XXVI. 3. Ex. Give God the glory of his incomparable excellency: with
some considerations to enforce it.
IF God be such an incomparable God, give him the glory and honor of his
incomparable excellencies: His incomparable perfections must have incomparable
praises. Praise him, says the Psalmist, according to his excellent greatness,
Psalm. 159.2. But alas! what tongue, what understanding of men or Angels can do
it, can praise him according to his excellent greatness? But though we cannot
praise him according to the utmost of his excellencies, we must praise him
according to the utmost of our abilities. The highest God, Psalm. 92.1. must
have the highest praises. Psalm. 149.8. The high praises of God are in their
mouths. The greatest God, Psalm. 145.3. must have our greatest praises. Great is
the Lord and greatly to be praised. Low or little praises are a dispraise to
one so eminently, so infinitely high and great.

Ordinary commendations of an extraordinary person are a discommendation to
him. According to thy name, so, O Lord, is thy praise to the end of the earth,
Psalm. 48.10. Therefore his name alone being excellent, Psalm. 148.13. his praise
alone must be excellent. David tells God, I will praise thee yet more and more,
Psalm. 71.14. He had already praised him much, but he would endeavor to praise
him more; and when he had done so, he would praise him more, and still more. We
read of songs of degrees, Psalm. 120, 121. We should ascend in our praises of
God by an holy climax, till we come to the highest degree that is possible, and
screw up our faculties herein to the utmost pitch that they are capable of.

Praise him for the incomparableness of his being. That he is an independent,
all-sufficient, absolutely perfect, incomprehensible, omnipresent, eternal,
infinite being, should much affect our hearts. Praise ye the Lord, Praise him,
O ye servants of the Lord, Praise the name of the Lord; Blessed from this time
forth, and for ever: From the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same,
the Lords name is to be praised: (why) the Lord is high above all Nations, and
his glory above the Heavens; who is like to the Lord our God, who dwells on
high? Psalm. 113.1, to 6.

Praise him for his incomparableness in his attributes, for the
incomparableness of his power. O Lord God of Host, who is a strong Lord like
unto thee? Psalm. 89.8. For the incomparableness of his holiness, Who is a God
like unto thee, glorious in holiness? Exodus 15.11. For the incomparableness of
his mercy, Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning iniquity, and passing by the
transgressions of the remnant of his heritage, because he delights in mercy?

Praise him for the incomparableness of his Words; O that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men,
Psalm. 107.8.15, 21, 31. Psalm. 72.18. Psalm. 136.4. Praise him for the work of
Creation, Psalm. 114.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Job 38.4, 5, 6. Praise him for his works of
Providence, Psalm. 97.8, 9. Psalm. 136. throughout, Psalm. 107. Praise him
especially for the work of Redemption, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who
has visited and redeemed his people. Luke 1.68. Psalm. 9.1. Rev. 15.3.

Praise him for the incomparableness of his Word, Wonderful are thy
Testimonies, Psalm. 119.129. How often does the sweet Singer of Israel praise
God for them, as a singular kindness? Psalm. 147. two last verses, He gave his
Statutes to Moses, his Laws and Commandments to Jacob: He has not dealt so
with every Nation. Praise ye the Lord.

Praise him by admiring him. Wonder at his being, As they of Christ, What
manner of man is this, that the winds and seas obey him? Math. 8.27. What
manner of God is this, who knows no bounds, no beginning, no succession, no
addition? An amazing admiration of him, is an high commendation of him. And
indeed our silent wondering at his perfections, is almost all the worship we
can give him, Psalm. 65.1. Praise waits for thee, O God, in Sion, Heb. Praise
is silent for thee, O God, in Sion: not that praise was dumb or tongue-tyed in
Sion; for praise in no part of the world speaks higher or louder than in Sion:
but to show that when the people of God set themselves to praise him, they are
struck with amazement and wonder, at his matchless being and beauty, at his
infinite excellencies and perfections; and wanting words to express them, they
sit down in a silent admiration of them. Thou would wonder at Adam, if he
were now alive, for his age; O wonder at him that is from everlasting to
everlasting, that is the cause and original of all things, that is what he is,
that is, and nothing else is; that is all he is in one indivisible point of
eternity.

Wonder at his attributes, admire his holiness. Behold he puts no trust in
his Servants, he charge the Angels with folly, Job 4.18. Behold, wonder at
it. Again, Behold he puts no trust in his Saints, the Heavens are not clean
in his sight, Job 15.15. Admire his wisdom, cry out with the Apostle, O the
depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, Romans 11.33. Admire his love, Behold
what manner of love has the Father loved us with, 1 John 3.1. Admire his
power, that he can do what he will do: Who is a strong Lord like unto thee?
Psalm. 89.8.

Wonder at his Works. Thou art ready to wonder at the rare works of some
curious Artist; alas, all their works are toys to the works of the mighty
Creator and Possessor of Heaven and Earth. O Lord, how mavelous are thy
works! Psalm. 104.24. His work is honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111.3. and
worthy thy greatest wonder.

What a piece is the Creation! how marveilous! how mysterious! Psalm. 8.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. The Heavens declare his glory, Psalm. 19.1. and the earth is full of his
goodness, Psalm. 104.24. What a work is Providence? read Psalm. 104. and 107. How
many rarities, curiosities, mysteries, are wrapped up in it, which are only seen
in the other world? Psalm. 77.19.

What man is this, say they, for he commands with authority, and the unclean
Spirits come out of men? Mark 1.27.

What a Masterpiece, what rare workmanship indeed is Redemption? a work that
the Angels are always prying into, and wondering at, Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Pet. 1.10.

Wonder at his Word. When thou hear it, do thou not perceive a Majesty and
Authority awing thy Conscience accompanying it? And they were all amazed and
astonished at his Doctrine, Luke 4.32. The very Officers who were sent to
apprehend Christ, could not but wonder at his words, and returned to them who
set them a work, Never man spoke as he spoke, Joh. 7.47. There are great things
in the Law of God, Hosea 8.12. things that are wonderful, Psalm. 119.18. which
may well be wondered at; And all, says the Evangelist, bare him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4.22.

Praise him by speaking always highly and honorably of him. If his name alone
be excellent, take heed that thou do not take his excellent name in vain. Thy
apprehensions of him must be ever high, and thy expressions of him honorable.
Thy Tongue is therefore called thy glory, because therewith thou may
glorify thy God, Psalm. 57.8.

Never speak of God rashly, or at random, without a serious consideration of
whom thou speak; and let thy expressions of him, and to him, be becoming his
vast perfections, Ascribe greatness to our God, Deuteronomy. 32.3.

Speak honorably of his being, So Moses Exodus 15.11. Who is a God like unto
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises? So Solomon, 1 Kings 8.23. Lord
God of Israel, there is no God like unto thee in Heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath. So David, 1 Chronicles. 29.11.

Speak honorably of his attributes, Psalm. 68.34. of his power, mercy, truth,
justice, wisdom, and holiness, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Isa. 6.3.

Speak honorably of his words, Psalm. 86.8. Among all the Gods, there is none
like unto thee; neither are there any works like unto thy works, Psalm. 145.10.

Speak honorably of his Word. The Commandments of the Lord are pure, Psalm.
19.7. Thy word is very pure: The Statutes of the Lord are right, Psalm. 19.10.
The Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. Though Paul's corruption took
occasion by the Laws prohibitions, to become the more unruly (as the water at a
Bridge roars the more for the stop) yet he dares not lay the least fault upon
the Law, but lays all upon himself: was the Law Sin? God forbid, v. 7. Far be
it from me to have the least such thought: No, the Law is holy, but I am
carnal, sold under sin, v. 14. So when he speaks of the Gospel, how
honorably does he speak of it? sometimes he calls it the glorious Gospel, 2
Cor. 4.4. the mysteries of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.19. the word of Truth, 1 Coloss.
5.

Praise him by walking circumspectly and closely with him. Live always as one
that believes, he has at all times to do with this incomparable God; and is
created and preserved, and redeemed, to show forth the praise of this God. When
the Psalmist had admired the incomparableness of this God in his being and
doings, Psalm. 86.8. he presently subjoyns, v. 9. All Nations whom thou have
made, shall come and glorify thy name, and worship before thee: For thou art
great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone. O Friend, this
incomparable God, must have incomparable obedience, Be still, and know that I
am God, Psalm. 46.10. Be still, be quiet, O sinner, cease, forbear any farther
to offend me, and know that I am God, incomparable in knowledge, acquainted
with all thy ways and works, inward, outward, secret, private, public;
incomparable in holiness, and perfectly hate all thy wickedness; incomparable
in power, able to revenge my self on thee every moment, to turn thee body and
soul into hell; incomparable in justice, and will by no means clear the guilty;
yet incomparable in mercy, and will accept and receive Prodigals, that,
sensible of their folly and filthiness, return home to me their Father, in the
Son of my love. Be still, sinner, Know this, that I am God, and obey my Laws.
But I have spoken more fully of this in the informations; only remember, that
the praise of thy life, is the life of thy praise; because hereby thou do in
some measure represent the excellencies of this incomparable God visible to the
world, 1 Pet. 2.9. Math. 5.18. Offering praise, and ordering the conversation
aright, are joined together by God himself, and let not us part them asunder,
Psalm. 50. last verse but one.

To help thee a little, that thou may give God the praise of his incomparable
perfections, Consider,

1. This God is excellency it self: he is not only excellent, Psalm. 8.1. and
alone excellent, Psalm. 148.13. but excellency, Job. 13.11. Should not his
excellency make thee afraid? nay, he is greatness of excellency, Exodus 15.7.
nothing but excellency, 1 John 1.6. Now think with thy self what honor is due
to one that is excellent, alone excellent, excellency it self, and nothing but
excellency. Can thy highest honor be high enough, or thy most excellent
praises be excellent enough, for such an excellency.

2. This God is the standard of all excellency. Nothing is excellent but
because of its relation or likeness to him. Every thing is more or less
excellent as it is more or less related or conformable to him. Saints are the
excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.3. more excellent than their neighbors, Prove.
12.26. but it is because of his affection to them. Since thou art precious in
my sight thou art honorable, The excellency of Jacob whom he loved.
Isa. 43.4. and because of their relation and likeness to him, Deuteronomy. 33.29. 1
Pet. 2.9. Psalm. 48.2, 3. The Scriptures are the most excellent of books, none
like them. I have written unto thee excellent things, Prove. 22.20. But what is
the reason? Surely because they are the word of God, Ephesians. 3.16. his mind, 2
Cor. 2. ult. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God. 2 Timothy 3.18. The
Sabbath is the most excellent of days, the queen of days, the golden spot of
the week, because it is his day, set apart by him, and devoted to him: My holy
day, the holy of the Lord, honorable, Isa. 58.13. Grace is excellent, the
beauty and glory of the creature, Prove. 4.7. 2 Cor. 3.18. more excellent than
gold or fine gold, than rubies or pearls, Prove. 3.14, 15. but why? because it is
his Image, it is a conformity to his nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 3.18. When the
Holy Ghost would render any thing excellent, he mentions it with relation to
God: The Cedars of God, the City of God, the Trees of God, the Mountains of
God, etc. that is, the most excellent Cedars, Cities, Trees, and Mountains.

3. He is so excellent, that even Angels vail their faces in his presence. The
excellent Cherubims and Seraphims, who are spotless in their natures, and
faultless in their lives, who are the highest and honourablest, and ancientest
House of the Creation, who, as his special friends and favorites are allowed
to wait on him continually, to behold him face to face, and to enjoy him fully
and perfectly; yet these Angels vail their faces before him (as it were)
ashamed of their Starlight in the Presence of the Sun, and their drops in the
presence of the Ocean, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3. I saw the Lord sitting on a Throne high
and lifted up; about it stood the Seraphims, each had six wings, with twain he
did fly, with twain he covered his feet* with twain he covered his face. To
cover the face is a sign or fruit of bashfulness, as in Rebekah, Genesis 24.65.
The face of an Angel is void of all spots and wrinkles, it is full of beauty
and brightness, a most excellent face. And all the Council looking steadfastly
on him, beheld his face as if it had been the face of an Angel, Acts 6. ult.
yet this face, as excellent as it is, they cover (as it were) ashamed of it
before that God who alone is excellent.

4. He is so incomparably excellent, that he humbles himself to take notice of
his perfect Spirits, his heavenly host, and their perfect Service in Heaven. It
is not only great and infinite condescension with him to observe the highest
persons on earth, as Kings, and Princes; and the holiest persons on earth, as
the most eminent Saints, and the highest and holiest performances of these
Saints; but it is boundless humiliation in him to look upon (with the least
respect) the perfect Spirits of just men, the Principalities and Powers that
are in Heaven, and their pure perfect Worship and Service, Psalm. 113.5, 6. Who
is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, who humbles himself to
behold the things that are in Heaven?

5. He is so incomparably excellent, that he is above the highest adoration and
worship of his Creatures. Worship is the most high and honorable of all our
works. Blessing and Praising God is the most high and honorable act of
worship; therefore this is that part of worship which suits the highest and
honourablest state of the Creature in Heaven, and must continue for ever. As
all our graces, of faith, and hope, and patience, etc. shall e're long be
melted into love, and joy, and delight; so all our duties of Confession,
Petition, Hearing and Reading the Word, receiving the Sacraments, shall all be
melted into Praise and Thanksgiving, Rev. 7.11, 12. And the Angels and Elders
that stood about the throne fell on their faces before the throne, and
worshipped, saying, Amen, Blessing, and honor, and thanksgiving, be unto our
God for ever; and therefore David calls upon Angels, and the Heavenly Host, to
praise God, Psalm. 148.2, 3. But this incomparably excellent God is above all
this worship, this highest worship; though he be not above it, so as to despise
it, Psalm. 50.15. and ult. yet he is above it, so as to exceed it; that his
Saints and Angels, though their powers are enlarged to the uttermost, though
the strings of their faculties are wound and screwed up to the highest pitch
and peg, to sound forth his praise, even then they will fall infinitely short
of praising and blessing him, according to his deserts, Nehem. 9.5. Blessed be
thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise. He does not
say, the name of God is exalted above the blessing and praise of men, of Saints
on earth, in their imperfect state; nor above the blessing and praise of
Spirits of just men, in heaven made perfect; but above all blessing and praise,
above the blessing and praise of Men, of Angels, of the holiest Men, of the
highest Angels, above all blessing and praise whatsoever, and of whomsoever.

6. He is so incomparably excellent, that his excellencies are beyond the
understanding and apprehension of Men and Angels. The excellency of God is not
only beyond all our expressions, verbal in our words, vital or real in our
lives; but also beyond all our apprehensions. A fluent tongue may speak much of
the excellency of God; an enlarged rational understanding can apprehend much
more, (The mind of man is much wider than his mouth) but the excellency of God
is infinitely beyond all our apprehensions of him; His works are unsearchable,
Romans 11.33. Lo, he goes by me, and I see him not; he passes on, and I
perceive him not, Job 9.11. He goes by me in his works, he passes by me in
the operations of his hands, and I perceive him not. There are such motions of
God in the heavenly bodies, earthly plants, ordinary providence, the growth of
a Child in the womb, etc. that men are nonplust at them, they are at a loss
about the nature, reason, and mode, or gradual progressions of them. How much
more is his being unsearchable, and his essence past finding out? If his
footsteps are unconceivable and invisible, much more is his face; if his works
cannot be apprehended, much less can his nature; because his works are in some
respect finite, as they are terminated on limited beings, and they are also
many of them visible, and so obvious to our senses; but his essence is wholly,
and altogether, and in all respects infinite, and is no way visible or liable
to apprehension by our senses, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who dwells in that light that is
inaccessible. As no mortal eye can behold the Sun in its full strength (the
attempt of which, according to some, has struck the adventurers blind) so no
creature whatsoever can apprehend the incomparable God in his full beauty and
brightness, in his boundless excellency and perfection. It Is the voice of God
to Moses, Thou can not see my face, for no man can see me, and live, Exodus
33.20. No man clothed with a mortal body, or in this estate of imperfection,
can behold an extraordinary created appearance of God; but he is thereat filled
with fears and frights, Job 4.12, 13, 14, 15. Job 21.22. Dan. 10.8.16, 17.
Habbak. 3.16. No man, no, nor Angel, can behold God in his infinite essence, to
the utmost of his perfections, but would be thereat crumbled into nothing.

Reader, if God be thus incomparably excellent, that he is excellency it self,
the standard of all excellency, that Angels hide their heads as ashamed of
themselves before him, that he condescendeth to show the least respect to his
high and perfect Host in Heaven, that he is infinitely above all their
blessings and praises, all their conceptions, and apprehensions; what praise,
what honor, what glory should thou give to this God? Though thou art unable
to give him all the glory that is due to his name, (yea, the thousand
thousandth part thereof) yet do thou give him all the glory, thy mind, will,
heart, affections, all thy faculties united together, and enlarged to the
utmost, can possibly give him. Say to thy Soul, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
all within me praise his holy name, Psalm. 103.1.

CHAP. XXVII. Comfort to them that have the incomparable God for their portion.
THirdly, This Doctrine may be useful by way of comfort to all the people of
God: If God be an incomparable God, then they are incomparably blessed who take
him for their God, who have him for their happiness. Every person or people is
happy, or miserable, as the God is whom they serve, as that is in which they
place their felicity; for nothing can give out more happiness to another, than
it has in it self. That good must of necessity be first in the cause, either
eminently or formally, which is conveyed from it to the effect. Those who serve
the flesh as their God and chiefgood, must needs be miserable, Philip. 3.18.
Romans 16.18. Because the flesh is a base and vile, Psalm. 49. ult. a weak and
impotent, Isa. 31.3. a fraudulent and deceitful, Jer. 17.9. a fading and
transitory God, Psalm. 73.25. 1 Cor. 6.23. So they who own, and prize, and love
the world as their God and chief good (of such we read, the covetous man is
called an Idolater, and covetousness Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5.) are miserable,
because their God is vain and empty, Eccles. 1.2, 3. piercing and vexatious, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. uncertain and unsatisfying, Eccles. 5.10. 1 Timothy 6.17. frail, and
not lasting, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. Prove. 23.5. Thus they who have Idols for their
Gods are miserable, because their Gods are poor pitiful, blind, deaf, and
impotent Deities; They have eyes, and see not the wants of their worshippers;
They have ears, and hear not the supplications of their suppliants; They have
hands, and work not for the relief of their Servants necessities, or their
deliverance out of their distresses: and thence the Prophet infers, the misery
of their makers and adorers; All that make them are like unto them, blind and
deaf and impotent as they are, (falsehood, and a lie, and vanity, and nothing,
as they are, 1 Cor. 8.4. 1 Samuel 12.24.) and so is every one that trusts in
them, Psalm. 115.5. to 9. But the person who through Christ has an interest in
this great God the Almighty, all-wise all-sufficient God, is happy. Happy is
the people whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144. ult. And incomparably happy,
because that God who is his portion and happiness is an incomparable God.
Therefore as the Scripture mentions God to be incomparable in excellency, it
also mentions his people to be incomparable in felicity, and infers their
incomparableness from his incomparableness who is their God.

The holy Ghost tells us, None is like God, he has no equal in worth and
perfection. Who is a God like unto thee? Exodus 15.11. Among all the Gods there
is none like to thee, Psalm. 86.6. And the holy Ghost tells us also, that no
people is like the people of God, and that because God is theirs. Happy art
thou O Israel, who is like unto thee? (why whence comes their incomparable
happiness? truly from the incomparable God,) saved by the Lord, who is the
shield of thine help, and the sword of thine excellency. Again, What Nation is
so great which has God so nigh unto them, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Israel at this time, to
flesh and sense, seemed a most unhappy people, they were in a barren and
howling wilderness, without an house to hide their heads in; without food, but
what a miracle sent them in; without raiment, but what was on their backs;
without any dealings or converse with other people, nay, in the midst of cruel
and potent enemies, they must fight their way to Canaan against walled Towns,
and sturdy Giants; and yet even in this plight they are the happiest people
under the cope of heaven; Because the God of heaven, the incomparable God, was
nigh to them. David asserts Gods incomparable Majesty, and thence Isreal's
incomparable felicity, 2 Samuel 7.22, 23. Wherefore thou art great, O Lord, there
is none like thee, (what follows thence?) And what Nation at this day is like
unto thy people, even like Israel? Reader, if thou art once effectually called,
if thou art a regenerated sanctified person, know to thy comfort, and rejoice
therein, that this incomparable God is thine. 2. That all his incomparable
excellencies are thine. 3. That this incomparable God, with all his
incomparable perfections, will be thine for ever.

1. This incomparable God is thine. That God who has no superior, no equal,
no fellow, is thine. He that is, and there is none else, Isa. 46.9. is thine.
He that is that he is, Exodus 3.14. is thine: Thou have a propriety in him, and
a title to him. This is the great privilege of heavens favorites. Behold the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and he will be their God, Revel. 21.3. This is the great promise,
the sum, the substance of all the promises, I will be their God, and they shall
be my people, Jer. 31.33. This is the great prayer of all that know how to
pray, or what to pray for, Psalm. 80.12. Psalm. 4.6. Exodus 33.15. Jer. 14.8. This
is the great purchase of the Son of God, 1 Pet. 3.18. His name is therefore
Immanuel, God with us.

This is heaven it self, the very heaven of heavens; for it is not the place,
but his presence which makes heaven to be heaven. In thy presence is fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. Once
more; this is the highest, the chiefest, the greatest gift, which the infinite
God can give to thee. When he gives thee riches and honors and friends and
relations, he can give thee greater things; when he gives thee Sacraments and
Sabbaths and seasons of grace, he can give thee greater things; when he gives
thee pardon of sin, peace of conscience, the graces of his Spirit, he gives
thee great things, but yet he can give thee greater: but when he gives thee
himself, he gives thee the greatest gift that himself (though infinite in
bounty) can give. O how sweet is that term of propriety, My God, My God. The
Redeemer himself rolled in his mouth over and over, as if he could never suck
out the sweetness in it, Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the house
of my God, and I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the City
of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down from my God, Rev.
3.12. David dwells on it as one unwilling to leave it, Psalm. 18.1, 2.

Reader, O what cause have thou to triumph in thy happiness, that the infinite
God is thine. Fear not, I am thine, Isa. 41. Scepters, and kingdoms, and
honors, and possessions, and friends, and relations, and liberty, and peace,
and health, and strength, are not thine possibly, but God is thine; He that is
all these, and more than these, is thine; He is thine own God: even (mark) our
own God shall bless us, Psalm. 67.6. Thou can not call any thing outward thy
own; thy estate is not thine own, I will take away my corn, and my wine, and my
oil, Hos. 2.9. Hag. 2.8. Thy relations are not thine own, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. My
children which thou have born to me. Thy credit is not thine own, no, thy very
graces are not thine own, Cantic. 4.16. Nay thou thy self art not thy own, 1
Cor. 6.20. Ye are not your own. Thy body is not thine own, 1 Cor. 6.16. nor
your souls, Ezekiel. 18.3, 4. All souls are mine. But God is thy own God, thy own
glory, thy own exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4.

2. All the incomparable excellencies of this God, his incomparable word and
works are thine. As all he is, is thine; so all he has is thine, all he can be
is thine, all he has done is thine, all he can do is thine, 1 Cor. 3.22. All
is thine: All his incomparable attributes are thine: His incomparable power is
thine to protect thee, Genesis 15.1, 2. Exodus 15.9, 10, 11, 12. His incomparable
wisdom is thine to direct thee, Psalm. 73.23. His incomparable mercy is thine to
pity and relieve thee in thy miseries, Judge. 10.16. His incomparable grace is
thine to pardon all thine iniquities, Micah 7.18. Exodus 34.6, 7. His
incomparable love is thine to refresh and delight thy soul, Psalm. 21.5, 6. His
incomparable justice is thine to accept thee as righteous for the sake of his
Son, Romans 3.24. His incomparable faithfulness is thine to fulfill all the
gracious promises which he has made to thee, Psalm. 89.33, 34. His incomparable
Majesty and beauty and glory are thine, to make thee great, and render thee
comely and glorious for ever. Ezekiel. 16.14. Isa. 43.4. His incomparable joys and
pleasures are thine to feed on, and be filled with, Psalm. 36.8. Mat. 25.21. His
incomparable works are thine. His works of Creation, Psalm. 37.11. Mat. 5.4. His
works of Providence, Romans 8.28. For your sakes I have sent to Babylon, Isa.
43.14. and Isa. 43.4. His work of Redemption is yours, Joh. 10.15. Gal. 2.20.
Rev. 1.5, 6. His incomparable word is thine, indicted for thee, sanctified to
thee, making thee wise to salvation. It Is therefore called their word, the word
of their testimony, Rev. 12.11. Whatsoever things were written were written for
our instruction, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope, Romans 15.4.

3. This incomparable God, and all his incomparable excellencies, will be thine
for ever. His incomparable eternity will be thine; and so long as he is God, he
will be thy God. When the sensualists God is gone, thy God will remain: when
the worldlings God fails him, thy God will not forsake thee: when all thine
honors, riches, friends, relations leave thee, thy God will abide with thee.
This God is our God for ever and ever, Psalm. 48.14. Not for a day, or week, or
month, or year, or Age, but for ever and ever; Not for a thousand years, or a
thousand generations, or millions of millions of generations, but for ever and
ever; Not for as many millions of ages, as there are stars in heaven, drops in
the Sea, creatures great and small in both worlds, but for ever. O happy
Conjunction of Propriety with eternity, this God is our God for ever and ever.
Thine immortal soul has an immortal God, an immortal good; Thou shall ever be
with this incomparable Lord. Comfort thy soul in the midst of all the
persecutions and afflictions that befall thee in this world, with these words,
1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17, 18. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and the
dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be
caught up together with him in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so
shall we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

FINIS.

