A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PAUL'S COVENT GARDEN Upon Sunday the Second of
December, 1694.

Being the Day Appointed by Their Majesty's FOR A Public THANKSGIVING For the
Preservation of His Majesty from the Dangers to which his Royal Person was
exposed during his late Expedition; and for his safe Return to his People, and
for the Success of his Forces by Sea and Land.

Published at the Request of the Parishioners.

By JOHN SWYNFEN, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Bradford, and
Lecturer at St. Magnus Church at the Bridge Foot.

IMPRIMATUR.

December. 14. 1694. C. Alston.



LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley next
Cornhil. 1695.

TO THE PARISHIONERS OF Covent Garden.
Gentlemen,
THE ensuing Discourse was not composed with any Design to be made Public, and
therefore wants that Correctness of Style, and, perhaps too, that strict
Coherence of Reasoning it ought otherwise to have had. For which Reasons I
ought in Prudence to have contented my self with that great Candor, wherewith
you were pleased to receive it, and not to have run this needless Risque of
exposing it to a more strict Examination. But I was rather willing to Oblige
you, by complying with your Requests in this particular, than be studiously
careful for lesser matters. And besides the Design of it being truly Good,
namely, to Vindicate the Providence of God, and to Assert its Influence in our
late Happy Revolution, I would hope it may not be altogether useless. That it
may obtain this End, is, and (by the Grace of God) always shall be the Hearty
Prayer of,

Gentlemen, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, JOHN SWYNFEN.

ERRATA.
Page 3. line 3. for then read it. page 7. l. 7. for after read often. page 23.
l. 3. read unexpected.

Ezekiel XX. 44. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with
you for my Namesake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your
corrupt doings, O ye House of Israel, says the Lord.


THese words having no great dependence upon the Context, to Discourse
thereupon would be wholly needless: You may take the sense of them in this
double Paraphrase; Ye shall acknowledge my Deity and Providence, when, by
freeing you from your present Slavery, I shall desist from punishing you as
your sins have deserved: Or else thus; The Deliverance from your Babylonish
Captivity, which I design to effect, is, not that you could lay any claim to it
upon account of your Righteousness, for alas, your ways are wicked, and your
doings corrupt, but only for my own Namesake. The sense is but little varied
either ways, only the former shows what is the positive cause of their
Deliverance, viz. the Holy Name of God; and the latter affirms that their Merit
had no influence in procuring it: Either ways they afford these two
Observations.



And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought, etc. This People of
Israel were not only as wicked as any upon Earth, but had moreover Ingratitude
as an extraordinary Circumstance, which aggravated their Guilt beyond that of
the whole World besides; and their present Servitude in a Foreign and Barbarous
Country had been so far from producing their Amendment, that it had added one
sin more, which they had newly learnt from the Chaldeans, namely, to make their
Sons and Daughters to pass through the fire to their Idols, as may be seen,
ver. 31st. And yet as bad, Ungrateful, and Idolatrous as they were, they are
here assured not only that for God's Holy Namesake they should be redeemed
from their present Slavery, but that after they were so, they should know that
God was the Lord.

Now because the first of these Proposition is Paradoxical, that is, is
opposite to the Vulgar Notions of Providence, and indeed to thos^ Methods which
God seems to have told us in Scripture he will take with a wicked People,
'twill be necessary to be more particular in proving them.

In Discoursing therefore upon the first, I shall first prove it true from
Scripture. 2dly, Confirm it by producing some Instances when it may be to the
Interest of God's Name to deliver a very sinful People from great Calamities.
3. I shall show what Improvements such a People are to make of such
Deliverances.

And first, that a very sinful People may sometimes be delivered from great
Calamities purely for God's Holy Name, appears from two passages in this
Prophecy which affirm it. See ver. 9th. of this Chapter, But I wrought for my
Namesake, that it should not be polluted among the Heathen, with whom they
were, but I made my self known to them in bringing them forth out of the Land
of Egypt: The place explains it self, telling us, that the Reason why the
wicked Israelites were Redeemed from their Egyptian Slavery, was for God's own
Namesake. A like passage to this we have in Chap. 36. ver. 29. But I had pity
for my Holy Name, which the House of Israel had profaned among the Heathen,
whither they went. Whether this speaks of the same Deliverance from the
Captivity in Babylon which the Text does, or of some other, is no matter,
seeing it is plain it is here said to be wrought purely out of pity to God's own
Name: Hence it is that in several Prayers mentioned in Scripture, that were
made for the Deliverance of a wicked People out of this or the other Extremity,
this Motive is frequently used, that God would do it for his own Namesake; as
in that, Arise, O Lord, for the Glory of thy Name, pity thy People, and Sheep
of thy Pasture. From which Instances, and many more that might be produced, the
thing appears to be true enough.

So that the principal Matter will be to show some Instances wherein God's Holy
Name may be concerned to deliver even a very sinful People out of great
Calamities.

it is as bad or worse than none, so that they are neither parts of the Visible
nor Catholic Church; for such as these, I say, to fall into the extremest
Misery, without any Deliverance from it, is no Reflection at all upon God
Almighty; seeing that he has never made any Covenant with or Promise to them
that he will appear on their behalf; nay, he has rather testified the
contrary, namely, That he will pour out his wrath upon such Heathen as know him
not, and upon such Families as call not on his Name. So that how far soever
common Providence may be concerned upon account of their being Creatures, to
free them from utter Misery in this Life, it is very plain that his Holy Name is
not at all interested in the matter.

But now that it may be sometimes concerned to deliver a Church or Nation,
whose Faith, Profession, and Worship are good and true, though the Practices of
its Members are wicked, is equally plain too: For seeing such Faith and Worship
are considerable Duties, and must therefore render those that have them amiable
in the sight of God, how can he evidence his Respect to them unless it be by
some such Temporal Deliverances? Besides, if this Church be of large extent,
utterly to erase it from the face of the Earth, is scarce consistent with the
Promises that are made of its Amplitude in the latter days, and that God will
in all Places have some that shall fear and serve him; nay, such severe
proceedings against a People that retain so much of Religion as an Orthodox
Faith and Regular Worship amount to, would Prejudice the rest of the World
against that true Faith which they profess; for seeing it is Natural, though
unjust, to judge of the Truth or Falsehood of any Religion by the good or bad
Fortune its Professors have in the World, like the Barbarians instantly
concluding Paul to be an ill Man, when they saw the Poisonous Viper on his
Hand; where Men see the hard Fate of such a People, they instantly conclude
that the Religion they Profess cannot be good, seeing it could not save them
from Ruin. In fine, by how much the sounder Men's Religion is, so much the
better do they expect to fare; and when Strangers see the hard Fate that has
befallen People of such a Belief, they will be so far from espousing it, that
they will think they cannot stand at too great a distance from it. So that as
much as God's Holy Name is concerned to be respectful to Men of sound Belief
and Regular Worship, to Propagate the true Faith in all parts and corners of
the Earth, and to make the Enemies to, to become Professors of and in love with
it, so much it may be concerned to deliver such a People out of the Calamities
into which they are fallen. And we are to observe, that this was that very
thing which so long preserved the Israelites from utter Ruin. Though their
Morals was corrupt even beyond Example, and their very Worship too frequently
stained with Idolatry, yet in the other Substantial Principles, both of Faith
and Discipline, they being still sound, though God Almighty for their sins did
after reduce them to the very brink of Destruction, yet for the sake of the
other he did as often deliver them from falling into it. Hence when the
Psalmist makes Confession of their Miscarriages, and owns them to be so great,
as to Merit an utter Extirpation, he adds this, Yet they are thy People, and
Sheep of thy Pasture; and urges this as a Motive with God, that he would not
utterly destroy them.

2. When amongst this wicked People there are a considerable number that are
truly Good, then may the Holy Name of God be concerned to deliver them from the
Calamities into which they are fallen; especially if the better sort are like
to suffer most, and those that are more wicked may extricate themselves; for,
as God may think, why should the Righteous suffer for the sins of the Wicked?
The Innocent bear the Punishment of the Guilty? Or good Men endure those
Miseries which they had no hand in procuring? This would be to separate Guilt
from Fault; and whereas he himself has told us, that the Righteousness of the
Righteous shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon
him, 'twould be to act counter and opposite thereto, especially in the latter
case, where bad Men escape, and the truly Pious only suffer: For this would
expressly verify the Jewish Proverb, That the Fathers have eaten sour Grapes,
and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge; nay, it would be worse than so, in as
much as it is less Injustice to suffer for the Faults of Relations, than for
those we were never related to. Indeed if for Ten Righteous Persons he would
have saved Sodom, and that he professes he could not do what he designed
whilst Lot was in it; where there are an infinitely greater number of good
People, we may reasonably presume he will not destroy the Country they live in
for their sake. And lastly, if the Righteous shall not bear the Lot of the
Wicked, nor bad Men escape, leaving the good to suffer in their stead, then
those Calamities where the contrary to this would certainly happen, the Holy
Name of God seems concerned to prevent.

3. The Holy Name of God seems concerned to deliver a Wicked People, that yet
are of the true Religion, from utter Destruction, where the Establishment of a
much more Wicked People, and of a false Religion too, would be the consequent
of it: For this would be to change bad for worse, to take away a little Evil,
and introduce a greater; and like the Demoniack, of whom we read in the Gospel,
out of whom one Devil was cast, and seven Devils worse than the former entered
into him. Seeing therefore that such proceedings as these would be so far from
lessening, that they would abundantly propagate Irreligion, Heresy, and Sin,
the Honor of God's Name seems concerned to avoid them. To this very Reason it
may be are we of this Church and Nation obliged for that Deliverance which we
this day gratefully Celebrate. Though with Israel in the Text, our ways are
wicked, and our doings corrupt, so that we justly merit even an utter
Extirpation; nay, though we publish our sins as Sodom, and seem to vye with the
Old World for all manner of Profaneness; so that to palliate or excuse our
Guilt, would not only much aggravate it, but likewise be the ready way to bring
worse Judgments on our Heads than those we have already escaped; yet surely,
compared with those that must in all probability succeed us, 'twill not be
criminal or assuming for once to make the Pharisee's claim, thanking God that
we are not so bad as they. At least this we are sure of, that no kind of
Impieties are justified by the Rules of our Religion, as there are by the Rules
of theirs. We maintain not, That for the safety of a Man's Honor or Good Name,
it is Lawful for him to kill or defame another; That in the case of Necessity we
may justifiably steal; That Fornication is not evil in it self; That if I
assert or swear what is false, so that I mean not as I say, that I am neither
guilty of Lying or Perjury; That it is Lawful for a Servant, not having Wages
answerable to his Labor, to cheat his Master, provided he can do it without
his privity; That one Act of Faith and Love is sufficient for a man's whole
Life; And that Natural Attrition is enough in the Duty of Repentance. We hold
not the Fertile Doctrines of Equivocations, good Intents, keeping no Faith with
Heretics, and that we may do evil that good may come of it. In short, we have
no Jesuits Morals, no Doctrines of Probability, nor any Point maintained, but
what is purely Religious, Christian, and Sacred; So that upon comparing the
Principles of our Religion with those of the Romish, when one will appear
suited to the strict Rules of the Gospel, the others are only raised up to
serve the ends of Secular Policy, upon the Ruins of Morality, Society, and
common Honesty. And indeed in this respect, the badness of their Cause may be
to our good, and the great Preservative to keep us from Ruin. God Almighty
perhaps sees, that he will not, as we say, mend the matter, by exalting them
upon the Ruin of us; nay, the Exchange will be to his own disadvantage; and
though he may gratify his just Resentments, by cutting off so wicked a People,
yet that may seem to derogate from his Wisdom and Holiness, when it tends to
the Establishment of a much worse.

4. When the utter Ruin of a People would involve other Churches and
Countries, that are perhaps more Innocent, in the same Miseries, then does
God's Holy Name seem concerned to deliver them therefrom; especially when a
very considerable part of the World will be damaged, and it may be that too
where the purer Parts of the Church of Christ are. For here not only the
Innocent will suffer for the Guilty, but Strangers miscarry for the faults of
those whom they had no concern withal; nay, greater Desolation will be caused
in the Church of God, than is perhaps consistent either with his Providence
over, or tender respect to it. And this we may suppose another Foundation of
that Deliverance which we now commemorate. Not to Remark the Civil Broils which
our Ruin must necessarily produce in other Countries, what can we think would
become of the Protestant Interest throughout Europe upon our miscarriage? We
may well suppose that the Common Champion for the Catholic Cause will use his
utmost Endeavors to make it as Universal as his Empire becomes, his Conquests
being but imperfect unless they make as great an Alteration in Religion as
Government: And besides the utter Ruin of the purer Parts of the Visible
Church, what Rapine, Blood, and Misery will needs be necessary in order to it?
The Cruelties showed to his own Subjects are but a faint Essay of those
Inhumane Barbarities that will be necessary in other Countries. What
overthrowing Laws, destroying Constitutions? Violating all the Bounds of
Humanity and Justice? How will Fire and Earth be mixed together? No difference
put betwixt Sacred and Profane! And such a Confusion wrought in the best Parts
of the World, as will but too sadly represent the first rude, indigested Chaos,
or the last, great, general Conflagration. These things the Wisdom of Almighty
God may perhaps foresee will be the Consequences of our Ruin, and his Justice
and Goodness seem concerned to prevent them. Hence has his Almighty Arm
appeared, already in a very great measure, to disappoint our Enemies, and to
deliver us. The kindness he bears to the Public Peace and Good of the World,
will not suffer him to permit that which would draw such general Evils after
it, and the Common Interest of Protestantism receiving its Fate from our
Success or Miscarriage, stepped in as an Advocate for our Preservation.

These are some of those many Instances that might be produced wherein God's
Holy Name may be concerned to deliver even a very sinful People from great
Calamities.

From whence it appears, that no one can hence collect, that the Impunity of
such bad People does at all argue that he either bears them any Respect, or
that he is backward in inflicting those Punishments upon them which they
deserve: Alas, it is only out of pity to his Holy Name that they are preserved,
and that because greater dishonor would redound to him by destroying than by
saving them.

I shall conclude this Head, when I have added, that we must not either think
that we are less beholding to God for our Deliverance, because it might not be
wrought for our sakes, but for the sake of God's own Name; or presume that we
may yet sin with safety, seeing 'twill always be as much to the Interest of
God's Name to preserve us.

For as to the former, it is well known that we for our sins sufficiently
merited Destruction, and that if strict Justice had had its current, there
would have been no escaping it. So that whatever Motives God might have on his
part, there could be none on ours. And yet even on his part, though other
considerations might concur, yet we all know that Mercy alone has the most
considerable ascendant over Justice in hindering its Execution. Or suppose it
has not, why should a Benefit be less valued, because in giving it the Donor
has some respect to his own Commodity as well as to his to whom it is given?
All that we are to look to, is, at the Benefit we enjoy by the good turn
another does us, and the proportion of our Obligation is wholly taken from
hence, and not from any collateral end he might propose to himself in doing of
it: And I think no Malefactor looks upon himself less obliged to the Government
in saving his Life, though it does, at the same time, design to employ him in
the Wars.

And then for the other, namely, our presuming to sin because it will be as
much, as it hitherto has, the Interest of God's Name to preserve us from Ruin:
This is, I say, as unreasonable as the other; and that not only because of the
Ingratitude of it, as being an high Abuse of his Goodness, and turning his
Grace into wantonness; but likewise for another, which is in this case a much
weightier Reason, and that is

The uncertainty of the Rule in general. For though God Almighty in all his
Actions does consult the Honor of his Name, yet you must note, that he knows
how more effectually to promote this, sometime by destroying than by saving a
wicked People; in as much as in all such Eminent Acts of Justice he highly
declares his Resentments of Sin, does Justice upon Malefactors, and thereby
makes himself feared in the World; and though in such Punishments all the
forementioned Instances, in which God's Holy Name seems concerned for their
prevention, may happen, and yet are taken no notice of, yet he knows how to
recompense himself for these by an hundred other things that he can cause to
happen. Thus he at last dealt with these very Israelites, after he had
delivered them from time to time, from one Danger and another, and saw that
nothing would bring them to a through Reformation, he utterly deprives them of
their Native Country, City, and Temple; and after a Slaughter of innumerable
Thousands, makes them Vagrants upon the face of the Earth, without any settled
place of abode. The same thing has he since done to the Asian Churches, who,
not observing the Cautions given them by St. John, are utterly wasted, and
nothing but the Name of them at present continues; so that now Seges ubi Troja
fuit, and where the True God was once worshipped, and Christianity flourished
in the greatest splendor, nothing is to be found but the Mosques of Pagans,
and Mahomet's Sacrifices alone obtain; such Desolations do the abused Mercies
and Goodness of God sometimes effect. Now, we are to observe, that amongst both
these People the True Religion was once established, abundance of good People,
there must undoubtedly be; a far worse People and Religion too succeeded in
their room, and a very great Breach, no doubt, was made by their Ruin upon the
whole Church of Christ upon Earth, and yet we see what has befallen them.

So that I say, though for his own Namesake, God Almighty may sometimes see fit
to spare a very wicked People, yet seeing he can bring Good out of Evil, and
Light out of Darkness; can turn those Accidents that seem most against to be
most for him, this is no safe Rule to be depended upon. He that can make the
Deliverance of a People at one time turn to his Honor, can, at another time,
make their Destruction contribute to the same End; and when his Patience is
abused, the forementioned Instances show that he will take other Methods.

From what has been said it appears, that the best Uses we can make of any
Deliverances that God Almighty may have vouchsafed us, are not only to give the
Glory of them to his Holy Name, but to use our Endeavors by Repentance and a
sober Life, to continue this kindness of his to us. We cannot think that any
thing but respect to his own Honor could ever put him upon appearing on the
behalf of so wretched, so degenerate, and so profane a People. And blessed be
his Holy Name, that it has interested it self for our safety; that instead of
giving us a Cup of Trembling, making us Magor Missabibs, Terrors to those that
are round about us, he has made us a Joy, and a Comfort to our Friends, a
Terror to our Enemies, and lifted us up above those that hated us. But let us
not hereupon be secure or high minded, but fear; he that has raised us up, can
for the self same reasons cast us down. If we continue our Uncharitableness,
our furious Zeal, our causless Prejudice, our Murmurings, and the like; then I
say the Interest of God's Name will be as much concerned to destroy, as it has
hitherto been to save us: In fine, Unless we Repent we shall yet sooner or
later Perish, and what has been hitherto done in order to our Settlement,
shall but tend to make our Fall the more Observable, more Surprising and
Afflicting to us, and more Grateful to our Enemies. I now come to the Second
Observation raised from the words, which is,

That the end or design of such Deliverances is, Obs. 2.
That they who receive them should acknowledge the Being and Signal Providence
of God to them therein; for the Prophet tells the Israelites in the Text, that
they should know, that is, be convinced and fully satisfied, that God was the
Lord, when notwithstanding their notorious Wickedness, he had Delivered them
from their present Babylonish Captivity. So v. 42. of this Chapter, And ye
shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the Land of Israel;
that is, my restoring you again to your Native Country, shall amply convince
you of my Being and Providence.

Seeing now that God does expect this of us, with respect to all such
Deliverances, it may be supposed that in effecting them, he leaves such
Characters and Marks of his Hand and Providence, as are sufficient to convince
all observing and unprejudiced People, that they are his doing. 'Twill be
therefore necessary to enquire what these Characters and Marks are; that is, to
observe some occurrents in the Deliverance of a Wicked People out of Adversity,
as make it appear to be the Management and Handiwork of God. And here we are
not to expect such Proofs as amount to a Demonstration; no, nor such either as
shall actually convince those who have a mind to Cavil and search for Evasions.
The former kind of Proofs belong to very few Articles that I know of, in the
whole Body of Divinity, and as for the latter, they who have a Mind to be
Captious, and are perhaps Dissatisfied about the whole Doctrine of Providence
in General, will be never Convinced but by Arguments of Sense; and if by that,
yet by nothing short of what is truly Miraculous: But 'twill be enough for my
purpose, if there be such Occurrences sometimes happen, as are sufficient to
convince all observing and sober-minded People, that they are indeed God
Almighties doing: Such are

1. When the Deliverance is Miraculous, that is, when it is effected either
without or contrary to means, or when the means that are used are utterly
disproportionable to what they produce, so that tho they be improved to their
utmost, yet without some other assistance, it is impossible but they should fall
short of their end; for seeing there is in the World nothing but God and
Nature, whatever Contingencies happen must be produced by one of them: If
therefore a thing fall out, that Nature had no concern in producing or so
little, that if left to its self, it could by no means effect it; here is a
plain Demonstration that God alone must be the sole Author of it in the former
Sense, and the Principal in the latter.

Hence such Miraculous Occurrents have been ever esteemed an Infallible
Argument, as well of the Existence as Providence of a Deity; and where Men have
seen an accident happen, either above the Power, without the Assistance, or
contrary to the Course of Nature; they have never scrupled to affirm, that the
Hand of the Lord has been remarkably in it. Where therefore any of these
Circumstances attend the Deliverance of a Wicked People, they are so many
signacula, Prints or Footsteps of God's Handiwork and Providence.

Now tho we believe that such things are now ceased, so that whatever
Deliverances happen in our days, means are always employed; yet even in them
there are sometimes such Marks of God's Influence and Management, that none but
the extremely prejudiced and wilfully Blind can fail of Discerning them.

2. Such are when those very Men and Actions are the means and Instruments of
it, which were designed for the express contrary: I mean, when the Measures
taken for our overthrow become the means of our Safety, and what was Designed
to effect our Ruin, contributes to our Deliverance. For to bring this about
it is plainly necessary, that something superior to what is against us do appear
on our side. Now if all that Humane Power and Wisdom can do be engaged for our
Ruin, a Power and Wisdom more then Humane must be Engaged to prevent it; and
what I pray, should this be but the Omnipotence and Omniscience of God, the
weakness of whom is stronger, and the foolishness of whom is wiser then Men; At
least suppose those that aim at the Ruin of a People, are by the urgency of
Affairs necessitated to take some false steps, in the doing of which they may
very probably spoil their Design; yet who is it that puts them upon taking
these impudent measures, but he that gives such men up to strong Delusions,
evacuating their Counsels, and frustrating their Designs? Or Lastly, which
(considering the state of things, is the more common case) suppose the Ruin of
the Liberties or Religion of a People, be according to outward appearance
unavoidable, so that to most Men's thinking there needs little to effect it
besides a Potent Power, hardened Malice, unanimous Councels, and a vigorous
Prosecution; where all these things concur, and yet the affair not only
miscarry, but with the utter Ruin too of the Contrivers, who can want sense to
perceive the Finger of the Lord in all this, especially considering what the
Psalmist tells us, That it is he who takes the wicked in the work of their own
hands, that he brings it to pass, that his wickedness shall fall on his own
head, and his violent dealings on his own pate, and Lastly, that he makes
himself known by the Judgments he executes in so doing.

3. When the Means concerned in effecting the Deliverance are no ways
proportionable to the Difficulties they conquer, either with respect to the
open Enemies they are to subdue, or to the inward Distractions of that People
for whom it is procured; that is to say, when those very People that are
delivered, are not only prepossessed against the Deliverance it self, and the
means used in procuring it, but likewise have an open Force engaged for their
Ruin, much stronger than those who appear for their Safety; this is, I say,
another mark of God's doing and Providence: For if we consider the two Bodies
of outward Force separately by themselves, that is, one rising against, and the
other in behalf of a People, Reason and common Experience tells us, that, where
for Conduct, Valor, and the like, they are equal, that the stronger side
should get the Victory; especially, where they are double or triple the Number,
it cannot be denied: And therefore in the Instances we have in Scripture, of a
lesser Force conquering a greater, it is always attributed to the Providence of
God, who is sure to bring Success to that side he does espouse. Much more when
the People, upon whose account the Contest is undertaken, are not only
prejudiced against their Deliverers, but against their Design too; then, I say,
their Deliverance seems so far from being probable, that their utter Ruin
seems unavoidable, and that because this will not only discourage those who
have taken Arms in their Quarrel, but very much dispose them to Differences
among themselves; either of which must needs prove fatal to them. So that for
such a People in such Circumstances, and by such Means to be delivered, must
needs afford an ample Proof of God's doing and Providence.

I might to these add some other Instances of God's Providence in matters of
this Nature; as where the Deliverance is seasonable, coming in that very nick
of time in which it was most wanted, and yet far from being expected, like the
Deliverance of the Jews in the days of Queen Esther, that when H^man's Designs
were ripe for Execution, and the People expected nothing but to fall a
Sacrifice to his Malice, that God Almighty should appear in the critical Minute
for their unexped Safety and Preservation. But I think we need neither this,
nor any others. What our Savior said of the Jews, that if they would not
regard the ordinary means of Moses and the Prophets, the more extraordinary and
Miraculous of one coming from the Dead, would not convince them, may be said
here; that a Miraculous Deliverance would hardly convince such People of its
being done by God, whom such wonderful, though but ordinary appearances as these
will not satisfy. I think I need not scruple to say, that though the Judgments
of God are sometimes a great Deep, and his ways very unsearchable, yet in these
and such like, they are so manifest, that he that runs may read them. As it is
God who Rules in the Armies of Men, pulls down one, and sets up another,
disposes of States and Kingdoms as pleases him; and in fine, to make himself
known, sometimes delivers a wicked People out of Extremity; so are we fully
persuaded, that he need not give greater Evidence of his doing and handiwork,
than these here produced. In requiring therefore those who receive them, to own
and acknowledge him therein, is no unreasonable Demand; on the contrary, it is
highly Rational, that when he so Remarkably signalizeth himself, that he should
be observed and taken notice of: For seeing they receive the benefit of it, why
should they not acknowledge its Author? Especially when God Almighty does so
much insist upon it, giving them to understand, that one of his main Ends is
wholly lost, where his Hand and Counsel are not taken notice of. I shall
therefore endeavor to press this upon you in two words, and so conclude.

1. And first, does God Almighty make such large Discoveries of his Being and
Providence in some Public Deliverances even of wicked People? Then let our
Faith be hereby more strongly confirmed in the general belief of that his Being
and Providence; that is, let us fully conclude not only that there is a God,
but that he does likewise Rule and Reign in the World, when we observe
instances of such Deliverances as these are. We see it is this that God Almighty
does particularly aim at in effecting them; and when the Israelit es Faith in
these Articles has begun to flag and grow weak immediately God has set
himself to work some such grand occurrent, and thereby has repaired and
strengthened it: And I can by no means see why the same things should not have
the same effects on us; that is, why Deliverances that have been wrought for us
should not amply confirm our belief both that God is, and that he governs the
World! perhaps the reason may be, that there is not so much of Miracle in our
Deliverances as there sometimes was in theirs; or that God Almighty does not by
an inspired Prophet, or an Angel from Heaven tell us, that he will bring about
such a Deliverance for us, at such a time, in such a manner, and by such
Instruments, as he sometimes told the Jews he would. But are there no instances
of God's Handiwork but such as are Miraculous? Or can he be concerned in no
occurrent, because he does not tell us by an Angel's Mouth that he is so? Are
there not rather rational Evidences of his Providence, which though not
Miraculous, yet such as are very convincing and satisfactory that God's Hand
and Counsel is therein? One would almost conclude that there were no such
Evidences, when he reflects upon the intolerable Atheism and Infidelity of the
present Age, with respect to all such Occurrences: Instead of Religion's
gaining Ground hereby, Irreligion and Profaneness have abundantly increased;
and where such things have been done as could be the contrivance of none, but
of an All-Wise, Just, and Merciful God, Men have taken occasion even from hence
to become mere Scepticks and Atheists as to his Being and Providence. In this I
particularly refer to the late Revolution, since which, if my Observations fail
not, Atheism and Irreligion have made a more considerable advance than
ordinary; and, which one would think something strange, but yet it is what I
have observed with some Resentment and Conserve, that such Atheistical Notions
and Practices have taken Foundation even from that very Revolution. If these
did only arise in some tender, though weak Christians, from their reflecting upon
the great Wickedness of the Nation, and from thence taking Offense at the
Deliverance, something might be said in order to reclaim them; and one need but
show that sometime the Holy Name, Honor, and Glory of God, may be concerned
for the Deliverance even of such a wicked People, and the forementioned Scandal
must needs cease. But alas, their Atheism and Irreligion are founded upon other
Topics, and are most Rampant in a quite different sort of Men: But this I can
only at present lament and bewail.

2. Seeing God's Hand and Counsel has so Remarkably appeared in the late
Deliverance of our King and Country, let us be persuaded particularly to own
and acknowledge him therein. If we perform not this Duty, and that with hearty
seriousness and concern too, we make the worst abuse of it imaginable, because
our owning of it was, as appears by the Text, the great thing that gave
Foundation to the Deliverance: Besides we hereby lose the greatest part of the
Benefit we might enjoy by the Deliverance, and that is a confirmation of the
Goodness and Blessing of God upon our selves and Country. For such as these God
Almighty may work one Deliverance after another, and have naught for his
Requital, but Silence and Ingratitude. He may free them from the worst of
Miseries, and instate them in the quiet Enjoyment of the greatest Blessings,
and yet be conn'd no Thanks for his Labor. And give me leave to add, that it is
a sad thing to observe how many we have of these even amongst our selves.
Though our Deliverance fall short of none, and has all the forementioned
Characters in it of God's Handiwork, yet how few are there who own and
acknowledge it? Some from a wonted Blindness, and never looking farther than
the mere surface of things; others from not considering the Circumstances of it
with Intensiveness and Application of Mind; a third sort from an Opinion they
have imbibed of God's unconcernedness with the World, and leaving all to second
Causes; and another sort I fear there are, who from a Prejudice and
Disaffection to the thing it self, look upon it as the doing of the Manichee's
Evil God, who is the Author of all Wickedness and Confusion, rather than of him
who does nothing but what is truly good. In short, some from one ground, and
some from another, take so little notice of God's Hand and Influence therein,
that they seem little or nothing to regard it. And thus, like Israel of Old,
God does great things for us, and we observe them not: And did not the
Government (by Religiously appointing days of Fasting on the one hand, and of
Thanksgiving on the other) declare its Sentiments in the matter, namely, that
it was the Lord's doing, I know not how we should avoid the National Guilt of
not answering the End which God tells us he aims at therein; that is, that we
should know that he is the Lord. However for our part, seeing we have so good
an Example and Authority too for our Acknowledgment of his Providence therein,
let us not fail to imitate it: And seeing our owning this, is not the All that
is expected from us, but a suitable Praise, Thanksgiving, and Gratitude, let us
not be deficient in them neither. Now we know our Deliverer let us be Thankful
to him, and suitable to the Benefits we enjoy by the Deliverance, so let our
Acknowledgments be; then will God Almighty return to us, and that it may be
with an increase of Blessings: Then will he render our Fleets Prosperous, and
our Armies Successful; then will he put an end to the sad and deplorable War
abroad, and compose our unhappy Differences at home: And lastly, then will he
Preserve to us our Gracious Sovereigns, and with them our Religion, and all
that is dear; and in so doing will purchase to himself from all good
Protestants, and all true Englishmen, all Honor, Glory, Power, and Praise
Everlasting.

FINIS.

