PRIMITIVE BAPTISM, And therein INFANTS AND PARENTS RIGHT.

MATTHEW. 19.6. What God has joined together, let no Man put asunder.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of these Papers is one whom I have known long since to be a person
of great Reputation for Knowledge, Wisdom, Gravity and Seriousness. A Person not
only skilful and diligent in his particular Calling, and beautiful in his
Christian Conversation, but also a diligent and judicious Reader and Observer
of the Sacred Scriptures; and, so far as I could either learn of others, or my
self discern by Conversation with him, an impartial searcher after Truth, and
readily receptive of it in its discerned Evidence: and consequently not
tenacious of any Sentiments or Opinions through humor, interest, and
self-conceitedness where any reasons do appear to prove them false, or probably
uncertain or unsafe. That this small Tract is his, I have great reason to
believe: It is small, nervous, and clear, as to the great Design thereof; of
which, the Title is a sufficient indication and account; but let the matter
speak for it self, and force its way into the Readers breast by its own
Strength, carried home by God's blessing thereupon to such degrees as He sees
fit, who is the Original source and Fountain, Patron, and End of Truth. I shall
only add, That when our Brethren who judge it improbable, that any Infants had
their solemn admission into the Church of Christ in Scripture-times by the
instituted rite of Christian Baptism, have tried their Strength upon what is
here offered, and scripturally proved, and have effectually Answered what is
here briefly, and in other Books, more copiously demonstrated and improved,
they may probably gain more Proselytes to themselves. Read carefully, think
deeply, pray fervently, design honestly, judge impartially, and give Christ's
evident Truths, Laws, Institutions, their just receptions and improvement; and
take in nothing for Truth or Duty for the sake of any Man, but yield to
Evidence; and this will be most grateful,

(Candid and Christian Reader,) To thine in and for our Blessed Lord, whilst M.
SYLVESTER.

PREFACE.
AS Civil Right is one of the great controverted Points in the World; so is
Religious Right in the Church.

What is here offered concerning Infants and Parents Right in the Church, is a
short Discourse maintained against two different Practices; the One withholding
Baptism from Infants of baptized Parents; the Other withholding such Parents
from their Infants in Baptism.

The Arguments brought against these Practices, are those brought by Christ
against a Practice of the like Nature, namely, that it is a putting asunder
those whom God has joined together; and that from the beginning it was not so.

Which Arguments are not insisted upon as suspecting the strength of other
Arguments, but as agreeing therewith, and the better to clear up the
Apostolical Practice in these things.

All submitted to superior Judgments.

Primitive Baptism.
GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son: Who
(that our Religion and Manners, Faith and Worship, may be after the due Order)
has commanded us to search the Scriptures, containing Rules and Directions,
Precepts and Examples, always evident and perfect in their kind, though not
always alike express.

The Sadduces finding no express mention of the Resurrection in the Books of
Moses, (which they emphatically called the Scriptures) not only denied the
Resurrection, but framed Arguments from those Scriptures against it; One
whereof they thought so unanswerable, Deuteronomy. 25.6.
that they encountered Christ himself with it, Mat. 22. v. 23, 24, etc. Christ
observing their Confidence, reproves them as plainly both of Error, and the
Cause thereof, in these Words, ver. 29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the Power of God; and from the Scriptures proves the Resurrection.

Which Words of Christ, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of
God, may have a double Aspect, one unto the Scripture, from whence they framed
their Argument against the Resurrection, and another unto the Scripture which
he brings to prove the Resurrection by.

That the Sadduces did not know the Scriptures literally, or the Power of God
historically, cannot be the meaning of Christ; but take the Words as having an
Eye to that Scripture brought by them, ( ver. 24.) from whence they raised
their Argument against the Resurrection, and the Sense may be such as this:

Ye Sadduces say that there is no Resurrection, and you seem very big of your
Opinion, as if you were in the right, and had Scripture on your side, and could
from the Scripture prove it impossible; but I tell you, Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the Power of God; for though that be Scripture which ye have
quoted, yet ye, not comparing it with other Passages of the same Sacred
Writings, nor Spiritual Things with Spiritual, do not hold the Analogy of Faith
contained in the Scriptures, but speak evil of those things which ye know not,
whilst what you know naturally as brute Beasts, in those things you corrupt
your selves. For that the Dead are raised, even Moses showed at the Bush, when
he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, for he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living, for all live unto
him. And though you pretend to know God, yet you glorify him not as God, nor
consider that Power belongs unto him, else why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the Dead? Neither are your Notions
of the future State, to which the Dead are raised by his Infinite and Almighty
power, suitable to those high and excellent Apprehensions which you ought to
have of it, for in the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
Marriage, neither do they die any more, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven.
Ye therefore do greatly err.

But taking the Words of Christ, as having a respect to the Scripture which he
brings to prove the Resurrection by, ( ver. 32.) and then the meaning may be
this, or such like:

Ye deny that there is any Resurrection, and conclude that you must be in the
right, because you find no express mention of it in the Scriptures, and as if
the Incapacity of the Dead made it impossible with God; but do you not
therefore err, because you know not the Scriptures, nor the Power of God? For
though it be not expressly said that the Dead are raised, yet know that there is
sufficient Proof for it in Scripture, by good and warrantable Inference from
Scripture: For as touching the Resurrection of the Dead, have you not read that
which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, Mat. 22.31.
and the God of Jacob? from whence you might have attained unto the knowledge of
the Resurrection as satisfyingly, as if it had been expressly said, that the
Dead are raised; for God is not a God of the Dead, but of the Living: which had
you considered, you might have known that the Spirits of Men, though separate
from their Bodies, are by the Power of God, (the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh) still held in Life; and that therefore he can and will by the same
Power, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself, raise their Bodies, and unite them to their own Spirits: which
Inferences being agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and a true and right
asserting of the Power of God, are as Scripture, of which ye being willingly or
wilfully ignorant, have erred in this main Article.

Now though the Sadduces still persisted, after such Conviction, in their
Error, saying that there is no Resurrection, and in opposition to the Doctrine
of Christ, Luke 20.37, 38. that there is neither Angel nor Spirit, yet the way
of proving by Consequences is not less cogent or commendable.

And if the Resurrection might be thus proved, why not other Points? why not
the baptizing of Infants?

It is true, the Resurrection is not Worship, yet it is an Article of Faith,
which if not believed, 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, etc.
all our Worship is in vain: And though nothing is to be admitted into the
Worship of God, as such, which is contrary to express Precept and Command by
Consequences, yet these rightly drawn from Scripture, are no less a Rule for
our Practice, than they are for our Faith.

Now tho the baptizing of Infants has been abundantly proved from time to time
by many plain and undeniable Consequences, rightly inferred from the
Scriptures, which being Christ's way of proving, should satisfy us; yet since
express Precept or Example are so much called for, let us a little enquire into
that.

What the First Commission of Christ was about baptizing, is not recorded, but
must be gathered from his Second Commission, and from the Practice of his
Disciples, and Acts of the Apostles.

The Second Commission of Christ for baptizing, is Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore,
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc.

The Practice of the Disciples and Apostles was to baptize particular Persons,
and with Parents their House and Household; as Lydia and all her Household, Acts
16.14, 15. the Jailor and all his, ver. 33. and Crispus and all his House,
Chap. 18.8.

Quest. The Question is, Whether these were only Adult, or Adult and Infants?

Answ. Adult and Infants. These words, Household, His, and House, when spoken of
Persons, being an Hebraism for Children of the House, who are the Seed of the
House, 1 Samuel 2.33.
Deuteronomy. 25.5. Mat. 5.12, 19. whether they be Infants or adult Children.

Thus Genesis 34.30. I and my House; and 41.13, 19. Pharaoh said, Take your
Father, and your little ones, and your Wives, and come; and 46.31. My Brethren,
and my Father's House are come. Numb. 16.32. And the Earth opened her Mouth,
and swallowed them up, and their Houses, that is, their Sons and little
Children, ver. 27. to wit, of Dathan and Abiram, Deuteronomy. 11.6.
whereas of Korah it was all the Men that appertained unto him, as in the same
32d Verse, not his House, for chap. 26.11. the Children of Korah died not:
Judge. 9.16. Now therefore if ye have done truly -- and dealt well with
Jerubbaal and his House: (for my Father fought for you, etc. and ye are risen
up against my Father's House, and have slain his Sons) If ye have dealt truly
and sincerely with Jerubbaal and his House, then rejoice, etc. 1 Samuel 3.12, 13,
14. In that day I will perform against Eli all which I have spoken concerning
his House, etc. 2 Samuel 3.1, 6. Now there was long War betwixt the House of
Saul, and the House of David, etc. And chap. 7.16, 18, 19, 23, 29. Thine House
shall be established, etc. And chap. 9.3. And the King said, Is there not yet
any of the House of Saul? And chap. 12.10. Now the Sword shall not depart from
thy House. 1 Kings 13.34. And this thing became Sin to the House of Jeroboam.
And chap. 21.21, 22. And will take away thy Posterity; -- And will make thy
House like the House of Jeroboam. 1 Chronicles. 13.14. The Lord blessed the House of
Obed Edom; (that is, chap. 26.4, 5, 6. his Children.) And chap. 1.16, 43. David
returned to bless his House. Psalm. 114.1. When Israel went out of Egypt, the
House of Jacob from a People of a strange Language. Micah 2.2. They oppress a
Man and his House. Habbak. 2.10. Jer. 23.34.
Thou have consulted Shame to thine House. Luke 19.9. This day is Salvation
come to this House. Titus 1.11. Who subvert whole Houses.

Add unto these Genesis 7.1. And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou, and all thy
House. So chap. 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will command his Children, and
Household after him (that is, his Children who are his Household after him; for
no others of the Family, though it exclude not them, were properly his Household
after him, but his Children, called his Seed after him.) Thus chapter 30.30. And
now when shall I (says Jacob) provide for mine own House also? So Exodus 12.27.
It is the Sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, who passed over the Houses of the
children of Israel, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our Houses.
Thus Deuteronomy. 25.9. So shall it be done unto the man that will not build up his
brother's house. So 1 Timothy 3. v. 4, 5. One that rules well his own house,
having his children in subjection with all gravity: for if a man know not how
to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? And Chap.
5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own
House, which according to the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.14. is his Children, For
the Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the
Children.

Thus we see the Hebraism of these Words; Household, His, and House in
Scripture, according unto which these Words in these three first cited Examples
of Lydia, the Jailer and Crispus, are by some very great Interpreters rendered,
The Children of the House; and are necessarily to be so taken there, Infants
not excepted, unless some sufficient reason be given to the contrary.

Now the main Reason to the contrary given, is, That these Houses and Households
who are said to be Baptized, were such as to whom the Word of the Lord is said
to be spoken, and who are said to believe in the Lord, which it is pretended
they could not do if spoken of Infants; so that there were either no Infants
there, or no Infants there Baptized.

But this Reason is not sufficient, because it supposes these Houses and
Households to be said to have the Word of the Lord spoken to them, and to be
said to Believe without the Parents, which ought not to be supposed.

First, it supposes these Houses and Households to be said to have the Word of
the Lord spoken to them without the Parents, and so renders Infants incapable;
whereas, take House and Household with Parents, and Infants have been, and so
may be, of them to whom the Word of the Lord has been spoken. Thus Children
were of them to whom Moses made that great and solemn Exhortation Deuteronomy. 29.2,
9, 10, 11. And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, -- Keep
therefore the word of this Covenant --.Ye stand all of you before the Lord your
God, -- your little Ones, your Wives, -- that ye should enter into Covenant
with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which the Lord thy God makes with
thee this day. And of them to whom Joshua made that famous repetition of the
Law, Josh. 8.34, 35. And afterward he read all the words of the Law, the
blessings and cursings according to all that is written in the book of the Law.
There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshuah read not before
all the Congregation of Israel, with the Women and little Ones.

And though it be said in Nehem. 8.2, 3. Men and Women, and all that could hear
with understanding, yet it is not said them only, as if Infants were excepted,
neither does it follow that they were; for we know that whatsoever the Law
says, it says to them that are under the Law, Romans 3.19. And we are sure,
that the Command of Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12, 13. was, that the Solemnity there
appointed, should be with the Women and Children. Also, when he called unto all
Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. aforesaid, and made that Exhortation, They stood before him
with their little Ones, and their Wives. Likewise, when Joshua made that
Rehearsal of the Law, Chap. 8. It was before the whole Congregation, with the
Women and little Ones. So 2 Chronicles. 20.13. And all Israel stood before the Lord
with their little Ones, their Wives and their Children. Still Women with their
little Ones and Children, as if such little Ones, as by reason of their Infancy
did yet hang upon the tender Breast: agreeable unto that Joel 2.12. Turn ye
unto me -- with weeping and mourning: 13. rent your hearts, -- 15. Call a
solemn Assembly. -- 16. Gather the People: sanctify the Congregation: assemble
the Elders: gather the Children, and those that suck the Breast, etc.

Not that Parents ought therefore to bring their little Ones at all times to
the reading, and preaching of the Word; but shows that it was done upon some
great and solemn Occasions, when they entered into Covenant with God, or the
like; and that little Ones may be part of those to whom the Word of the Lord is
spoken, Act. 21.5.

It is granted, the Phrase and manner of speaking in Scripture is primarily
accommodated to those who are adult, but not exclusively of Infants; for they,
as Israelites, were of them to whom, says the Apostle, appertains the giving
of the Law, Romans 3.19. And, as Jews, of them to whom were committed the Oracles
of God, Romans 3.1, 2. Acts 7.38.

Secondly, this supposes these Houses and Households to be said to Believe
without the Parents, and so though it had instead of House and Household, been
said, their Children, little Ones, and Babes; yet according to this supposal
the meaning would have been made still the same; that this could not be of such
in Age, but only of such in quality and disposition; whereas, take it as it
is, Parents and House together, and then Infants are not only included, but
chiefly intended, the Adult being for the most part at their own disposal,
whilst the Infants were always at the disposal of their Parents, who
themselves, whether Heathens, or Jews, being converted to the Faith of Christ,
brought over theirs, all if possible, but be sure their Infants, to be of the
same Faith with themselves; and it being Parent and House, and not House
without the Parents, who are said to Believe; it shows it to be in a way of
Covenant, which always includes the Infants: And thus as the Infants of
Heathens were always reputed to be Heathens, and the Infants of Jews to be
Jews, so the Infants of Christians to be Christians, (though not declaratively
so, no more than the converted Adult until baptized) and may, as Infants of
such, Mat. 18.6. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 2.19.
as well be said to Believe, as the Infants of Circumcised Parents might be
said, by being Circumcised, to become debtors to do the whole Law, Gal. 5.2.
Or, by not being Circumcised, to break the Covenant, Genesis 17.14.

Object. But it is said, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. How then can
Infants be said to Believe?

Answ. This goes upon the former mistake of putting Parents and Infants
asunder, for so it is said, He that believes not, shall be damned. Mark 16.16.
and is condemned already, John 3.18. Shall not Infants therefore be saved? God
forbid, for tho they cannot believe in all respects as the Adult do, yet they
may be parties with their Parents in the covenanting part of their Parents
Faith, as their Parents covenant for themselves and them; which is well
illustrated by Parents making their Infants Parties with them in their own
civil Contracts of Bonds and Leases, but is grounded only upon the Nature of
the Covenant of God; and as this Faith comes to the Parents by hearing, so to
their Infants in conjunction with them.

When therefore it is said such and such, as Namely, the Jailor, Crispus, and
the Nobleman, John 4.53. believed with all their House: this relates not so
much to the great success the Gospel had in those times, though that was very
great, as it does to the Covenant of God with Parents and their Children;
because no House is said to believe without the Parents, nor any Parents having
House under their charge, without the House; which must therefore have a
respect to Infants, Adult Persons sometimes believing, and not their Parents;
and Parents, and not always the Adult.

An Husband might believe, and not the Wife; the Wife, and not the Husband: but
though it be said, to a Husband, or a Wife, Believe, and thou shall be saved, and
thy House; yet it is not said to any Husband, Believe, and thou shall be saved,
and thy Wife; or to any Wife, Believe, and thou shall be saved, and thy
Husband; but only, What know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy
Husband? Or, how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife? 1 Cor.
7.16.

Again, a Master might be Converted, and not the Servant; a Servant might be
Called, and not the Master; but with considerable difference in respect to the
House: for when the Master being a Parent, Believed, there Salvation came to
the House, not so when only the Servant was Called, or did Believe; which is
one Reason which the Apostle gives there, why a Brother or Sister being
married, should not depart from, put away, or leave their Unbelieving
Yoke Fellow, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Not why the Converted Servant should not
leave his Unconverted Master, ver. 20, 21, 22, 23.

And this makes it more clear, That House in the Scripture must include
Infants, in that an House is said to be saved, (that is to say, saved as to the
outward means of Salvation; which to them who die in their Infancy may be to
their Eternal Salvation; howsoever will be so to them who survive their
Infancy, if they neglect not so great Salvation;) where the Parents are said to
be saved, but not House said to be saved without the Parents. Thus when Peter
was sent to Cornelius, Acts 11. it was to tell him words whereby He, and all
his House should be saved: the same which Paul and Silas here said to the
Jailor, Act. 16. And so to every Parent, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved, and thy House: which must be with respect to Infants; for
as it would be hard to say, That Infants could not be of the House which was to
be saved; so it would have been needless to say, The House was it, not for the
Infants sake. The Adult of every House, if they Believed being saved, whether
the Parents did Believe or not; so that exclude Infants from being of the
House, and it makes all those grants of Salvation made to the House upon the
Parents believing; such as that to Zacheus, Luke 19.9. This day Salvation is
come to this House, forasmuch as he also is a Son of Abraham. And here to the
Jailor, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy
House, to be superfluous, and insignificant: for the Adult of every House, as
is said before, were saved, if they did Believe, though the Parents believed
not, nor were saved; but no House is said to be saved without the Parents.

Object. But when it is said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall
be saved, and thy House: The meaning is, Thou thy self believing, shall be
saved, and thy House, if they believe; and so respects only the Adult.

Answ. This cannot be the whole meaning, both because no House is said to be
saved without the Parents; and because this excludes Infants from being said
here to be saved, as well as from being said to believe: When therefore it is
said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House.
It is meant of some benefit (that is, to be saved) that shall redound to the
House by the Parents professing to believe; which would not have redounded to
it, if the Parents did not make the profession, which must have respect
principally to the Infant Children, which the Parents have, or shall have
afterward. Genesis 17.7, 8.

Add unto this, that the House was always baptized, when the Parents were
baptized, but not House without the Parents. Thus it is, Lydia, and her
Household, the Jailor and all His, and Crispus with all his House.

Caesar and his Household were not baptized, because some of his Servants were
so, whereas Lydia and Stephanas standing in a nearer relation to theirs, they
being baptized, their House and Household were baptized also, and so all other
Houses said, or that may be said to be baptized; if the Parents, their
Households, but no Household without the Parents, though Parent is sometimes
mentioned, and not the House, and sometimes the House, and not the Parent, 1
Cor. 1.15, 16. Now if when any Parents were baptized, their House, Household,
and all theirs were baptized, unless any of the Adult refused for themselves;
and no House or Household were baptized, where one or both the Parents were not
so, it necessarily supposes some Infants baptized in those baptized Families,
since they that were of Age therein, who were baptized, were baptized upon
their own account.

Object. But some may object; First, that Household and House are not always
said to be baptized with Parents; it is not expressly said, Acts 18.8. that the
House of Crispus was baptized; nor does the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.15. reckon it
amongst those whom he enumerates to have baptized there; so neither is it
expressly said of the House of Cornelius, that it was baptized.

Answ. Be it so; yet so long as it is said of Cornelius, that he feared God
with all his House, Acts 10.2. and had Words sent unto him, whereby he and all
his House should be saved, Acts 11.14. and of Crispus, That he believed in the
Lord with all his House: And that Crispus and Cornelius themselves were
baptized; it is all one as if it had been expressly said, that all their House
were baptized with them. Nay further, though it be not expressly said of
Zaccheus, and that Nobleman, John 4.53. that they were baptized, yet nothing
can be more evident; for though Christ baptized not, yet his Disciples did, and
that as a great part of their Employment during Christ's Abode with them, for
they baptized more than John, John 4.1. Now they baptizing so many, who should
they baptize, if not them? and if them, why not their House and Households? For
if others thus and so qualified were baptized, themselves and theirs,
themselves and all their House, why not these, being qualified after the same
manner, baptized, they, themselves and theirs, themselves and all their House?

Which that they were, is sufficiently confirmed by this, That though it be not
expressly said in any of the Gospels, that the Disciples of Christ baptized any
particular Persons or Households; yet when we come to the Acts of the Apostles,
by whose proceeding then we may see what was their Practice all along before
then, as also 1 Cor. 1.15. we have a clear and particular account not only of
the baptizing of single Persons, but also of the baptizing with Parents, their
House and Households. And this was always taken for granted, else we can assign
no reason why the Apostle instancing in the baptizing of Crispus in the
aforecited 1 Cor. 1.15. names him singly, and mentions not his House; and may
be one reason why the Apostle there says, that he was not sent to baptize, but
to preach the Gospel; namely, because that if he had baptized all that he had
converted, especially where Parents and Households were concerned, it would have
hindered his preaching: But as Christ taught, and his Disciples baptized, so the
Apostles might preach, and others under them sometimes baptize those whom they
had converted. Thus it was at Corinth, when many of the Corinthians, hearing
Paul, believed: and so we may suppose at Jerusalem upon Peter's Sermon, Acts
2.41.

And it is to be observed that when the Apostle Paul gives us the names but of
three which he remembered he had baptized of those many Corinthians, who are
said to believe, Acts 18.8. that of two of them, to wit, Crispus and Stephanas,
it is expressly said, Them and their House; for though in the Corinthians it is
singly Crispus, as is observed before, yet in the Acts it is Crispus with all
his House; and if Gaius was Gaius the Host, which supposes an Household, and
Gaius Paul's Host, which supposes a baptized Household, then the same may be
said of him also.

Object. 2. But House and Household is not always an Hebraism, for Children,
especially Infant-Children; for 1 Cor. 16.15. it is said, Ye know the House of
Stephanas, that it is the First Fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted
themselves to to the Ministry of the Saints: Now Infants could not do this.

Answ. Put House and Parents here asunder, and then none of the House could be
Infants; but as Infants joined with Parents, are said, Jer. 35. to be the
House, and to be spoken to, ver. 2. to answer, ver. 6. and to obey, perform and
do, ver. 8, 10, 14, 16, 18. so Infants may be said to be of the House of
Stephanas, who addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints.

Object. 3. But it is said, John 4.1. That Christ made and baptized more
Disciples than John; now made seems to imply only Adult.

Answ. If by Disciples here be meant only those who did baptize, for Christ
baptized not, but his Disciples, (that is, one another first, and then others)
then they could be none but Adult; but if by Disciples be meant also (as it
must) those who were baptized, then it comprehends those all Men said to come
unto Christ, John 3.26. such as those Multitudes, Mat. 14.13 to 22. amongst
whom many were Children.

Object. 4. But it is said, Acts 8.12. They were baptized, both Men and Women.

Answ. None can restrain these words, Men and Women, to Persons of such an
exact Age; neither because it is said, Men and Women, does it hinder Infants
from being understood also, any more than that saying, Nehem. 8.3. Ezra read
the Law to the Men and Women, and to all that could hear with Understanding,
does hinder that their little ones were some of the Assembly, which that it did
not, is cleared before in page 14, 15. When therefore it is said Men and Women,
the Sense is not, that none but of such an Age, were or may be baptized, but
that there was no distinction of Sex in Baptism, Gal. 3.28.
as there had been in Circumcision; for this, and that the things concerning
the Kingdom of God were preached to them, ver. 12. being Samaritans; and that
thereby Salvation came to their Houses, and that of such was the Kingdom of
God, it was that there was great Joy in the City, ver. 8. And it being Crispus
singly in the Corinthians, which in the Acts is Crispus with all his House, it
is a further Confirmation of this Sense, since Infants may as well be couched
under the terms of Men and Women, as Crispus's Household under his Name.

Object. 5. But what if there were no Infant-Children in the Households of
Lydia, of the Jailor, and of Crispus, how then could there be Infant-Children
there baptized?

Answ. If there were no Infant-Children in the Households of Lydia, of the
Jailor, and of Crispus, they could not be baptized: but then this Objection
seems to grant, that if there were, they were baptized: Now that there were
Infant-Children in those Households, (and none dare say there were not) appears
from these following Considerations.

1. That House, Household, and His, (which are the Words here used) are, as
proved before, when spoken of Persons, an Hebraism, so common and familiar to
express Children by, whether Infants or Adult, that there is none more frequent
and ordinary.

2. That suppose these Households to be without Infant-Children, and one may as
well suppose all the Houses and Households, whose Parents were baptized in those
times, which could not be few, to be without Infant-Children, which is a thing
not to be supposed.

3. That an House being said to believe, to be saved, and to be baptized, where
the Parents are said to believe, to be saved, and to be baptized, and no House
said to believe, to be saved, and to be baptized, but whose Parents are said to
believe, to be saved, and to be baptized, it must be with respect to their
Children, especially their Infant-Children, the Adult being to make Profession
for themselves.

And it being not only the Apostles Peter and Paul, but all the Disciples and
Apostles of Christ who they baptized, that is to say, with Parents, their House
and Household, and no House and Household without the Parents, there can be
nothing more plain, than that it was the Apostolical Practice in baptizing
Parents and their Households, to baptize their Babes and Infants.

Object. 6. But when Christ renewed his Commission for baptizing, Mat. 28.19.
he mentioned not Infants.

Answ. He then mentioned Infants as much as Adult, for he mentioned neither of
them expressly.

Object. 7. But we have fresh Examples of Adult Persons being baptized, not so
of Infants.

Answ. The express Examples of those whom the Disciples and Apostles of Christ
baptized, are of two forts; the One of particular Adult Persons, the Other of
Parents and their House, (for a Man and his House is Parent and House) which
being not only Parents and Adult, but Parent and Infants also, and as to
Baptism especially Infants, as is made good all along before; the baptizing of
Lydia, the Jailor, Crispus, and the like, and their House in conjunction with
them, affords us as express Example of the baptizing of Infants, as of the
baptizing of any Adult therein, and consequently as of the baptizing of any
other adult Persons whatsoever.

Object. 8. But Christ was not baptized in his Infancy, and he knew when
rightly to be baptized.

Answ. This makes nothing against the baptizing of Infants; for as there were
none then to baptize him; so his Baptism being in order to his Ministry, into
which he was not to enter by the Law (which he came to fulfill, Matthew. 5.17.)
till his being about thirty years of Age; he was not to be baptized till he had
accomplished that Age. Besides, it is a Question whether the Baptism by John
the Baptist, and the Baptism of Christ by his Disciples and Apostles, were one
and the same: for tho there be much said for it, and many Instances of
Parallels drawn whereby they are made to seem so, yet if it belonged unto
Christ ministerially to institute and ordain the Sacraments of the New
Testament, and if he could not ministerially do that till he was duly ordained
and admitted into the Function and Office of his public Ministry, which was
not till his Baptism by John, then John's Baptism could not be a
Gospel-Sacrament, and if not a Gospel-Sacrament, then his, and Christ's
Baptism, though they might agree in many other things, could not be one and the
same.

Now as Christ's not being baptized in his Infancy is no Argument against the
baptizing of Infants: so his Baptism, and the Baptism of John not being one and
the same, makes the Name of Baptist an improper distinction for such as profess
the Baptism of Christ; as also that though the Disciples of Christ, who had
Commission from him to baptize, baptized those among themselves into the
Baptism of Christ, who before had been baptized into the Baptism of John, as
appears clearly by comparing John 1.35, 37, 40, etc. with John 4.1, 2. and than
which there is no clearer Proof of their being baptized at all; yet the
rebaptizing of any now is altogether groundless and unwarrantable.

Object. 9. But what benefit of Baptism are Infants capable of more, than they
are capable of the benefit of the Lord's-table? are they not as capable to
receive a small quantity of Bread and Wine, as to be Baptized?

Answ. This is to arraign the Institutions of God, the profit of which, namely,
That of Circumcision, which included Infants, Genesis 17.12. The Apostle resolves
to be much every way, chiefly, because unto them were committed the Oracles of
God, Romans 3.1, 2. It arraigns also the Commands of God mentioned before, Deuteronomy.
31.11, 12, 13. Joel 2.12. And the express practice of the Apostles, who when
they baptized Parents, baptized their House, and Household; not so when they
administered to them the Lord's Supper, it being not there, a man and his House,
but, let a Man examine Himself.

Object. 10. But Churches by means of Poedobaptism become unholy, and unholiest.

If Churches become Unholy by means of Paedobaptism, then by what means did the
Primitive Churches become unholy, with all that unholiness that is charged upon
them in the several Epistles directed to them before, and in the Revelations,
if it was by means of Paedobaptism, then Paedobaptism was in use in those
times; if it was not by means of Paedobaptism, then Churches may become unholy
by some other means. And if History does not wrong the Churches of the
Antipoedobaptists, they have not been so holy as they should have been: Now by
what means came they to be unholy, and unholiest? As for such who being
baptized in their Infancy do not answer the Profession of Faith and of a good
Conscience, whereinto they were baptized, but do afterward make Shipwreck of
that Profession, and persist therein: it had been better for them not to have
known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment once delivered to them; but is no argument, why none but Adult
Persons should be baptized, for these also may make defection, unless we will
confute all experience; and then what way or course may, or ought to be taken
with them upon this occasion, the same may be taken with others upon the like,
and so Christianity and Holiness be preserved and secured in the Churches of
God as much this way, as it is pretended it may be in the other.

But there remains two things yet to be resolved; in resolving of which it will
be proved, That Parents, and Parents only, where they may be had, have right to
present their Children unto God in Baptism.

Quest. 1. The First, how do Infants covenant, and engage to be God's People,
or take Christ to be their Lord in Baptism?

Answ. By their Parents, who having first given their own selves unto the Lord,
are bound to give and dedicate their Children, both Infants and Adult, as their
Seed unto him also: And for this cause it was, that no House was baptized
without the Parents; the Adult covenanting and engaging for themselves, and the
Parents for the Infants; Parents doing of which for their Infants, being as
Joshua, resolving that he and his House would serve the Lord, whilst the
Infants promising by their Parents, is as we may so say, as Levies paying
Tithes in the Loins of Abraham.

And though that may be verified of Infants, when their Parents covenant for them
in Baptism, which Christ said to Peter, What I do thou know not now. Yet
this can be no bar to this practice, that Promise, (but thou shall know
hereafter) being as applicable to them, as it was to him.

And truly, they who go about to dispute themselves and others out of
Infant Baptism by such like Arguments, saying, How do Infants know that their
Parents covenant for them? And how can any after Infancy tell what engagement
lies upon them thereby? may as well say, How do we know who was the Father that
begat us, or the Mother that brought us forth? and so cast off that great
Commandment with Promise, Honor thy Father, and thy Mother.

Quest. 2. The second is, Why then are not Parents, but others required in
their stead, to answer for their Children in Baptism?

Answ. Some have thought, that the requiring of Others, instead of the Parents,
to answer for their Children in Baptism, was not brought into a Canon, till the
Clergy was prohibited Marriage, and it may be so. But waving that the usual
answer is, That however Parents might be chiefly concerned in this at the
first, yet because Parents might be taken away by Death, driven away by
Persecution, or by some other means necessarily detained, when their Children
were to be baptized, the Church might require that Others should appear for
them; by requiring of which, the Church does not exclude any Title which the
Children have by the right of the Parents: for the Sponsors may be supposed to
appear in a threefold capacity. First, as representing the Parents in offering
up the Children unto Baptism, and thereby challenging in their Right. Secondly,
by representing the Children in the Answers that are made in Baptism. Thirdly,
in their own capacity, when they promise to take care of the good Education of
the Children in the Principles of the Christian Faith.

But though this may be done in defect of the Parents, yet that Parents when they
may be had, should be quite justled out by these, who were taken in only to
supply their defects, seems not only to undervalue, but oppose the Wisdom of
the first times, and does too much resemble the setting light by Father and
Mother, complained of Ezekiel. 22.7.

And whereas it is fairly pretended, that though one of the reasons (to wit, the
Persecution of those Times) which made Sureties more necessary in the first
Ages of the Christian Church, has long since ceased; yet that they are
continued for good ends, as (not only to offer up, represent and promise, but)
to covenant on the Childrens behalf, and secure the Church that they may be
brought to Confirmation, and own their Covenant hereafter.

These are Reasons why there should be some Sureties for Infants; but none at
all, why Others rather than the Parents, but altogether on the contrary; for
Parents are not only much more responsible for all those good ends, but are
confessedly those who were chiefly made use of in the first Ages of the
Christian Church, till the Persecution of those Times cut them off. Now if
Persecution was one main thing that afterward hindered Parents, and that it was
a Persecution so to do; why it should be thought a thing expedient in it self
to hinder them now, by still requiring Others in their stead, the reason
ceasing, is very difficult to resolve.

Nor is it so easy and small a matter to be Sponsor, or Surety in this Case,
Eccl. 5.2. to the 8th.
as many it may be make it to be; nor a Charge to be taken so rashly, and
inconsiderately, as we may fear is done by the most. What Parents may do for
their own Children, who are taken into Covenant with them, is one thing; and
what they may do for the Children of Others, who stand not in that relation
with them, is another. Every Christian is obliged more or less, if not as a
Witness, yet as a Monitor, to help each other in their Faith and Manners; but
for any to Covenant with God, to Promise and Vow in the presence of God, and of
his People solemnly assembled, to be such or such an one's particular Christian
Monitor, and in their own capacity to promise as a Surety, to take care of
their good Education in the Principles of the Christian Faith, not being their
Parents, or where the Parents may be had, is a thing of an higher nature, and
not without absolute necessity, to be either required, or undertaken.

And though the use of Sureties should be so early in the Christian Church, as
some pretend, that it is not easy to fix the time of its beginning; or, that it
should be so ancient, as some think, among the Jews; as the time of Isaiah, who
took unto himself Witnesses to record, Isaiah 8.2.

Yet what are Sureties? The time of whose beginning it is not easy to fix, to
those made use of from the beginning. Or what are Witnesses to Sureties? Were
Witnesses anciently Sureties? Or must we use Sureties, because the Prophet took
unto himself Witnesses?

And as to the Reason of the thing: Is it to offer up, dedicate, and devote
Children unto God, (by their Ministry, whose Office it is) and represent them
in Answers to be made in Baptism? Who are more proper for these than the
Parents, whose they are, who are Parties with them, and who must answer in some
respects to God for them?

Is it to Promise, Vow, and Covenant on their behalf? Who are more fit for this
than the Parents themselves, with whom the Covenant is made for themselves and
theirs, and without which, Sureties, and all their promising, vowing, and
covenanting would signify nothing; Children having no right to Baptism, from
the promising, vowing, and covenanting of Others; for so the Children of
Infidels might have right, but as the Parents themselves promise, vow, and
covenant for them: And if other Sureties do challenge but upon the Parents
right, why may not the Parents themselves challenge upon their own?

Is it to undertake for the Childrens good Education in the Principles of the
Christian Faith? who are laid under such strict Commands, bound in such
indispensible Obligations, Psa. 78.5, 6. Prove. 19.18. and 29.27.
charged with that care, and trust, and furnished with those fair and
advantageous opportunities for the discharge thereof, as the Parents? Does not
even Nature it self teach us? And unto whom has God said at any time
concerning the Children of Others, as unto Parents concerning theirs, Thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy House, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6.7. And when the Apostle says, Ye
Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Of whom principally says he this, of the
Fathers of their Flesh, or of some others?

And for the security of the Church, that the Children may be brought to
Confirmation, and own their Covenant; Wherein are the Parents less responsible,
or more insufficient than the Sureties? It is the Parents that God looks after;
and if they bring up their Children for him, do they not bring them up for the
Church? What needs the Church then any other Sureties? Or, wherein is it better
secured by them? As for Sureties, it is well known, that any are generally
accepted of: besides, some do but stand for other Sureties; and some are
Sureties for the Children of several Families: And what more common, than for
the younger sort of Sureties, to be removed into other Habitations and Abodes?
And for those of greater years, to have Charges of their own, sufficient to
take up all their care and endeavors? Moreover, are not Families very often
flitting, and changing their Dwellings? How then, it may be again asked, Is the
Church more or better secured by Sureties, than it would be by Parents? whose
Security, was it taken, would be something; whereas that of Sureities is,
besides the uncertainty of it, usually but in complement, having a Form of
Godliness, but little or nothing of the Power of it; so that if it should be
demanded, What advantage, as to these things, has the Church? Or, what profit
is there by them unto the Parents, or their Children? Or, what Glory unto God?
it would be hard to say, Much every way. Besides, is not Filthiness and
Uncleanness hereby covered and masked? which it may be hoped would be shamed
out, if Parents only were required personally to present their Infants.

To sum up All: Are any proper and competent to represent the Children of
others, to offer them up in Baptism unto God, to promise therein for their
virtuous and religious Education, to covenant with God for them, secure the
Church, and receive the Charge and Exhortation given in their behalf? and must
they not be much more proper and competent for their own? Or, if they be not
proper and competent for their Own, how come they to be proper and competent
for the Children of Others?

Yet this hinders not, but that Others may hand Children from the Parents to
the Minister; or stand as Witnesses of their Baptism; so they proceed not to
serve in things appertaining to the Parents.

For the Service and Worship of God requiring personal Attendance, and it not
being in the power of any to require the performance of one Man's Religious
Duty of another; or of one Man, to perform another Man's Religious Duty for
him. So that if any should require One man to go to the Church, serve God,
partake of the Lord's Supper for another; Or, if any should pretend that he
does all these things, by another's doing it for him, it would be nothing. Even
so to offer up, devote, and dedicate Children unto God in Baptism, to Covenant
for them, and therein solemnly to promise and vow the Religious Education of
them, all which are part of the Christian Religion, and Divine Worship, is no
discharge to the Parents, whose Part and Duty it is, let them pretend what they
will of doing it by others, unless they themselves do perform it. And therefore
that Parents should be required and necessitated to do it by others, or it must
not be done at all, when they themselves may do it, is a matter that deserves
the most serious consideration of those who challenge not a dispensing or
infallible Power.

If any should think that Parents therefore may not answer, promise, vow or
covenant for their Children in Baptism, because this would be to serve God for
them.

It follows not: For when Parents answer, promise, vow and covenant in their
Childrens Name, they do not perform their Childrens Duty for them, but thereby
engage them to it, and perform their own: And so far as the Parents Act of
giving up, and dedicating their Children unto God in a way of Covenant, and
therein answering for them, is a Work of Necessity and Mercy, it is no more a
performing of their Childrens Duty, or a serving of God for them, than praying
to God for them, or being their Mouth to God in Praise, is.

To conclude; Since Suretiship, and making Vows for others, is no light and
easy matter; that this for Children, being in things of the greatest moment,
and unto God who will not be mocked, is none of the meanest; and that it is not
in our Power to substitute one for another, or others in our stead to serve God
for us, nor safe to trifle with sacred things: how well would it be if that
Suretiship, which is founded upon Covenant-Right, accommodated with the
greatest Advantages, most expedient in it self, most competent for all the good
Ends of Suretiship, most unquestionable, and which was from the beginning, to
wit the Parental, was always required; unto the discharge of which, if such,
whose Ministerial Calling and Emploiment it is, would superadd their Endeavors
by a frequent assisting of the Parents upon all convenient Occasions,
remembering them always, that he is not a Christian which is one outwardly,
(Romans 2.28, 29.) neither is that Baptism which is outward in the Flesh; but he
is a Christian which is one inwardly, and Baptism is that of the Heart in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God: How
useful might this be, and more religious, than for them, waving the Parents, to
bind heavy Burdens and grievous to be born, and lay them on other Men's
Shoulders, and they themselves not move them with one of their Fingers?

Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant us to be like-minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus; that we may with one Mind and one Mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Romans 15.5, 6.

Amen.
FINIS.
An Appendix.
AS to Christ his being baptized when 30 Years Old, at the beginning of his
Ministry, (mentioned here page 26.) and also about the Differences and
Agreements of Christ his Baptism and John's, let the inquisitive Reader peruse
and pause upon those brief, but excellent touches hereupon, which that diligent
Reader of the Sacred Scriptures, Mr. Samuel Clark, has lately given us, in his
Notes on Matthew. III. 6, 16. Tho I confess that Christ's Plea for his being
baptized by John, [Thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness] I cannot yet
say that I understand it in its utmost reach and force to my full satisfaction.
That Christ was bound to (and so must) fulfill the Law of Moses, and John's
Prophetic Mission, and the whole Law of Mediation which his Father laid him
under, and he so voluntarily obliged himself unto, admits no Doubt, and needs
no Proof: But what particular Law Christ here respected as to this Instance, I
cannot say I yet fully know.

As to Sponsors, (Godfathers and Godmothers) 1. Let them be serious, and
devoted Persons unto God and Christ, themselves. 2. Capable of Receiving, and
likely and willing to fulfill this Trust. And, 3. then appear and stand as the
Substitutes and Representatives of Absent Parents through Necessity; or
Proparents, where Parents are dead, or manifestly give their Children wholly to
them; or, as in Conjunction and Concurrence with the Parents, for the more
effectual Christian Education of the baptized Children. And then less may be
said against them, and more for them than otherwise. And then their Testimony
will be more credible, that Persons offering their Seed to God, are such as
very probably have a right thereto. That the Persons offered are baptized; and
that in case the Parents die, or deny the Faith, or prove grossly negligent as
to the performance of their Trust, care will yet be taken about the fit
Christian Education of their baptized Seed. But why Parents (where they can)
should not Solemnly and Personally offer their own natural Seed to God, and
personally profess and promise, I know not: Seeing this renews their Christian
Profession, reinforces their Christian Obligations and Advantages upon
themselves; hands down the Essentials of Christianity from Age to Age; calls
other Parents to reflect upon themselves as to their Christian Advantages,
Performances, and Concerns; and quickens all the Baptized to their Work and
Hope. I will not vouch for every Word and Thing in this, or any mere humane
Book; but I think it no lost time or labor to read this small Tract.

M. S.

Mr. Joseph Whiston has published these Treatises about this Subject, viz.
1. INfant Baptism from Heaven, and not of Men; or a moderate Discourse
concerning the Baptism of the Infant Seed of Believers. 2. Infant Baptism from
Heaven, and not of Men, the 2d Part: Or, an Answer to Mr. Danvers's Treatise of
Baptism. Wherein Infants Right to Baptism is further confirmed. 3. An Essay to
revive the Primitive Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, in the Resolution
of Four Questions. 1. What are the Reasons of God's appointing the Token of his
Covenant to be applied to the Infant Seed of his People. 2. What is the Good or
Benefit they receive thereby. 3. What is the Duty of Parents toward their
Children, as bearing the Token of the Covenant. 4. What is (...) Improvement
that Children, as grown up to Years of M^rity, may and ought to make of the
Token as applied to them in their Infancy. 4. Infant Baptism plainly proved. A
Discourse wherein certain Select Arguments for Infant Baptism, formerly
syllogistically handled, are now abbreviated, and reduced to a plain Method for
the Benefit of the Unlearned. With a large Epistle to the Pious and Learned
among the Antipaedobaptists, especially the Authors of the late Confession of
their Faith. 5. A brief Discourse concerning Man's natural proneness to, and
tenaciousness of Errors. Whereunto are added, some Arguments to prove, That
that Covenant entered with Abraham, Genesis 2.7. is the Covenant of Grace. 6. The
Right Method for the proving of Infant Baptism. With some Reflections on some
late Tracts against Infant Baptism.
All sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Church-Tard.
Together with several other Treatises in Defense of Infant Baptism, by Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Wills, Mr. Barret, etc.

An ADVERTISEMENT. December. 2. 1689.
THere is newly Published, A Large Folio Bible of a fair new Roman Letter, with
Annotations, and Parallel Scriptures or References (some Thousands more than
are in the Cambridg, Oxford, or any London Bibles yet extant.) To which is
annexed, The Harmony of the Gospels: As also a Reduction of the Jewish Weights,
Coins, and Measures, t^ our English Standard: And a Table of the Promises in
Scripture.

By Mr. SAMUEL CLARK.

In ^e entire Volume, containing Three hundred twenty five Sheets in Good Demi
Paper.

Proposed By the Booksellers undermentioned on these Terms, viz.

I. He that Buys only one Book, to pay Twenty five Shillings Unbound. II. He
that Buys Six Books, shall have a Seventh Gratis, which reduces the Price to a
Guinea Unbound.
Which Terms are to continue until the First of May next: But after that, no
Seventh Book will be allowed, nor a single Book Sold under Twenty seven
Shillings Unbound.

By Richard Chiswel and Jonathan Robinson in St. Paul's Churchyard.

And by Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhill.


