AN EXPOSITION OF Ecclesiastes, OR, The Preacher.

The Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding; Job 32. 8. The things of
God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God, by which he reveal's them; 1 Cor. 2.
10, 11. The Spiritual Man discern's all things; v. 15. If I pleased Men, I
should not be the Servant of Christ; Gal. 1. 10. LONDON, Printed in the Year,
1680. Sold by Samuel Lee, at the Feathers in Lombard Street, near Pope's Head
Alley.



CHAP. I.
Verse. I. The words of the Preacher, the Son of David, King of Jerusalem.
THIS Book (written by King Solomon, about the fourtieth year of his Reign, and
last of his Life, Anno (...), 3030) is called, in Greek, Ecclesiastes; in
Hebrew, Choheleth; both signifying, a caller unto (or a gatherer together of)
Men, to declare to them the words of God's Wisdom, relating to their
everlasting blessedness. This is the proper work of the infallible Spirit of
Christ, in himself and Saints, Pro. 1. 20-23. and 8. 1, -9. This living
Creature-Word and Wisdom of God, is called the Beginning, in and by which, God
created the Heaven and the earth, Genesis 1. 1. The purely divine Form of God, did
(by way of emanation or generation, not properly creation) produce that Supreme
Creature-form of him, in personal Union with it self, from everlasting, as it
self tells us, Prove. 8. 22, 23. This became his fitted Hand, by which, to
Create the World, as also to mediate between mere creaturality in Angels and
Men, when made, and the single infinite Divinity. This fountain
Creature-Spirit, is, by Divine Authority, called God, and asserted to be the
immediate Creator of all things, John 1. 1, - 3. Col. 1. 15, 16. Yea, the Man
Christ, as the polished Shaft in this hand of God (ready to be sent forth in
due time) is said to be him by whom God made the Worlds ( Heb. 1 -- 3.) Natural
and Spiritual, by a first and second Creation. He gave an Immortality of Being,
not of Life, to Angels and Men, by the First: but true Life and Immortality are
brought to light, and set up in them, only, in and by the Second. The First was
a mortal Law-life; the Second is an everlasting Gospel-Life, 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Whoever fall short of Christ's Gospel-life (as all do, that finally refuse to
part with their fading Law-life, by a holy obedient death of their own Spirit
and Nature) fall short also of the glory of God, never come to see and enjoy
the divine glory, as Coheirs, with Christ, of God. This living, creating,
preaching Word and Creature-Wisdom of God, is the supreme receaver, and
infallible declarer of the whole counsel of the divine Mind, relating to Angels
and Men. The words of this living Word, will prosper in the thing, whereto
sent, the Eternal Life or Death of the obedient (...), or willful rejecters
thereof, Isa. 55. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. God effectually makes obedient
submitters to, and receivers of it. Wicked Men and Angels make themselves
willful haters, final refusers, and incorrigible enemies thereof, Hos. 13. 9.
In this supreme Creature-being, the original Creature-Book and living Word of
God, did all things consist, or stand up together, in a Radical existence,
before brought forth in their actual subsistencies, by Creation. In this Book
were all our Members written, when, as yet, there was none of them. Our
substance was not hid from God, but seen by him, together with all we shall
ever come to be, or do; and all, he will do with us, to all eternity, Psalm.
139. 15, 16. Seen and known to him were all the works of his hands, and all the
works of those works, Men and Angels, toward him, before their actual
Production or personal Individuation: Yea, before their said radical
Existence. There are no Futurities to His infinite Understanding. All things,
past, present, and to come, were ever present to him. The Supreme
Creature-Spirit, Word, and Wisdom of God, is called Man, as also are Angels,
both good and bad. The man Gabriel, that appeared to Daniel, Zachary and Mary,
( Dan. 9. 21. Luke 1. 19. and verse. 26, 27.) was this Creature-Spirit in the
Mediator. Good Angels, also, have been frequently represented as, and called
Men, Genesis 18. 2. and other Scriptures. Evil Angels also, are called Men of sin,
Sons of Perdition, in and with their Luciferian Head, 2 These. 2. 3. By the
communicated Spiritual Light of the Man Christ, to Angels and Men, can either
of them, under and with him, become true seers of God, in his divine and
creature-glories, so as to be true Preachers, and rightly qualified Declarers
of his divine and spiritual Things or Truths. Such a Seer of God was Solomon
the Preacher and Writer of this Book. And in the same Light, in which a Seer of
the things of God, was he enabled, infallibly to see and declare the Vanity of
all first-creation Life and Goodness, and the never-fading Glories and
excellencies of the Second. In the all-penetrating Spirit of true Prophecy, did
he see the deep things of Gods divinity, and the natural and spiritual things
of the first and second Creation, what each amounted to. So could (...), with
other awakened spiritual Saints, infallibly prophesy or foretell what will
become of any Men or Angels to Eternity (as found rebelliously fixing in their
first-creation Life and State of Vanity, or obediently surrendering it for the
second) in Eternal Life or Death. In this true spirit of Prophecy, did Solomon
(with his Father David, and other Saints) find out and set in order many right
words, words of Truth, given from one Shepherd, Eccl. 12. 10, 11. The spirit of
the Lord, the rock of Israel, spoke to and by David. His Word, says he, was in
my tongue, 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3. Such words only as the Holy Ghost teaches, words
of Gods wisdom, show the way of salvation, and of scaping damnation. Such words
only show those glorious things, God has, in everlasting love, provided for
Saints; and the dreadful amazing things, he has, in everlasting wrath,
prepared for incorrigible sinners; neither of which, can the Eye, Ear, Heart,
or Understanding of natural Man or Angel, take any right measure or notice of.
Man and Angel, in the utmost wisdom of their own nature, are bounded with
first-creation vanities, for Object; of which number, its very self is; and
they, therein. When viewed in the infallible Light, and weighed in the just
Balance of Gods new creation Sanctuary-Spirit, they will all be found lighter
than vanity. t. The Son of David, King of Jerusalem. So, a Type of the Man
Christ (as Son of the great and originally unchangable Creature-spirit of the
Mediator) the true King of his New-Jerusalem Saints; set up, by God, on his
holy Hill of Zion, Psalm. 2. 6. John 5. 22. 27. Act. 17. 31, etc.

Verse. II. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher; Vanity of vanities; all is
vanity.
The doubling of the words, Vanity of vanities, is emphatical, more strongly
asserting this irrefragable Truth, That vain are all things in the
first-creation world, or natural state of Men and Angels. This says the
Preacher, Solomon, as turning from his own Wisdom or Understanding, and owning
the Holy Ghost (or New Creature, Gospel Spirit of Christ) in him, the sole
dictating Author of this Book. Vanity of Vanities, in the Hebrew manner of
expressing, signifies most vain, in the superlative degree? Man, at his best
estate, (and so, Angel, at his best, before the Fall of either) were altogether
Vanity, (Psalm. 39. 5.) and since the Fall, are they worse, lighter then Vanity
it self, less then nothing, Psalm. 62. 9. Isa. 40. 17. Neither of them had, at
first, any durable Life, Wisdom, (...), Glory, nothing but what was mortal,
perishable, and vanishing. All was but a fading Flower of the first-creation
Field, or World. The utmost growth, beauty, flourish and fruitfulness of the
corruptible seed of God's left hand planting in them by a first-creation, is no
more or better. And all their best desires, births, fruits, thoughts or actions
therein, are vanity; can never exceed the fading nature and title of the root,
whence they spring; the fleshly Tree of good and evil, on which they grow. All
visible things, Glory, Riches, Power, (together with the litteral Sun, that
produces and renders the rest, visible) are but Vanity of vanities, shadows of
shadows, to wit, of the intellectual (...) Sun, the first-covenant Spirit,
with all the inward mystical riches, (...), wisdom, righteousness, glories and
excellencies produced thereby, in the natural first-creation state of Man or
Angel, at best. The most excellent births, fruits, performances, or works of
Righteousness, brought forth and done, but under the impregnating and
fructifying influence of the first-covenant Spirit, and so, of Christ therein,
as a fleshly Bridegroom to them; all these still, are but Vanity, or vanishing
shadows of spiritual, heavenly, eternal, substantial things or truths, durable
riches, everlasting life, food and clothing; the glory that excells and remains
for ever, in the New Creation state of Man or Angel. All Is but the Life and
Image of the earthly, in the Spirit of Nature; not of the heavenly, in the
new creature Spirit of Grace. The life, wisdom, form of godliness,
righteousness of Man or Angel, in their own nature, as at first created, were
real, but not true, in a Scripture-sense. All are but shadows of the
everlasting Life, power of Godliness, wisdom and righteousness of God, in the
New Creation, or Second Covenant. Holy flesh; cleansed, righteous nature (and
so, the common or general Salvation all men are capable, since the Fall, of
being restored into, by the Redeemer) is but a shadow of true holiness,
special, everlasting salvation, in God's holy New Creature spirit of Grace and
Truth. True godliness; the mystery, the power of godliness; true or everlasting
Life, Salvation, and blessedness; the Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God,
in his New Covenant spirit of Grace, none of these true things were possessed
by any Angel or Man, in the Primitive unstained purity of their (...), by the
first-creation. All these true things of God were represented to them all, in
the Tree of true Life, by way of Object, as what God had in reserve, to bestow
upon them, by a new creation; on their obedient surrender and parting with that
mortal Life and State, they received by the first. God calls what he gave them,
by the first-creation, their own; their life, wisdom, righteousness, etc. What
he offers them by a new creation, he calls his own; his life, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. All men, that Satan can bring to savor only the natural
things of Man or Angel, and never at all, the spiritual, new creature things of
Christ and God ( Mat. 16. 23.) are fixed with him in unchangable enmity to God.
The New Creature Life and things, God calls his own, are transcendently
superior to Man's own, as the Litteral Heavens are above the Earth. The
duplication of this Hebrew superlative, the double Outcry or Proclamation,
here, implies the absolute certainty and great importance of the assertion, as
also that Solomon would have the thing here proclaimed, understood as the sum
or compend of this whole Book, which he explains by degrees, in the various
parts thereof. What he, indistinctly, and as in a transport, cries out of as
Vanity of vanities, he begins to lodge and fix his meaning in, saying, All is
vanity. And this (All) yet, as somewhat indistinct, is (after) limited within
its due bounds, yet allowed its full extent and circumference, over and over,
in this first Chapter. All things under heaven, under the sun, all earthly,
mortal life and goodness, received by Man or Angel, in their first-creation;
all below what is heavenly, spiritual, and everlasting, in and by the second,
are vanity, or vanishing, perishing things, however good in their kind; and
useful in their place. This fixes and compleats this leading Proposition and
Foundation of the ensuing Discourse. All visible things under the litteral Sun
(depending on its influence, as a concurring second Cause of their Production
and Preservation, and rendered visible by its light) and then, all the invisible
things of Man and Angel, all the Life, Wisdom, Righteousness, Excellencies,
Glories, and all the Desires, Thoughts and Operations of their invisible,
immortal spirits, under the mystical first-creation Sun, or first-covenant
spirit of nature in the Mediator, all these things are comprehended under the
title, Vanity. All their counsels, studies, purposes and contrivances for true
happiness, within the compass, and in the single activity of that natural
state, or life, life and all, all is Vanity. Vanity is written out upon Tree
and Fruit, Root and Branch, Principle and Operations, throughout, in that state
of both. The infallible new creature spirit of true Prophecy, declares this,
concerning all the goodness, life or (...), found in the old, natural,
first-creation state of Angel and Man. This Spirit, in Christ and awakened
spiritual Saints, can prophesy or certainly foretell, what will become of any
man (as finally rejecting or complying with its reproofs of Death on his own
spirit of Nature, and instructions of Life, in God's Spirit of Grace) in
Eternal Life or Death. This New Creature spirit of Life and true Prophesy, is
below the infinite Divinity, but transcendently above all natural,
first-creation Life and Things, in Man or Angel. Paul, in all the Light,
Wisdom, and Righteousness of his restored naturalls ( Phil. 3. 4, 6.) Was
exceedingly mad against Christ's Gospel Truths and Saints, Acts 26. 11. What
work then is Man (though wise, strong, and honorable in Christ, (1 Cor. 4.
10.) as to (...)-covenant seize) like to make of it at Gospel, or showing
the true way of Salvation? God knows all the Thoughts of man, in his highest
wisdom, to be (...), 1 Cor. 3. 20. All purely divine things, the deep things of
God; and all spiritual, heavenly, new creation things, lie clear out of the
reach of all single natural understanding of man or angel, 1 Cor. 2. 9-14.
Their vain wisdom has nothing but Vanity, for its immediately discernable
Object. If we extend this, all is Vanity, beyond the sphere of natural, to
divine or spiritual creature-things, we blaspheme. If we narrow or confine its
significancy to mere visible outward naturals, and call the upper sort of
Vanities (the invisible excellencies of natural Man or Angel) Spiritual, we
blaspheme also, by thrusting them into the room, and giving them the Title of
the New Creation things of God. Flesh and Spirit, natural and Spiritual, in
Scripture, are the distinguishing characters of all natural first-creation life
and things thereof, in Angel or Man; and of the things of God, in the second.
To reckon, with the young man, the Corinthians, and Laodiceans, that when full,
rich, wise, strong, and honorable, in the restored first-covenant Law-life of
our own nature, we need nothing ( Rev. 3. 17.) as to Eternal Life, we shall
find our selves so far mistaken, that indeed we want every thing, and must part
with all we have, for that every thing. Neither Uncircumcision, nor
Circumcision, corrupt nor righteous Nature, holy or unholy flesh and blood,
signifies any thing, as to eternal Life, or our entering the Kingdom of God,
but that we be New creatures; have spiritual, new creation Life, about us. If
true Righteousness and Salvation were to be found or had in the Law-Life, or
first-covenant, first-creation state, no need of Gospel, or a new covenant Life
by the Second, Heb. 8. 7.

If the natural life of Angel and Man, set up in both, by the first-creation,
had bin immortal, unchangable, eternal, every one of them had infallibly bin
saved. And, if but mortal, and no more excellent life and things had bin
prepared by God, to bestow upon them, by a new and second-creation of them, not
one of them could ever have bin saved. All had infallibly perished, for ever.
None will now so perish, but such as finally refuse to part with and lose their
fading life and things, in the first creation, for Gods everlasting
creature-life, wisdom, righteousness, and glory, in the second. Miss but the
true extent and bounds of the word all, in this saying, all is vaniry, and we
miss all, as to the main scope and design of this Book. That all visible,
outward things are vanishing shadows, the common light of reason, in heathens,
can declare. But, the reputed orthodox wisdom of man, in the glory of a
restored first-covenant righteous life, is the Arch-heretick in the main point,
when peremptorily asserting the invisible natural excellencies he is possessed
of, to be spiritual. For so, he perfectly excludes the true spiritual things of
Christ and God, and shuts up the kingdom of Heaven (Mat. 23. 13.) excludes all
the truths or things thereof, out of his doctrine. Then, the whole counsel of
God, about the salvation of man is counted foolishnes and madness, by him. Where
will man be, when God is Judge himself? The Heavens will declare his
Righteousness (Psalm. 50. 6.) not Man's, to be that which qualifies any for
entrance into his Kingdom. A most dismal conclusion, will the self-confident
Disputers of this World, against God, and all his things, in the next, come to.
When their Consciences are opened, all their mouths will be stopped. They Will
have nothing to say. All Words of Man's wisdom about the things of God, are
most false and Heretical. They assert those to be the things of God, which are
not; and utterly deny those that are. All Man's Doctrines, Reasons or
Arguments, Uses, Motives, etc. amount to but the persuasive words of his
foolish wisdom, to establish his hearers in a direct contrariety to God's.
All Is but the gingling confused noise of tinckling Cymbals, giving no certain
sound, as to what is pleasing to God, or wherein to resist the Devil. They
labor to keep off any the least word of a true tendency this way. This work
are multitudes of blind leaders and their followers at, sporting themselves in
their own deceivings, as to the grand concern of both. Any word, toward the
opening the Kingdom of Heaven, they reckon the arrantest Heresy in the World.
All this, from want of a right owning the distinction of first creation
vanities and shadows (in the full extent and comprehensiveness of this, All is
vanity) from spiritual, new creation Substances and Truths. All that is natural
is Vanity, and so, the subject on which the Cross, or spiritual Sword of
Christ, falls; it must dye, in every Angel and Man, as brought upon them in
love or wrath, whether on obedient Saints, or incorrigible sinners. Job was
amazed to see his restored humane Excellencies, smitten by the Cross. And his
three mistaking Friends were amazed to find his Spirit, as to all the natural
wisdom, restored life and excellencies thereof, lie a bleeding under the
friendly death-wounds of Christ's spiritual Sword. To (...) Jobs Body,
Children, and outward concerns only, all that was struck at, by the Cross, is
to miss the principal scope and intent of that Book. So, to miss the full
extent of the All that is vanity, here, is to miss the main design of this. All
that so state Job's Case, miss the main design of God's Love, which was thereby
accomplished upon him, for his Salvation; and the main design of the Devils
wrath, for his final destruction, which was not accomplished, nor could be. A
parallel mistake of this leading word, here, All is Vanity, will gravel the
utmost wisdom of the most soaring, (...) undertaker, in the wisdom of man, to
interpret this Book. He will never border upon, or come near the design of it,
which is, to undeceive men in their pursuit after true happiness, which all
implicitly desire, but millions unalterably hate that Life, wherein it does
consist. Man gad's abroad, to change his way, in a vast heap of perishing
vanities, first-creation desireables, delights of the sons of men; and wholly
misses all those substantial new creation things or truths which are the
delights of the Sons of God. Thus does Man labor for, and seek after true
happiness, under a perfect and absolute impossibility, of ever (...) it. Man,
in all possible variety of condition, within the compass of his first-creation
make (...) never gets out of, or surmounts the sphere of Vanity. Vanity (...)
writ upon all he is, has, can think, speak, or do, therein. Root and Branch,
Tree and Fruit, Principles and Performances; all is Vanity Why, then

Verse. III. What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the
Sun?
What remains to a man, after dead, of all his labor in this world? read's the
Chaldee. Nothing. How dies the Wise man? As the fool: the righteous? as the
wicked; both perish, for ever. The highest righteousness of man gives him no
Title to the Kingdom of God. And where then must he be? Nothing of his fading,
mystical, inward Riches or Glory, as well as outward, shall descend after him,
or remain with him; Psalm. 49. 17. Praised he was of men (verse. 18.) and liked
himself passing well, as truly blessed, but will find he never had the praise
and approbation-Seal of God (as truly good in his sight) or any thing
conducible to true blessedness. Man blesses the covetous heapers up of inward
or outward perishing Riches, whom the Lord abhors ( Psalm. 10. 3.) as they,
him, and his true. What profit then can man expect of all his labor under the
Sun, in but a first-covenant Life and Righteousness? Nothing below the Holy
Ghost, or new creature constant, right, steady Spirit ( Psalm. 51. 10.) and
principle of everlasting righteousness, signifies any thing, as to his true
salvation. When he reckons he has all, he has nothing of durable life, riches,
food, or clothing, but is wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked. The
wisdom of self-confident man, misses the design and principal intendment of
God, in the whole Scripture. To preach up the righteousness of man, in the
first-covenant-law, is good, in its kind. But, to assert this, to be an
everlasting Gospel-life, or state of true salvation, is the highest evil; the
very doctrine, Satan preached to Eve. Ye shall not dye at all; the Life ye have
in the first-creation (that is but natural) is eternal. This is Man's and
Satan's accursed other Gospel, handed to men, with great confidence, in the
words of their twisted humane and Serpentine wisdom's. To establish and warrant
men in their own righteousness, holy flesh, for salvation, is the very doctrine
of devils. It Is a setting up of Man and Angel, in their spirit of Nature,
against God's Spirit of Grace and Truth. All, that finally persist in this
Doctrine and way, in stead of the Saints everlasting rest, will (...) the Lake
of fire and brimstone, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Enmity to God and
his Gospel Spirit, is inseparable from the restored first-covenant life of the
Law, in man; yea, gets strength, courage, credit, and great authority, by the
coming of the command, or fresh setting up that lost life, in him, by the
Redeemer; as Paul found; Romans 7. While then men are heaping up riches, and
reckon they are doing well to themselves, there, so as to despise the riches of
God's goodness, they are treasuring up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath. Their, moth-eaten, cankred, rusty, corruptible Riches, mystical as well
as litteral, will testify against them, in God's day, for trusting in them in
their day, on earth, against all his faithful warnings, to the contrary, Jam.
5. 1-3.

Verse. IV. One generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the
earth abides for ever.
Eternity and Immutability are the requisite Adjuncts of that, wherein man's
true felicity consists. He must look for it in things Eternal, or never find
it. And these are not seen by natural understanding, 2 Cor. 4. 18. The litteral
sense of these words, is evident to the common understanding, and universal
experience of mankind. The spiritual, is a mystery to the highest wisdom of the
most enlightened, righteous party of men, in but their own single spirit of
nature, short of spiritual light. Man, therein, esteems and values only the
cleans'd (...), rich and fruitful mystical House or Land of his own Nature, as
that which will continue for ever: So, desires it may be called by his own
Name. This is the inward thought of the wise, rich, and full first-covenant
Saint, in his holy (...), the sandy-foundation'd building, though he see such
holy, wise men perish, as well as brutish fools, in the corrupt life of nature,
Psalm. 49. 10. 11. Man's calling his Lands, or outward possessions, by his own
Name, is the litteral shadow of this mystical folly. Yet, (...) posterity
approve (...) sayings (verse. 13.) steer the same course, do the same things,
and so, generation after generation, go to the same (...) of (...) and death,
where they never see Light, verse. 19. Through the unsuspected wiles of the old
Serpent, are new raw stagers (...), one after another, in the fame (...). They
reject the voice and instructions of true Wisdom, as the greatest folly. They
say to true Seers, see not, prophesy not unto us right things. They hate the
Lord's Prophets, as Ahab, Micajah; embrace Satan's, with their smooth words of
deceit, Isa. 30. 9, 10. Thus one generation of visible Saints, in holy flesh,
after another, passes away into the same dismal end, eternal death, as found,
from first to last, a serpentine generation of vipers, fixed in enmity to Gods
holy spirit. They say they are true spiritual Jews; but Christ says, they are
of the synagogue of satan. Rev. 3. 9. This generation passes away, and, yet
passes not away (Mat. 24. 3, 4.) though always passing. How So? Why, new
comers into this world, still keep up the old Trade, the same spirit,
Principles and Persuasions, all along Satan's reign, from the beginning to the
ending thereof. A fresh supply of new Teachers and Hearers, carry on Satan's
work, to their own eternal ruin. t. But the Earth abides for ever; That is,
Man's and Angels immortal Spirits, in the earthy, leaky, first-creation make
thereof. All of them, that refuse to have that first-creation building taken
down (in order to become new Bottles or Vessels, by Christ's new creation
workmanship, fitted to hold the new-wine, or Spirit of his Kingdom) do, through
the immortality of their beings, become the subjects of God's unchangable
wrath, for their unchangable enmity to him, by which they have made themselves
Vessels of dishonor and everlasting contempt. This is such recompense of their
error, as is meet, even the vengeance of Eternal Fire, ( Romans 1. 27. Jude 7.)
on mystical, more than litteral Sodom, Mat. 11. 24. All that yield up all,
received in the first-creation, to be filled and clothed with the everlasting
life and righteousness of the second, become Vessels of honor, glory,
immortality, and eternal Life.

Verse. V. The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to (or
pants aster) his place, where he arose.
The litteral Sun, that has a causal influence on all the visible parts of this
World, is vanity. It Is restless in its motion and revolution, direct and
periodical. And this, yet, is but a shadow of the invisible first-creation Sun,
the first-covenant-spirit of the Law, under which Men and Angels were created,
and Christ himself, in our flesh, was made, Gal. 4. 4. Under and by the causal
influence of this, in Christ's Person, as a fleshly-bridegroom, to
first-covenant Saints, in holy flesh, are all such righteous fruits and works
brought forth and done, as have bin found in a restored enlightened sort of
Professors and People, since the fall; or, in Man and Angels, before the Fall.
This mystical first-creation Sun, is yet but a shadow, or figure of the
sevenfold (and seventy times sevenfold) brighter spiritual, intellectual,
new creation Sun of everlasting righteousness, the Holy Ghost or new covenant,
new creature spirit, in Christ's person, of which all new-creatures are born,
and under the cherishing influence thereof, enabled to bring forth fruits unto
God, in a newness of Life. All, thus brought under this Law of the spirit of
Life, are made new Bottles, Vessels of honor, and eternal Life; and no other.
This is the Sun, Mal. 4. 2. Through this most glorious creature-Sun, in the
Mediator, as the (...) Chrystaline Medium, or transparent Sea of Glass ( Rev.
4. 6.) does the infinite glory of the divine Sun shine forth for ever, with
safety (in a modifying mixture and allay) on blessed Saints and Angels, which,
in its single infinite brightness, would overset and consume them, Heb. 12. 29.
Only the original creature-sun or spirit that is in personal union with the
infinite divinity, can behold and enjoy the divine Sun or Spirit, in its
immediate brightness. This supreme creature-vail on it, is the absolutely
necessary means of unvailing it, or leting it down, with safety, to all
meer-created beings, Angels or Men, in their highest spiritual capacities and
understandings. On this account, and in this sense, will Christ be a Mediator
between God and them, to all Eternity. The litteral and mystical Sun of the
first-creation, will set, and come to a final period. Then will all the flowers
of that field, litteral or mystical, wither, fade away, and come to nothing, as
to all the perishing beauty and goodliness thereof. But, the Word of God (the
new creation Gospel-Sun of righteousness) will abide for ever, upon all the
blessed Inhabitants of the true Mount Sion, Isa. 40. 6-8. 1 Pet. 1. 23-25. On
the first sin of Man, against God, and his Creature-Sun of everlasting
Righteousness, did Christ withdraw the mystical first-creation Sun; causing
it to go down, set or disappear to all mankind; taking from them what they had,
and so leaving them in darkness and death, dead in trespasses and sins. Then,
as Redeemer, does Christ cause this Sun to rise upon them again, for the fresh
enlightening of every man that comes into the world, more or less ( Joh. 1. 9.)
with rational, first-covenant light, against which if they sin, it accuses; if
they obey it, it excuses them, Romans 2. 15. This is the Light, or Law of
rational nature, in all men. By this Light, are men showed the way for a
returning toward the righteous life, they were, at first, created in; which is
called, a making straight (in the desert of their barren, fallen state) a high
way for their God ( Isa. 40. 3.) a setting their first-creation House or State,
in order, again. But, this done, and Man growing up into a fruitful,
flourishing posture herein (the ruling intellectual powers, and ruled sensual,
each performing their duty, in rightly commanding and obeying) still, still,
this very mystical Sun, or first-covenant-spirit (under the quickening,
enlivening and fructifying influence whereof, all this is done) will, according
to its orderly appointed motions and revolutions, with the litteral Sun, be
withdrawn again, go down, set, and disappear from them. Christ, as a
fleshly-Bridegroom or Husband to them, will depart and leave them, so as never
to shine upon them, more, there. All then, that do not timely, and obediently
surrender and part with all the life, fruitfulness, and comforts, they have
found under his influence, as the first-covenant Sun of Righteousness (in order
to receive from him that newness of life, in which to be married to him as
risen from the dead, and bring forth fruits unto God Romans 7. 1-4. under the
influence of his new-covenant-spirit) will be found (on the setting of the
former mystical Sun) in a total darkness and death; a Nightstate, in which no
man can work righteousness, more, for ever.

Verse. VI. The Wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North;
it whirleth about continually; and the wind returns again, according to his
circuits.
Here Is another teaching, instructing similitude, fetched from the litteral
wind. Christ, in his first and second covenant spirits (not unfitly represented
by the North and South Wind) does powerfully breath and blow upon the spirits
of men, in the actual distributions of the one, and convincing discoveries of
the other. This mystical wind of Christ's twofold creature-spirit, is, in the
workings and motions thereof on men, compared to (and fitly figured out by)
litteral winds, which manifest themselves in their powerful effects, however
unseen in their true cause and nature. Christ himself uses this similitude Joh.
3. 8.

Verse. VII. All the rivers run into the Sea; yet the Sea is not full: unto the
place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.
The litteral Sea is a figure of man's immortal spirit, the fathomless depths of
which, are such, that it is impossible it should ever be filled, with all the
streams of comfort that can flow into it, from all variety of visible or
invisible things and excellencies, in the whole first-creation World, Satan's
permitted dominion, the sphere and bound of his activity and walk. All these
things, highest, lowest, and intermediate, from the tallest Cedar to the
meanest Shrub in the whole lump of this worlds perishing, transient vanities,
are resembled, here, by gliding rivers. Satan has the most glittering
excellencies, of the first-creation sort (in his angelical nature, superior to
man's) to offer, communicate, and lay before him, to feed upon and delight in.
He is permitted, by God, to retain all these, in unchangable enmity to him, and
all his divine, Spiritual and Heavenly things, in the second. Yea, also, by his
sinful transforming skill and power, can he gild them over with the nearest
resemblance and beautiful appearance of the second, so as to deceive, if
possible, the very Elect, with his baits, and catch them in his snares. But,
the far greater part of mankind feed on husks, as his Swine; on the lowest part
of the dust of this mortal world, the gratifying satisfactions of the most
brutish lusts of the lowest sort of life, in their confounded, fallen nature.
All these things of Man or Angel, within the compass of their first-creation
state ( in distinction from the things of God, Delights of the Sons of God, in
the second) are the delights of the Sons of Men. Satan has a vast Herd of
Swine, amongst men. And, as for those that are not only enlightened but
enlivened; quick'ned out of their death in sin, into the righteous life of
their own nature again, he is ready with all sorts of diet, suited to the palate
of that state. And, if the single excellencies and dainties, suited to their
palate in that state, will not serve their turn, he is ready with his superior
angelical first-creation vanities, for them to feed on. If these yet will not
hold, and satisfy them (when by Christ's spiritual enlightnings, convincingly
showed and offered his more excellent new creation life and things) then will
he gild over all humane and angelical excellencies and meats, with the exactest
counterfeit resemblance of the things of God, the never perishing meats, in the
second. If this, yet, will not do; he is gone; and the true Saint delivered
from all his snares. All the things of Man or Angel, under all Satan's false
glosses, and glistering appearances of the things of God, can never answer or
satisfy the vast, deep, botomless (...) of man's immortal spirit. The most
swelling rivers and full streams of all worldly vanities, flowing into it, can
never fill it. Nothing below the Ocean-fulnes of infinite divinity, and the
rivers of spiritual life (flowing therefrom, and returning thereunto, as in
unchangable union therewith) can truly satisfy it.

Verse. VIII. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
Man, in his natural, first-creation state, at best, in all possible
seize and contentments thereof, is but laboring in vanity, from first to
last; and his misery therein, not to be conceived or uttered by him.
Everlasting perplexity and unutterable vexation of spirit, will inevitably
seize him, for ever, after all his doting mirth in his fools paradise, here,
if he get not out of this finfull folly and madness. The understanding, or eye,
ear, and heart of his immortal spirit, in the best natural state thereof,
cannot see, hear, desire, take in, or enjoy the divine and eternal spiritual
creature-things of God, provided in the Mediator for them that love him, which
alone can answer all the wants of their immortal spirits, not only to
satisfaction, but ecstasy and wonder, to all eternity. A new, spiritual eye,
ear, intellect and palate, are absolutely necessary, for man's rightly taking
in, seeing, hearing, savouring, enjoying, and delighting in these things of
God. But how, or which way must or can man come by these spiritual senses, eye,
ear, palate and understanding? By the assimilating, regenerating touch of
Christ's new creature heavenly spirit, on man's natural and earthly. Man,
obediently submitting to the death-work of Christ's heavenly priestly spirit
(as himself did, in our spotless fleshly nature, offering it up in sacrifice to
the will of God, in the fire thereof (Heb. 9. 14.) kindling that fire, on the
earth, or earthly state of our nature, in himself, Luke 12. 49-51.) by this
means and way only, can any truly please God, effectually, resist and overcome
world and devil, escape eternal death, or find eternal life, in the senses
whereof, to be satisfied with seeing, and filled with hearing. He must be
content to have his right eye, hand, and foot, plucked out, cut off, and cast
away (to part with and lose the best discerning, wisdom and light, the exactest
working righteousness, and walking righteously, in his own renewed natural state
(offended at the cross) signified by eye, hand, and foot) in order to be filled
with another life, springing up from the incorruptible seed thereof, as
begotten and born of the spirit or ever-living word of God (1 Pet. 1. 23.) in
which alone he can see, hear, work righteousness, or walk with a right foot
according to the gospel of the grace of God, so as truly to please God, or find
true blessedness for himself; where his eye, ear, and heart can take in what
will fully answer all the wants or desires of his immortal spirit, to eternity.
Thus only can man come, so to delight in the Lord, as to have the whole desire
of his heart (Psalm. 37. 4) all the needs of his immortal being, eternally
over-answered, in such enjoyments and things, as the natural eye, ear, or heart
of Angel or Man can never see, hear, desire, understand, or take any right
measure and cognizance of; 1 Cor. 2. 9. By submitting to the death of nature,
at best, under the hand of the gospel-high priest of our profession (Heb. 3.
1.) as himself, in our nature did, can these things be brought to pass. The
promise of the father will be certainly performed by the son, for the quickening
us up, out of the death of our obediently sacrificed nature, into the life of
the true Melchisedec, or sacrificing High Priest of God. So shall we come to
have an eye that can be satisfied with seeing; and, an ear, filled with
hearing, in the fight and enjoyment, not only of the Rivers of true Life, in
the creature-spirit of the Mediator, but infinite divine Ocean-fullness of God
most high. The natural Eye, Ear, Heart and Understanding, have nothing for
Object of the desire and thought of Man, but a heap of perishing, (visible or
invisible) vanities, that can never answer the wants of his immortal being. All
his appetite there, is but a belly for meats, and meats for a belly, that God
will destroy, both one and the other (1 Cor. 6. 13.) desires and desirables,
which are all, Vanity. Man, in whatsoever variety of his own nature, then, is
vainly laboring under an impossibility of pleasing God or profiting himself,
as to true blessedness. All he does, in his natural state or Body, the restored
living soul and Image of the earthly, is but bodily exercise, 1 Cor. 15. 44-49.
1 Timothy 4. 8. Man, by trusting and establishing himself in his righteous
Law-life, becomes the unchangable enemy of God and his Gospel-life, and Truths.
Filth of flesh or spirit (an enmity to the divine and everlasting righteous
creature-spirit of Christ and God) fixed in, makes Men a litteral or mystical
Sodom, to which the vengeance of eternal sire is the meet recompense. When Man
is once come to this pass, all his labors are but as the tossings and
uncertain tumblings of a raging, foaming Sea, casting up mire and dirt, (...)
of flesh or spirit; Isa. 57. 20. No peace with God, no peaceable fruits of
righteousness to God, in a fixed spirit of enmity to him. These can only be
found and brought forth in that Gospel spirit of truth, which is called Love,
as unchangably loving and beloved of God, the fulfiller of his whole Law ( Romans
(...). 10.) in every point, in the full comprehensive, litteral and mystical
meaning thereof; the fulfiller of all righteousness, God's and Man's, to God's
well-pleasing, and Man's Salvation. Man, established in the most righteous Life
of his own nature, and, so in unchangable enmity to the Righteousness of God,
in his spirit of Grace, is unchangably wicked. He walks but in a vain show, a
troublesome dream, disquiets himself in vain, heaps up Riches, and knows not
who shall gather them, Psalm. 39. 6. Christ, by the same Cross, or spiritual,
Gospel-Sword and Fire, in final wrath, will seize, gather, take and consume
all; which, had they obediently submitted to, as offered to be brought upon
them, in Love, he would have given them his durable Riches, and everlasting
Life, in the room thereof; and so, a spiritual Eye, that should have bin
satisfied with seeing, and an Ear, that would have bin filled with hearing.
Without Gospel-exchange-Traffick of Nature for Grace, the Life of Man for
God's, of the Creature for the Creator's, who is God blessed for ever, we never
find true satisfaction. In his own nature, Man trades only in shadows, will
never make any thing on it, to purpose. That Life, and all it feeds on, are but
vanishing shadows; all the visible and invisible goodnesses thereof, but fading
flowers. All that wilfully and knowingly spend their days in such vanities,
will in a moment go down to the grave, and all their thoughts perish. Job 21.
13. All their beauty will be consumed in the grave, from their dwellings, Psalm.
49. 14. This will men come to, by the willful neglect of this timely warning
from God, that the inmost Eye and Ear of their Immortal Spirit, in the worldly
Life of their own Nature, can never be satisfied, or find any durable good, for
its portion. Unhappy man, in all possible variety of his own nature, corrupt or
righteous, foolish or wise, wholly eyes, doats upon, chooses, delights in, and
hunts after perishing vanities, which God calls things that are not; and turns
his back upon all things spiritual and eternal, as Chimaerical nothings, which
God calls the only things that are.

Verse. IX. The thing that has been, is that which shall be: and that which is
done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the Sun.
There Is no new thing to be found in the first-creation, worldly spirit of
nature, under the mystical Sun, or first-covenant spirit: nothing of the
new creature spirit of everlasting righteousness; no things of God, or his
kingdom; things spiritual, heavenly, eternal; things ever new, fresh, green and
flourishing. Man and Angels, as soon as made, were old, that is, had no life or
goodness, but what was subject to mystical gray hairs, decays, old age, and
death. These are the several steps, by which the mortal life and best things,
put into (or set up in) Angel or man, come to expire and vanish. All, vanity.
All their fading goodness ( when they flourish therein as a green Bay Tree,
Psalm. 37. 35. 36) carries mortality and vanity, written out, in its forehead:
has a day of adversity, set over against their utmost prosperity therein. The
thing that has bin, is that which shall be. The sinless, Innocent state of
man, at first, is that which shall be generally experienced, on earth, under
the reign of Christ, again. At entrance thereof, he will give a restitution of
all, to their primitive natural purity; Act. 3. 21. Some gradual restorations
of the first-covenant light, or also life, man was created in (under Law and
Gospel, and before either were put into written oracles) have bin experienced,
more or less, by all men, from the redeemers hand, the light that lights
every man that comes into the world. What, all such light, life, wisdom,
righteousness, or (...), works, duties, and performances thereof and in, amount
unto, has bin sufficiently experienced. This spirit or state is so far, at
best, from being any security to man, for salvation, that a false confidence
and resting therein, is his sore and remediless destruction; Mic. 2. 10. Men
bring forth fruit but to themselves, in all this, at best; are empty vines to
God; Hos. 10. 1. They never bring forth fruit unto God, but in his newness of
life, as born of (living and walking in) his spirit of grace. All, in nature,
best or worst, Root and Branch, the fleshly Tree of good and evil, with the
fruit, all is but a perishing vanity. There is nothing new, to be done or found
therein, as the innumerable multitude of mankind have experienced, generation
after generation. For,

Verse. X. Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, see, this is new? it has
bin already of Old time, which was before us.
Satan is ready to suggest; and man, as ready to believe, there is some new
thing in the but renewed old nature of man, beyond what, at first, was in it.
All men are experimental witnesses of Satan's first lie to Eve, that the life
of nature, given in the first-creation, was eternal; and, that they should not
Die at all. No such thing as Death, incident to it. But, this life, renewed and
confirmed by the second Adam, says Satan (and Man joins in it) is Eternal.
But, this confirming and warranting man safe in the established life and
righteousness of restored nature, is Satan's doctrine, and Man's accursed other
Gospel. Christ restores man's lost first-covenant law-life; Satan asserts this
to be a Gospel state, and man agrees, to take it so, and look no farther, for
salvation. As soon as any are renewed by Christ, into some degree of the lost
righteous life of nature, Satan is at their Elbow, with the same lying
Suggestion, as to Eve, this is Eternal Life, ye shall not Die at all. Paul (not
without a cause) was afraid and Jealous of the Serpents thus beguiling the
Corinthians, through his subtilty, as he did Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. This is his
other Gospel, in a perfect contrariety to every tittle of Christ's (v. 4)
another Jesus, another spirit and state of life, for salvation, in direct
contradiction to all, Paul preached; which, nor Paul, nor any true
Gospel-preacher, ought to let pass, undiscovered and uncontrolled. Fixing in
nature, at best, for salvation, is union with the Devil, in unchangable enmity
to God, and his new creature spirit, in which, ever, any could be saved. Under
Satan's reign, nature is seldom fully restored in man, from filth of flesh. And,
filth of spirit, or enmity to God and his spirit of truth, is inseparable from
the highest restorations of it, till the Reign of Christ. Yet, under all these
disadvantages, and shortnesses of primitive purity, is it, when restored,
asserted to be better and safer then that, for Salvation. This, Satan most
wickedly suggests, and Man most foolishly believes, to his own destruction, as
he will find, at winding up. Thus Satan and his Apostles, transformed into the
likeness of Christ and his, in word and language, preach up restored nature,
a-fresh, for a current Gospel-state of absolute salvation; in which, men are
under an absolute impossibility of ever finding it. All the enticing and
persuasive words of Satan's and Man's serpentine and humane wisdom, look, and
run this way. Scripture interrogatories are the strongest assertions. Is there
anything new, any newnes of life, in man's restored Old? nothing of it. whatever
can be found in this restored state, has bin already of Old time, before us, in
the unstained purity of it, in Adam, who yet was not fence-proof against Satan's
charming wiles, and power. It Was then, perfect, in its kind; rarely yet so,
since. It Was but a corruptible perfection of a loseable goodness. And, lost it
was. Most vain; mad and unprofitable then, is all Man's labor, since the fall,
in seeking for, asserting (or undertaking to prove) eternal spiritual life, to
be found in fading natural. Man, now, in his best restored naturals, is tainted
with a treasonable Enmity to God, and that spirit, in which alone any can be
saved. Paul, in his restored righteous law-life of nature, was a fierce enemy
to the spirit of grace, and all the Gospel Truths or things thereof. After the
universal experience of mankind, and universal warnings of true wisdom, to the
contrary, to preach up Salvation in the but restored first-covenant righteous
life of nature, is unexcusable madness. True Wisdom calls out to these simple
stragglers and wanderers after Vanity, with their backs wilfully turned upon
him, and all his Reproofs of death upon Nature, and instructions of Life, in
his Spirit of Grace. How long re simple ones, will ye love simplicity, delight
in scorning my counsel, and hate true knowledge? Prove. 1. 22. Turn from your
own Understanding at my reproof, and I Will pour my spirit into you, by which ye
shall rightly understand all my words, verse. 23. While men ramble after their
many things, spend all their labor and money for that which is not Bread,
Satan's diverse and strange Doctrines, they come to be established in their own
Nature, with his meats, to their final destruction, in stead of being
established with the Grace and Doctrine of Christ, for their everlasting (...),
Heb. 13. 9. All our Old things, Life, Light, Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. must
pass away, that we may receive Christ's new, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

Verse. IX. There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall their be any
remembrance of things that are to come, with those that shall come after.
All former things, excellencies, and perfections, found in the natural
first-creation state, before the fall (or gradual restorations of the like,
since) are of no account or remembrance, with God. Nothing, short of his Life
of everlasting righteousness, set up in Man, brings him under his
approbation-Seal. Men must be unmade, broken down, and pulled up by the roots
(as to that Building and Life, they were set up in, by God himself, in their
first-creation-make) in order to be new Vessels of his newness of Life, by a
second. God planted in Man, an incorrupt seed of corruptible Life (that, in its
utmost flourish and fruitfulness, amounts but to a fading flower) by his left
hand, in a first-creation. He offers to plant and quicken up in him, on the
obedient death and removal of all this (Root and Branch, Tree and Fruit) an
incorruptible seed of an everlasting Life, by his right hand, in a new creation
of him. See both Seeds, with a negative on the former, in all, born of the
latter, 1 Pet. 1. 23. This only (and man therein) will be of everlasting
account and remembrance with God; the other, never, in time past, in innocence
or any restorings of it since; or time to come, by the like restorings of it,
in following generations, under Satan's reign; or the full perfection of it,
under Christ's reign, which shall come after.

Verse. XII. I the Preacher was King over Israel, in Jerusalem.
What more contemptible than Satan's mercenary Priests and Preachers of Lies?
What, or who more honorable than the Preachers of God's Truth? King Solomon,
and a far greater than he, Christ himself, the high Priest of God, is the
Preacher of his Truths, and Declarer of his Counsels, to Angels and Men.
Preaching Christ's Gospel, is the best of Callings; Satan's, the worst of
Trades. Solomon; the Preacher, and Writer of this Book, was King over litteral
Israel, in Jerusalem; and therein, a Type of Christ, King over the whole
spiritual Israel of God, in the New-Jerusalem. In the all-discerning Spirit of
Prophecy, does Solomon reflect upon his former vain thought, for finding true
happiness, or the way toward it, in the single wisdom of his own enlightened
nature, however eminent; as follows.

Verse. XIII. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by Wisdom, concerning
all things that are done under Heaven: This sore travel has God given to the
Sons of Man, to be exercised therewith.
Solomon, here, in the true preaching Spirit of Jesus, reflects upon, and gives
an account of his own mistaking wisdom and thought, about blessedness; and, of
his sad experience, therein. I gave my heart to search out by my own Wisdom
(wherein I excelled others) concerning all things, under Heaven. The result
was; he found this sore travel and labor of his natural mind, to be what God
has given to the sons of men, to exercise, afflict, or humble them, by: In the
new creature Wisdom of God, he finds the vanity of his own, and his vain
design, thought and labor, therein. He finds that, and all the things, or
works and fruits thereof, to be but earthly, from beneath (below that Life,
wisdom, and things of God, he had now the experience of, in him) under Heaven.
So he, at once, confesses, declares and corrects his vain thought, of reaching,
knowing and doing all things, relating to his true blessedness, therein. By way
of Recantation, toward the close of his Life and day in this World; he
confesses the vanity of his thought, and unprofitableness of all his labor,
therein, calling it (as by sad experience he had found it) a sore travel. He
declares also God's design, in letting even Saints, for a season, run their
course there, to humble and Afflict them, and so, dispose them to a willing
surrender of that, for a better Life and Wisdom, in which alone they may find,
what they were, under an impossibility, seeking for. Thus, God let Job and his
three Friends, run to the end of their Line, in their own Wisdom, and Spirit,
as Disputers of this world, till at an absolute puzzle and period, none of them
being able to unriddle the design and methods of God's Wisdom toward Job,
under that dispensation of the Cross. Then he opens the mouth of his
fore-runing Messenger, (...), to instruct them all, in another Wisdom and
Spirit, on which they were (...), answered no more; but, left off speaking,
Job. 32. 2. 15. Enmity to God, inseparable from the highest restored Life and
Wisdom of Man, must needs render his utmost labor therein, about happiness, a
sore travel. God, in greatest love, on Man's fall, (...), the mystical Ground,
Earth, or earthly state of Man's nature, and that for Man's sake, so as to
render that enmity to him, contracted by the Fall, unextinguishable, otherwise
then by the perfect death thereof. Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth,
says God, to Adam, Genesis 3. 17. 18. Both the litteral, and also mystical earth
of Man's Nature (in the very restored Life of the Law, Image of the earthy, and
righteousness of Man) fell immediately under this Curse. All, in the best works
of their Law-life, are under this Curse. Gal. 3. 10. What Thorns and Thistles,
was Paul (when eminent herein) bringing forth, in a fierce persecuting enmity
against Christ, and all his Gospel Truths and Saints? Phil. 3. 6. Act. 26. 11.
The death of nature then, the right way (not in, but to sin, so that sin
becomes dead in them, not they in it) under the Cross and Gospel-sword, is
undispensably necessary to the ridding man of all evil, and capacitating him to
receive a Life of everlasting righteousness, wherein he will find himself
possessed of all good; a state, wherein it is as impossible not to please God in
every thing, as in his own Life at best, ever to please him, in any thing. This
comes Man to, by obediently complying with God's design, in gladly receiving
his sentence of Death within him, as Paul, and so getting rid of his own
Law-spirit of bondage, enmity and death (and all his sore travel and labor
therein, to no purpose, as to his grand concern) in exchange for the
Gospel-life of Christ, and therein, glorious liberty of the sons of God, an
everlasting freedom to good only, and from all Evil of sin or punishment, for
ever. Then all our works are wrought in God ( Joh. 3. 21.) and God works all
our works in us and for us. We, therein, are co-workers with God. All such
works are ever acceptable to him, and most easy, delightful and profitable to
man. What, all works, in man's earthly Life and Nature, under Heaven, amount
unto, we find, yet farther,

Verse. 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun; and behold,
all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.
Solomon, in the new light and wisdom of God, positively concludes the most
rectified Principles of nature, and man's utmost fruitfulness, exactest
walking, best works, designs, counsels, thoughts, and purposes therein, to be
but vanity in themselves, and vexation of spirit to himself. The more rich and
full Man is, in the righteousness, wisdom, and glory of his own nature, the
more apt to grow offended at the Cross, that comes to seize and set fire, on
all; and hereby, the more is God offended at him. A confidence in such
increasing riches, as are but vanity, increases vexation of spirit, every way.

Verse. 15. That which is crooked, cannot be made straight: and that which is
wanting, cannot be numbered.
Humane nature, at best, in innocence, as liable to wax old, decay, and die, in
all the Wisdom, Life, and Glory of it; and, as liable to corrupt, and be
depraved (through Man's evil use of all, in preference and opposition to what is
more excellent) might be called old and crooked. But, since the fall, it is
actually, and apparently, so. A glory it had, which was no glory, to the glory
that excells, and remains for ever, in new creation Life; The Life, Wisdom,
Righteousness of man, in his first created state, was no Life, Wisdom,
Righteousness, in respect of what is given to, and set up in him, by the second;
is admitted no comparison; looked upon as nothing, to it; is to be folded up,
and laid aside, as an old garment, for it. God himself thus handles all the
first-creation works of his own hands, Isa. 34. 4. and 66. 1, 2. Heb. 1. 10-12.
Man, though made perfect and upright, at first, all the life and goodness he
was possessed of, was corruptible and changable, though not corrupt. So, not to
be compared with the incorruptible, unchangable, everlasting Life, Wisdom,
Righteousness and Glory of God, set up in, and put upon man, by a new creation.
Man's and Angels attempts and designs, for holding fast, making straight (and
establishing themselves in) their natural, first-creation Life, ( which God
has made crooked, (...). 7. 13.) in opposition to his offered straight, and
incorruptibly perfect new creation life, is peerless madness, and inexcusable
folly. God requires them both and all, to part with their own crooked life, how
ever straight in their Eye, for his own absolutely straight and incorruptibly
perfect new creation life, which only is straight in his Eye. But farther, what
God made (...) to crookednes (and, in that sense, crooked) fallen Angels and
Man have made actually perverse, crooked, and tortuous. In evil Angels, it is
made unchangably so, in rebellion against God, and a justling competition with
his unchangably straight new creation life. In fallen man, enmity to God and
his everlasting righteous creature-life, is inseparable from his natural state
and life, however restored. But, both that enmity and his life, are seperable
from him, by his obedient death, in sacrifice to God, on which he receives
thepromise of the Father, the unchangably straight new creature life of the
Son. Evil Angels are continually at it, with Men; follow them closs, with this
lying suggestion, that their but restored righteous natural state, is the
straight thing in God's sight, as well as theirs, which will give them entrance
into the kingdom of God. Multitudes, multitudes, all along this World, under
Satan's reign, have drunk in this serpentine venom, to their eternal ruin, as
will appear in the valley of decision. Fixure in the life of nature, corrupt or
righteous, renders men litteral or mystical Sodomites; both, most Crooked,
perverse, and abominable, in God's sight and thoughts; be what they will in
their own. Such establishment in the righteousness of Man, as is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. Such an evil concupiscence,
lust, or covetousnes after, and delight in, the mystical riches, fruits,
wisdom, glory and righteousness of their own nature, or house, as makes them
finally to despise the durable riches, wisdom, life and glory of God, in that
spirit of grace, which is his house, and to refuse the required exchang of all
their fading vanities for them, is death without mercy. Thus do men by an evil
covetousnes to their own house, consult shame to themselves, and get
everlasting contempt, as vessels of dishonor. Hab. 2. 9, 10. This did the
Pharisees, who were thus covetous. Luke 16. 14, 15. This fixes man in an
unchangable bloody mind of enmity to the constant, steady, right (Psa. 51. 10.)
unchangably straight creature-spirit of everlasting righteousness and truth,
and to God most high.

The defects of man, or what is wanting to him, for eternal Life, in his own
nature, corrupt or righteous (from which, since the fall, filth of flesh or
spirit, are inseparable) cannot be numbered. For he wants every thing, all
things Spiritual, Heavenly, and Eternal; and must part with every thing he
has, for them. Till poor, desolate, and undone in himself, he cannot be rich
and strong in God; till impoverished even to death, in his own spirit, not rich
in God's; but wretched, poor, blind, and naked; destitute of, and wanting all
things, for eternal Life. Enmity to God, and that Spirit of Grace, in which
alone any can be saved, is as inseparable from man, in the corrupt or righteous
Life of his own spirit of nature, as the Ethiopian hiew, or Leopards spots,
from them. Jer. 13. 23. Till the said exchang, by death, be obediently yielded
to (the terms, God's wisdom put's on man, as his part, in order to an entrance
into his new and everlasting covenant-life, on which, he will certainly perform
his part of that covenant, in giving him that life) the things man wants, for
salvation, cannot be numbered. All the numberless spiritual, new creation
things, the everlasting creature-Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of God, with
the innumerable fruits to be brought forth by men therein, to God; and the
innumerable fruits of Gods love therein, (...) man, Love, Joy, Peace, etc. Gal.
5. 22, 23.) All these things are wanting; that is, every thing.

Verse. XVI. I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom then all they that have bin before me, in
Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience ( Heb. seen much) of wisdom and
knowledge.
Solomon was eminent in mystical earthly-Jerusalem life, and in the Ornaments
or excellent, best, and most spiritual inlightning gifts of the Heavenly. In
this super-eminent wisdom and understanding, the vain thought and pussing up
Imagination of his own heart, was, that he now wanted nothing, for the rendering
him completely happy. His wisdom and largeness of heart was as the Sand on the
Seashore, 1 Kings. 4. 29. The mystical inward riches of his restored, adorned
nature, rendered him as much above others therein, as in outward worldly
greatness and visible pomp. And he resolved to make the best, of all these
advantages, offered him; try what they all amounted to, not without a secret
hopeful-thought of finding absolute blessedness therein.

Verse. XVII. And I gave my heart to know Wisdom, and to know Madness and Folly:
I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.
Here Is that he find's all to amount unto; Wisdom, Righteousness, Wickedness,
Madness, Folly; all (within the compass of Man's natural state, corrupt or
righteous) vanity, and if finally trusted in for blessedness, will leave Man
(to his sore and amazing disappointment) in eternal darkness and death,
unutterable torment and everlasting vexation of spirit, as his due portion,
the, meet recompense of his error, from God. Solomon found the search after
all Earthly vanities, all things under Heaven or below what is heavenly, a sore
travel (verse. 13.) a grievous labor; man, little the better, when he has found
them. For, setting himself to experience what the utmost pleasures to be had in
all, amounted to (as gratifying to all variety of life and desire in him,
sensual or intellectual) he found all such knowledge and folly in corrupt or
righteous nature, and all such practice and experience, vanity and vexation of
spirit. He was qualified and furnished, to take the largest and deepest
draughts, as to all delights of the Sons of Men; and take them he did, and this
he found all to be. Though he found wisdom, acquired or infused (nature,
cultivated, advanced and adorned by humane learning in Heathens; or made wise,
strong, and honorable in Christ, by his restoring the lost righteous
first-covenant life thereof) better then the folly of dark, ignorant,
uncultivated, and unrenewed nature; yet, he found, that all these varieties in
nature, fall under the same general title, vanity and vexation of spirit. This
is the conclusion he arrives at, in the preaching, all-searching spirit of
infallible truth. All Wisdom, Folly, Light, Darkness, Righteousness,
Wickedness, in man's natural state (which he had taken the liberty to
experience, as well as know) all is vanity. This is King Solomon's Proclamation
and warning to his fellow-mortals; and the true King Solomon's faithful and
timely warning to all mankind, in all generations; Prove. 1. 20, etc. 8. 1,
etc. Final disappointment, torment, and vexation, will befall all that finally
fall short of true, substantial, divine and spiritual things, in which alone
true blessedness can ever befound.

Verse. XVIII. For, in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow.
All increasings with the increases of man, in the fading Life, Wisdom, Riches,
Righteousness and Glory of his own nature ( not of God, in the everlasting
Life, Wisdom, Glory, and righteousness, things of God) are but additions to, and
multiplications of his sorrow, in getting, keeping, and then loosing all,
again. For, all must go, first or last, by the dispensation of the Cross (in
love or final wrath) upon every Man and Angel. Men cannot but have misgiving
thoughts (from the self-evidencing nature of the perishableness of all they can
be there possessed of) that all will be gone, again. So are, all their life
time therein, subject to bondage, in the highest glory and flourish thereof,
through a fear, by death, of losing all; Heb. 2. 15. Job declares, that, as
safe as he was apt to (...) himself to be, in the highest righteousness,
wisdom, and glory of his own nature, in afirst-covenant-life, he had a secret
bottom-fear, all would fail him. The thing I greatly feared is come upon me;
Job, 3. 25, 26. I find I had nothing of that true safety, rest or quiet, in the
utmost wisdom and glory of my own restored nature, that I fondly flattered my
self into the false persuasion of. He found all, death-struck, by the Cross;
the very righteous life and mystical riches of his spirit, as well as outward
concerns of his body. His secret fear was the truest thought, and faithful
(...) of him, as to what he was to expect, at winding up. Man's increase in the
wisdom and knowledge of his own nature, amounts but to the cleerer sight of the
miseries and defects of himself and others, therein; and, all such wisdom shows
it self insufficient to correct his own or others errors. Young sciolists are
apt presently to think they know all; but when they have traveled farther, in
their inquiries, come, with Socrates, to see and confess, they know only this,
that they know nothing, with certainty, infallibly; and so, find no rest, or
satisfaction, in all they find. Yea, and are still more and more vexed and
pressed, thereby, with the foresight of future evils, incident to them. The
wisest man, will more and more find himself, in the, exercise of his own wisdom
(as to things past, present or to come) but in a self-tormenting labyrinth, and
(...) maze of vain, self-bewildring imaginations. All knowledge and thoughts,
depending on the temper and fitness of bodily Organs, are enfeebled, in the old
age (and, at length, quite extinguished, at the death) of the body. Then, that
all that sort of thoughts perish, all see. Again, the higher man's light and
knowledge, if uncompliant therewith in practice, the heavier (he knows) will the
wrath of God be, upon him, for ever. Thus, the sad and inevitable result af all
Man's increase in his own wisdom and knowledge, is the increase and aggravation
of his sin, and sorrow at every turn. Lastly the higher man is advanced in the
life, riches, wisdom, and righteousness of his own spirit, the more apt, with
Paul, to be a fierce zelot for that law-life, and forwardest opposer of the
everlasting Gospel-life of Christ, and all the words thereof. The Cross seems
a harder dispensation, to the righteous Scribe and Phaisee, that have much to
lose, then to Publicans and Harlots in the corrupt life of nature, who
therefore (as more easily induced to submit to and own the doctrine thereof)
enter into the Kingdom of God, before them. The mystical rich young man went
away very sorrowful, when he heard of parting with all he had, for eternal
life. Zaccheus and Mary-Magdalen did not so. Final trusting in the corruptible
life, riches, wisdom, and righteousness of man, render's entering into the
kingdom of God, absolutely impossible. Mar. 10. 24, 25. The very Disciples
(acquainted yet only with first-covenant riches) were astonished out of
measure, at this word, saying, among themselves, who then can be saved? verse.
26. Increase in outward riches, also, and in that wisdom and subtlety, by which
gotten, and for a season, kept; all such riches, pomp, and glory therein, as
figures and shadows of inward, are usually found to be but the amusing snares
of Satan, by which he keep's men in a total mindlesness of truelife, with all
the words thereof, and leads them blindfold to the chambers of Death, in Mirth
and Jollity, Job. 21. 7-13. Thus are all worldly riches, wisdom, and glory,
litteral and mystical, by man's wilful madness, made an occasion of his
everlasting grief, sorrow, torment, and vexation of spirit. Who can utter it?
what life, treasure, meats, food, clothing, man should not seek, and what he
should, Christ declar's and commandes; nothing, that is liable to moth-eating,
rust, corruption, loss, or death; but heavenly, unsubjected to any of these
things; above all dangers, decays, deaths, enemies or fears; Mat. 6. 19, 20.
Joh. 6. 27. And, by James, he shows, what, all that take not this counsel,
will come to, at last; as found possessed of no other riches, litteral or
mystical Gold and silver, but what will be cankered and the rust thereof
witness against them, as guilty of inexcusable folly, in neglecting all the
faithful warnings of Christ, against their trusting in such selfevidencing
vanities, for true hapines. Jam. 5. 1-3. What they reckon a heaping up treasure
for themselves, for the last days, they will find to have bin a treasuring up
unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Man's passive obedience, to the
death and loss of all his life, wisdom, and riches, is the highest point of
obedience, God requires, or he can perform, in the right use thereof. This
makes way for the quickening and springing up of the incorruptible seed and
principle of a new and everlasting righteous life, in which alone it is possible
for man to bring forth (...) unto God, or perform such active obedience, as
shall be ever pleasing to God, and (...) to himself. This is the counsel, and
method of Gods wisdom, about man's salvation, which, all that (...) reject,
will inevitably perish. If they will follow the words of man's wisdom, in
perfect contradiction thereunto, This will they have of God's hand, they must
lie down in sorrow.

CHAP. II.
Verse. I. I said in my heart, go to now; I will prove thee with mirth,
therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is Vanity.
SOLOMON set his Heart to try, what, all Mirth, Joy, and Pleasure, in all sorts
of first-creation things, amounts unto. After the utmost Proof thereof, he
finds and declares this also to be vanity; all worldly delight and desire, of
the same complexion, with the desirables, delighted in, whether visible or
invisible; delights of bodily life, and the corrupt spirit of nature, therein;
or, of the rectified intellectual, rational powers, more properly the delights
of the Sons of Men. The other are for beasts, brutified men, drowned in the
lusts of literal Sodom, where sensual Powers usurp dominion over rational,
using what should be their Masters and Rulers, as Slaves to fetch in provisions
for them, by right or wrong. Some are recovered out of this disorder and
confusion, toward a rectitude of their natural powers, where the rational
command, and sensual obey. But, to show the unstable, slippery standing of Man,
here; Solomon, not only restored into the right exercise of his naturals, but
under strong spiritual convictions of true wisdom, was caught, and miserably
entangled in this lowest sort of worldly snares. His suppressed sensual powers
struggled for, and recovered their formerly usurped dominion, over his rational
and intellectual. The signal aggravation of this (...), was, that he was
eminent, in the restored first-covenant wisdom of his own spirit of nature, and
spiritual light of the second, the self-discoveries and revelations of Gods
wisdom, in his own spirit of grace, as his pleasing request to God, and the
gracious answer thereunto, do evince, 1 King. 3. 5-14. And again (chapter 9. 1-9)
where the Lord also threaten's him and his people, in case of apostasy, or
turning from following him; v. 6. After all this, his sensual lusts after
strange Women, run him a-ground. They turn his heart after strange Gods also
from the true. He not only tolerated, but himself went after the Gods of the
Idolatrous borderers, Zidon, Moab, Ammon, etc. whence he fetched his Wives, 1
King. 11. 4-8. The Lord takes notice of the aggravation of this folly and
madness, as after his remarkable appearing to him, twice, and solemnly
commanding the contrary v. 9. 10. On this threaten's to rend the greatest part
of his Kingdom, from his Son, 11-13. It Is like, his expenses about Idols and his
Idolatrous Wives, occasioned such unreasonable taxes and oppressions, as moved
the people to capitulate with his Son, for redress of greivances, which, he
refusing, they refused him for their King, Chap. 12. 'Twas an amazing thing, a
double-portion'd saint, and kingly Preacher, when old, and near his exit out of
this world, should be found guilty of such gross enormities, as many mere
heathens, in a long life, avoid, to their dying day. To increase the wonder,
under all the violent impetuous hurries of his own disordred spirit, the wisdom
of God's, still remained with him. Without this, his foolish, hurtful lusts
had drowned him in destruction and perdition. A seed and principle of true
wisdom was his powerful preservative from final apostasy. And the want of this,
will be found no excuse to final apostate's from, and haters of it, when
convincingly showed and offered it. Solomon exercised his brutish lusts, for a
season, not only in a flat contrariety to this, but, to the very light of his
own reason, also. The unsubdued natural spirit, or mystical Woman, in himself,
carried him forth in lust after the literal, who involved him in their gross
Idolatries. He allowed himself the full experience of all worldly desirables,
from the higher to the lower parts of the dust of this mortal, first-creation
worldly vanities. He sent forth his heart on this errand, to try what
satisfaction, the whole lump of this world's vanities, from the Cedar to the
Shrub, intellectual delights, to Husks among Swine, would afford him; and,
set's down at the foot of his account; All is vanity. In a union of mind, with
Christ, by spiritual light, he acknowledges all his ransacking the whole bulk
of this world's desireables, and roving up and down (as thinking to pick up a
satisfying food for his immortal Spirit, amongst them) direct madness. So,
comes he from dear-bought experience, to say, as fallows;

Verse. II. I said of Laughter, it is mad: and of Mirth, what does it?
Laughter and Mirth, here, signify the highest delight and satisfaction, can be
had, in the fullest possession and enjoyment of all worldly desireables,
relating to the corrupt or righteous life of man, in his own nature. Solomon
therefore, in the al-discovering light of the spirit of God, reflects upon his
former foolish design therein, judging his whole course and race, there, evil,
because his force (or principle) was not right: but indeed, a spirit of enmity
to God. All his delusive and destructive Joy, he found Madness; a making large
and swift steps, under the bewitching influence of the God of this world,
toward the chambers of death. His words, pleasing suggestions and gratifying
offers to men, are smoother then oil, yet are drawn swords; his method of
wounding men to eternal death. The spirit of man, since the fall, is a deep
dark dungeon and miry pit of all sorts of filth of flesh or spirit, a litteral
or mystical Sodom, in the corrupt or righteous life thereof; in the dark, as to
the excellent things, God offers, and wholly disposed and inclined to close
with Satan's offers, out of his vast heap of perishing vanities. Merriment and
Jollity in such a destructive course, is madness. God therefore calls man into
a state of poverty, mourning and death, as to all this life of vanity; and
that, as the only possible way of his deliverance from all evil Prove. 1. 33.

Verse. III. I sought in mine heart, to give my self unto wine (yet acquainting
my heart with Wisdom) and to lay hold on Folly, till I might see what was that
good for the Sons of men, which they should do under the Heaven, all the days
of their life.
Verse. IV. I made me great Works, I builded me Houses, I planted me Vineyards.
Verse. V. I made me Gardens and Orchards, and I planted Trees in them of all
kind of Fruits.
Verse. VI. I made me Pooles of Water, to water therewith the Wood that brings
forth Trees.
Verse. VII. I got me Servants and Maidens, and had Servants born in my House;
also I had great Possessions of great and small Cattle, above all that were in
Jerusalem before me.
Verse. VIII. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
Kings, and of the Provinces, I gat me Men-singers and Womensingers, and the
delights of the sons of men, as musical Instruments, and that of all sorts.
Verse. IX. So I was great, and increased more then all that were before me in
Jerusalem; also my Wisdom remained with me.
Verse. X. And whatsoever mine Eyes desired, I kept not from them; I withheld
not my heart from any Joy: for my heart rejoiced in all my labor, and this was
my portion of all my labor.
Here Is, in Letter, a larg account of Solomon's most desirable circumstances,
as to his outward condition, in this World. He excelled other Kings, in all
kind of wealth, wisdom, greatness, and honor, 1 Kings 10. 23. Of all worldly
contentments he had more then heart could wish. And he set his heart to deny no
desires thereof, but fetched up the utmost pleasure and satisfaction to himself,
that all these things could afford him. To interpret, then. Every outward
circumstance was figurative to the inward condition and mystical riches of his
spirit. All import, in mystery, his beautiful structure in the glory and wisdom
of a first-covenant life; and the works of his own hands, therein. All this,
Paul counted dung, and parted with, for the riches, wisdom, and righteousness
of God, in his Gospel Spirit of grace and truth, Phil. 3. 6-9. The wisdom,
inward beauties, and excellent natural accomplishments of Solomon's spirit, are
here represented by stately Houses, fruitful Gardens, Orchards, etc. At
length, in the awakened principle of true wisdom, from the Fountain of living
Waters, he sees and declares the vanity of his broken Cistern, or leaky natural
Vessel, with all the fading Waters, buildings, plantings, and fruitfulnesses
thereof. All, within man, and all from without, relating to him, in this world,
is but Meats for a belly and a belly for Meats; all, perishing vanities. God
will destroy all, belly and meats, desires and desireables. All confidence,
laughter, mirth, and joy therein, is folly and madness. All natural perfections
and excellencies, in the unstained purity of his first-creation state, together
with the convincing discoveries and revelations of the spiritual perfections
and excellencies of the second, soon ran out of the leaky natural Vessel of the
first Adam. He did not long keep the twofold waters of first-covenant Life, or
second-covenant Light; the loss of both, soon left him and all his posterity,
in darkness and death; Dead in (...) and sins. Solomon finds all his natural
braveries, outward or inward, but tottering Houses, leaky Vessels, all his
possessions therein, altogether vanity. In the infallible light of spiritual
wisdom, he makes a right judgment of his natural principle, and all fruits,
works, or buildings, therein; typed by the abundant litteral varieties of
pompous Houses, Plantations, etc. All is vanity, says he. This is the result;
this, his verdict (on the review of all) after his full trial, largest
draughts, and utmost experience of all possible desireables or satisfactions,
to be found in nature. To particularize, farther. Men-singers and Women-singers
may sitly signify the well-tuned frame and pleasant harmony of Solomon's spirit,
in the orderly comportment and beautiful subjection of the sensual, to his
rational and intellectual powers, figured by great and small Cattle, making up
but the humane Beast, in scripture Language. Every man is a Beast by his own
knowledge, in the utmost wisdom of his own nature, earthly, sensual (so all, in
Man or Angel, is called, short of spiritual, new creation life) having not the
spirit ( Jude 19.) so, if fixed in, devilish, by unchangable enmity to that
spirit, and God most high. Jam. 3. 15. The head of fallen Angels (in the fading
glory of first-creation life, rebelliously exalted against the second) is the
most subtle beast in the first world or field; Genesis 3. 1.

Solomon gathered Silver and Gold; was great, and increased more then all
before him, in Jerusalem; mystical Gold and Silver, the peculiar treasure of
Kings, such Princes of this world, Scribes, Pharisees, etc. (in the riches,
flourish, and fruitfulness of their own restored nature, made wise, strong, and
honorable by and in Christ, there) as crucified the prince of life in the
next, the Lord of Glory. In sum, he exceeded all such mystical (1 Cor. 4. 8.)
as well as litteral Kings of the earth, for wisdom; and for riches inward and
outward. And, his great delight in both, and all, is figured by Men and
Women-singers, with musical Instruments of all sorts, importing his full
enjoyment of the utmost delights of the Sons of Men, nature (in it is most
widen'd capacity) can take in. Whatever his eyes desired, he kept not from
them, nor withheld his heart from any joy. He allowed himself a latitude of
rambling, to take his utmost pleasure in all the litteral and all the mystical
riches, and fruits of his labors. He rejoiced in this portion, as the result
of all his labor; reckoning, he had ground, so to do. The wisdom of God, that
remained with him, in and under all this doings, was the only preservative in
him, that kept him from sinking and drowning in this full tide and affluence of
all worldly desireables, streaming into him. He gives proof of the awakened
exercise of this wisdom, in this recantation-book, and of the contrary Judgment
thereof to man's, at best, as to the things wherein his true hapiness lies. In
the hurry of his busy, active natural mind, in worldly contrivances and
enjoyments, this true wisdom in him lay sorely clouded, obstructed, silenced,
and neglected. But at last, up it gets, under Christ's powerful influence, and
pronounces himself and all his former designs, works, and enjoyments, in his
own fading nature, vanity and vexation of spirit; as fallows.

Verse. XI. Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on
the labor that I had labored to do: and behold, all was vanity and vexation
of spirit; and there was no profit under the Sun.
Solomon, in the infallible light and wisdom of the second, looked upon all his
works, labors and enjoyments in the first-creation World and life, and finds
all, vanity and vexation of spirit; of no profit, avail, or conducibleness at
all, to true hapines; but rather, as mistaken and abused, signal lets and
hindrances thereunto. All will come to nothing, and therefore, finally trusted
in and relied upon, will leave Man naked and destitute, to eternity. In all
moyling and toyling in his own nature, he is found in direct enmity to God, and
that spirit of grace in which alone he can be saved. All life, goodness, things
of this world, are not only unprofitable, but destructive to man, if rested in.
His inevitable loss of all, is legibly written out, in the changable nature of
all, for his own reading. The resolute choosing, therefore, his own fading
creature-life, and things, before, above, and against the unchangable
creature-life of the Creator (and everlasting Righteousness and wisdom of God,
therein, with all the ever-new fruits thereof, things of God) is an
unpardonable crime, the sin against the holy Ghost, or spirit of God, and
Gospel-life of Christ; the great, the presumptuous sin, unto death, exclusive
to all benefit of Christ's sacrifice, all intercession of Christ or true Saints;
Jo. 5. 16. Heb. 10. 26. So will man be left, for ever, in the most forlorn
condition, imaginable; unutterable torment, and vexation of spirit.

Verse. XII. And I turned my self to behold wisdom, and madness and folly: for,
what can the man do, that comes after the King? even that which has been
already done.
Solomon turned from his own fallible, to the infallible wisdom of God, or
light of his spirit, in which he saw the perpetual course of madness and folly
he had been guilty of, under the conduct of his own. So saw he the wisdom of
God, in his new covenant spirit of grace; and folly of man, throw-out, in his
old-covenant spirit of nature. Partakers of that creature-holy ghost (or
spirit) that is in personal union with the divine, are brought into unchangable
union of mind, with the divine. When Solomon turned to the exercise of this, he
turned from his own, as he advised others, Prove. 3. 5, 6. The spirit of God is
the creature-wisdom, the living Word of God, that is God (Jo. 1. 1.)
everlasting righteousness, true holiness. To keep up the life and way of Man's
will, wisdom, and spirit, against God's, is destructive Madness and folly. For,
what can he do that comes after the King? Solomon, King of litteral, and also,
mystical earthly Jerusalem, in all the glory, wisdom, and righteousness of man?
He reigned as a King there, for a season, over his sensual powers, with the
Corinthians, in the but restored first-covenant spirit of the Law, 1 Cor. 4. 8.
He had the start and vantage-ground of all others, in his day, for finding true
hapiness in worldly vanities, if any such thing were ever to be found, therein.
What, litteral or mystical, all visible or invisible Riches and Glories of that
sort, signified, or amount unto, he had so full an experience, that for any to
think or hope to find therein, what he could not, is madness. The King, here,
may also point back to the first, or forward to the second Adam, in our flesh,
made under the Law, as the first. Both first and second Adam, in holy flesh,
life of the Law, righteousness of Man, were greater then Solomon, in the
first-creation Principle of life and action, and free from enmity to the
second. The first could not secure his standing, in that changable principle.
The second refused to attempt it, but surrendered and let it fall (for that
principle of unchangable righteousness, in which he could) as the first ought
to have done. He would not be a Judge, Ruler, or King, in the former, as the
professing Jews, in that spirit, would have had him, who crucified him for
owning himfelf a King, in the latter, wherein the Son of God. Yet, such a King,
will he show himself to be, to their sorrow, whether they will or no. What can
men hope for, in but some gradual restorings of that life of nature, they had
in perfection, untinctur'd also with filth of spirit, or enmity to God, and the
power of godliness, in his spirit of grace, which lurk's under the highest
restored Righteousness of Man, or form of godliness, in his spirit of nature?
Adam, in innocence, had not eternal life; and God took away what he had, his
fading, for his sinful keeping it up against (and refusing to surrender it in
exchang for) his everlasting life. If what was Adam's sin, to do, be asserted
the duty he ought to have done (to Wit, the keeping what he had, and where he
was) what instructions are we like to have, toward the avoiding a sinning
after the similitude of his transgression? And they that confine the Death of
the second Adam to his body, denying the surrender and Death of his spirit, as
to its first-covenant Life of the Law, will teach the pitying, sparing, and
keeping up of that ( as Satan, by Peter, counseled Christ himself) to be the
very way of salvation. Thus runs the doctrine of Satan's and Man's other
Gospel, in a flat contradiction to Christ's, in every point.

Verse. XIII. Then I saw, that Wisdom excels Folly, as far as Light excels
Darkness.
Wisdom and Folly, Light and Darkness, character the first and second Covenant,
or Old and New creation Law and Gospel-principles of life, desire, thought, and
action, in Men. The excellency of the second, admits no comparison with the
first. The first has no Glory (Wisdom, Light, Righteousness) to the second,
that excell's and remain's, for ever; 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11. The first is mavelous
darkness, as to all spiritual things of God, and grand concerns of man: The
second, mavelous light, discovering all things, divine, spiritual, and
natural, in their distinct goodnesses. Ye were darkness (in your own spirit of
nature, corrupt or enlightened) now are ye light in the Lord's spirit of grace;
walk as Children of this light. ( Ephesians. 5. 8.) walk, not as fools in your own
spirit; but as wise ( verse. 15.) in the Lord's. Man's spirit, since the fall,
in the highest renewals, is of Satan's palate, savours not, sees, or receives
any things of the spirit of God; Mat. 16. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 14. All, that finally
prefer their darkness to God's light, will find everlasting darkness their
portion. The glorious advantages of the wisdom and light of God's spirit,
render it most desirable to man; Prove. 3. 13- 18. and, 4. 5- 13. True wisdom
call's out to all, in corrupt or enlightened nature, as fools and simple, in
their main concern; Prove. 1. 20-23. and, 8. 5. The folly of Man, in corrupt
nature, is seen of all. But, enmity to God, and the power of Godliness, in that
spirit of grace, wherein alone any can be saved, is seen of none, in the
highest wisdom of restored nature. And this is the root of all spiritual
Wickednesses, Uncleanesses, Idolatries, and Murders. These all lurk under fair
shows in holy flesh, form of Godliness and righteousness of Man, in the
restored Image of the earthy. All natural excellencies in Man or Angel, are but
a fading flower. All the mystical Gold, Silver, and Rubies thereof, perishing
nothings, to the new creation Wisdom and things of God. And, what then, to the
infinite divine Wisdom and things of God? less then nothing; Isa. 40. 17.
Christ offers his durable Life, Riches and Substance, his Heavenly treasures,
for Man's fading Earthly shadows, and is refused; Mat. 19. 21, 22. Wisdom of
nature, in corrupt or moral Heathen, and in first covenant Saints, excells the
folly contrary thereunto, as Light, Darkness. But this reaches not the intended
mystery and truth of this scripture.

Verse. XIIII. The wise Man's Eyes are in his head; but the fool walks in
darkness: and I my self perceived also, that one event happens to them all.
The truly wise, sees with the Eyes of Christ, his spiritual Lord and Head; in
his light, he sees light (Psalm. 36. 9.) in the spiritual light of Christ, the
infinite divine Light and Glory. Man, and all he does, in this light, this
spirit, has the praise of God; but, not at all of men, wise, righteous Men.
Paul was of high account with such, when a persecuting first-covenant Saint, in
his holy flesh; of no account with them, when a suffering spiritual Saint, in
God's Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 4. 8-13. 2 Cor. 10. 12. He was contented to be a
nobody with men, when such a one as the Lord commends; passed not for Man's
day, or judgment of him. The righteousness of Man kept up in enmity to God's,
is highly esteemed of men, but, abominable to God. And, the righteousness of
God, in the spiritual Saint, is highly esteemed of God; but abominable to man,
with all the words thereof. Man's Soul, established in his own Righteousness,
loath's God's soul, or spirit; and God's, his, Zec. 11. 8. Man's loathing God,
is the greatest wickedness: God's loathing him, and dealing with him
accordingly, the just punishment thereof.

In the spiritual Eyes of their Head, do true Saints fix their eyes on Christ,
their Lord and Head; receive his counsels, and obey him, amid'st all
uncertainties, darknesses and miscarriages of their natural Man. They walk in
his spirit of light; fools, in their own spirit of darkness. Paul, when wise in
God, seemed a fool to men, men wise in Christ, by his first-covenant
communications. Christ marred that visage, wisdom, and image of the earthy, in
his own person, which they trust in, for Salvation. Paul cast away all they
trust in, as dung, for the spirit and wisdom of God, the life and image of the
Heavenly. No being wise in God, without being fools, to Men; 1 Cor. 3. 18. and,
4. 10. Man, in the highest Light and Wisdom of his own nature, is indeed the
Fool, tossed up and down by the various Winds of Satan's diverse and strange
doctrines, walking in darkness, not knowing whither he goes, or what he does;
who, or what he worship's. He reckons, he is making safe steps toward
Salvation, when making swift steps to destruction. Man, that finally trust's in
his own Wisdom, for directing his steps; sides, and hold's with the Devil, as
his Head; true Saints, with Christ, for directing their Steps, in his spirit.
But, how does one event happen to them all, Wise and Fools? This one event is a
twofold death, incident to both, in the twofold mortal Life of their Body and
Spirit. It Is appointed to all men, good and bad, Once to Die (Heb. 9. 27.) as
to both these lives, in their natural state. By such Death, are all, first or
last, cut off from (and for ever deprived of) all outward or inward, litteral
or mystical riches and comforts of this World. The whole Life of the natural
state, in the love or wrath of God, will be taken from every Man and Angel.
Mortality and Death is legibly written out upon all, in the perishing nature of
all they are possessed of, however obstinately kept up, and trusted in, by
most. The event that happens or falls to the Lot of the obedient surrenderer of
his natural Life, under the Cross; or rebellious refuser so to do (which brings
him under the same Cross or Gospel-sword, in final wrath) after the said one
event that happens to both, and all, will be found exceedingly differing, even
a state of eternal Life or Death. God rejects men's false confidences, but
approves of their distrust and despair in themselves, or best things in their
own Nature; as, verse. 20.

Verse. XV. Then said I in my heart, as it happens to the fool, so it
happens even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart,
that this also is vanity.
Here is the bottom thought of Solomon's heart, in this matter. In the Wisdom
of God, he reflects upon and reviews himself, in all his former glory and
wisdom of a man, and then compares himfelf (and any other, in like case) made
wise, strong and honorable in Christ (by his renewalls of their old natural
state, and fresh quickening them up into the life thereof, out of their fallen
state of death in trespasses and sins) with the fool, and finds one Chance or
Lot, happen to all that are but such wise men (never proceeding farther) and
the fool; even a state of eternal darkness and death. The Fool, in the lowest
sense, is, what we call a mere Natural, destitute, in a manner, of any use of
his rational Powers, through indisposition of Body. Again, a man, weak and
shallow in his natural Powers, and uncultivated by Education, Reading and
Converse with better Understandings, is a Fool, to a man of deep Natural
Judgment, quickness of Mind, of a soaring searching Capacity, and great Reach,
advanced also by Learning and Converse. This Fool and wise Man may both be
found, and often are, in the but heathenish spirit of nature, and that, in the
corrupt, rebellious state thereof, walking contrary to such, and to all light
and wisdom, natural and spiritual. The moral righteous Heathen, that endeavors
to obey such light of nature ( as Christ a-fresh sets up in every man that
comes into the world) though of less light and speculative wisdom or capacity
then the former, is a wiser and better man. The first-covenant Saint, with his
holy flesh, wise, strong and honorable in Christ, though of less speculative
wisdom then either, is wiser and better then both; and then, the spiritual,
new covenant Believer and Saint (that seems a fool to them all, as having
quitted all Wisdom of man, for God's, is not only wiser then them all, but the
only truly wise, and they all fools, as to the whole of their eternal concerns.
In general, all are fools in a scripture sense, God's judgment, that make the
visible or invisible glories and excellencies of this world's perishing
vanities, the only objects of all their desire, delight, labor and love. All
inward mystical riches, heaped up in the fruitful exercise of a restored
first-covenant life, under the fructifying influencings of Christ, as a sleshly
Bridegroom, are passant vanities, as mortal and perishable as the life and
outward concerns of the body, that all men know to be so; and will make
themselves Wings and slay away, or depart from all the possessours thereof.
This then, leaves the title wise, only to the spritual saint, that's counted the
veriest fool of all, by all (but such as himself, that is, by all fools) as not
fit to live, any longer upon the Earth, amongst them. Thus thought and said,
Holy, Wise, Righteous, first-covenant professors, concerning Paul. Act. 22.
22. And, of Christ himself, they said, he has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye
him? Jo. 10. 20. All, below the truly wise, Spiritual Man (both wise and fools,
within the compass of their natural state, in all the forementioned senses)
will be alike brought to the greatest loss, disappointment and misery,
imaginable, as to any thing of hapines, in eternal Darkness, Torment and
Vexation of spirit, under unquenchable Wrath. They Will all lie down, in Sorrow,
for ever. This being so, Solomon says, Why was I then more Wise? to wit, in my
renewed Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of Man? To what purpose, do I labor in
this, that is but folly and darkness it self, as to all Divine, Spiritual,
Heavenly, most concerning things and Truths? Moreover, from the changableness
and Mortality of it, alway's exposed to death and loss. All therefore that
trust therein, must needs meet with eternal vexation of spirit. This is yet
more fully witnessed.

Verse. XVI. For there is no remembrance of the wise, more then of the fool, for
ever; seeing that which now is, in the days to come, shall all be forgotten;
and how dies the Wise Man? as the Fool.
Man, in the corrupt, and man in the Righteous Life of nature, are brought to
an equality in the grave of both. Death level's their spirits as well as
bodies. All the fading inward or outward riches and glory of the Princes of
this World, litteral or mystical (such professing first-covenant Saints, as
crucified Christ, for the life and doctrine of the second) that come to naught
(1 Cor. 2. 8.) will vanish, and come to nothing. However good in their kind,
and for a season, the highest excellencies, beauties and glories, of humane or
angelical nature, be; all that is now so, in the days to come, shall be
forgotten. It has the praise of man, but's of small or no account with God,
while it last's. Spiritual Seer's, God's watchmen, warn both the righteous and
wicked, of this; Scribe and Pharisee, as well as Publican and Harlot, that in
the life of nature, corrupt or righteous, they will all likewise perish; and
the established (...), found the highest and most criminal sinners; Ezekiel. 3.
16-21. and chapter 18. 20. 28. chapter 33. 11-19. The same Cross, or slaming
Gospel-Sword, they refuse to submit to, in love, will be upon them, in sinal
wrath. Js. 1. 19, 20. The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. What need of
farther testimony? Let the righteous turn from his righteousness, to his old
sins, in corrupt nature, or turn it into the highest wickedness, by seting it
up, against the righteousness of God; let him turn from his righteousness,
either of these two ways, he lies down in sorrow with the fool, or fixed
common sinner of the Gentiles, for ever; Ezekiel. 33. 13. This dismal end, come
both to. Such righteous men, exalted to Heaven (in the restored Life of the
first, and light of the second) instead of admission into the kingdom, will be
laid under greater final wrath, then litteral Sodom, as their most dreadful
doom, and amazing disappointment. They have rejected confidence in God; and he,
their confidences in themselves; Jer. 2. 37. By establishing their own
righteousness, in the first, against God's in the second-covenant, they become
of a Changable People of God, an unchangable Synagogue of Satan, in unchangable
enmity to God, and union with the Devil. All, fixed in nature (corrupt or
righteous, fools or wise, therein) will go to the same Tophet, prepared for
both, under unquenchable wrath, and the said righteous have the worst on it,
there, for ever.

Verse. XVII. Therefore I hated life, because the Work that is wrought, under
the sun, is grievous unto me: for, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Solomon, in the wisdom of God, sees all he had bin long doing in his own,
vanity and vexation of spirit, all his (...) and labor therein, grievous to
him. Rightly considering and reviewing all, in the infallible light of true
wisdom, he argues himself into a most concerning duty ( without which, Christ
says, none can be his disciples) the hating his own life (with all the
desires, designs, thoughts, ways, righteousness, wisdom, and best things
thereof, as vanishing shadows) for the durable Riches, Wisdom, Life,
Righteousness, and things of God. All pleasures, and delusive joy in the
former, all love of this World, the delights of the Sons of Men, he finds, in
the spirit of the next, enmity to God ( Jam. 4. 4.) and so, destructive to man.
In nature, corrupt or righteous, since the fall, are men found hating (and
hateful to) God, and one another, as scrambling for a hapines to them all, out
of things that can never make any one of them happy, but leave every one in the
eternal loss of their own Souls. It Is a just Judgment of God (on all
obstinate seekers for hapines, where God has abundantly convinced and warned
them, it is never to be found) it should be so. Solomon's reason for hating this
life, and man's whole course and race therein, is, because it, and all done in
it, under the sun, is grievous unto him; not only unprofitable to the worker,
toward hapines, but directly destructive to his whole being. When this is
discovered by the spirit of God, in and to men, all the former delusive Mirth,
Joy, and Laughter, is spoiled. Then nature grows sullen, and angry at the
discoverer, fighting continually against it, in the very Saint. Flesh is
offended at (offend's and grieves, opposes and fights against) the said spirit,
as Paul found even holy flesh, righteous nature, in all its workings, desires,
and thoughts, to do, Romans 7.

Verse. XVIII. Yea, I hated all my labor, which I had taken under the Sun:
because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
In the former Verse, he hated his own vain Life; in this, all his vain labor
therein, as both, and all, vanity and vexation of spirit; not only
unprofitable, but grievous to him, Life and Works, Principles and Operations.
Here, he gives another reason for hating them; because he should leave the
Product and Result of all such his labors, to the man that shall be after him.
As figure and shadow of his meaning, herein, it is with many, the whole design
of all their Labors and Travels, to heap up outward treasures to themselves,
and leave to their Posterity, great Possessions, called after their own Name;
as if they had any concern therein, when deceased; or, any relief thereby,
when, with Dives, tormented in the flames of God's Wrath. And, as to any
advantage to Posterity, how know they, but their Successors will blot out and
deface, by their unwise and sinful practices, what they got by their wise and
honest labors; though great things, of that sort, are seldom so gotten? Such
great things puff up, and are often the ruin of those that come after them. This
was Solomon's own case, in his foolish Son Rhehoboam, who following the rash
dictates of ignorant young (...), and rejecting the sage counsel of grave
Senators that stood before his Father, disobliged the People, lost ten parts of
his Kingdom, at first entrance on his Government; and he, and his Successors
held the rest, not without great confusions, troubles and desolating Wars, with
the Kings of Israel, their Brethren, and from such Nations round about, as were
common enemies to both; Moab, Ammon, (...), Edom, Philistines, etc. 1 King. 12.
Yet is this but the lowest and least part of Solomon's meaning, in these and
the following words.

Verse. XIX. And, who knows whether he shall be a wise Man, or a fool? Yet
shall he have Rule over all my labor wherein I have labored, and wherein I
have showed my self wise, under the Sun. This is also vanity.
Here is a deep mystical Truth. The fading Laodicean Riches, and great
Possessions, treasured up, in and by the fruitful exercise of my own spirit, in
the restored first-covenant Life of the Law, Who knows (...) a wise Man, or a
fool shall (get, and) rule over it? Whether the supreamly wise man, Christ
himself, by his Gospel-sicle, Sword, or Cross, as freely and obediently
surrendered to him; or the Man of sin, and Son of Perdition, the greatest
mystical Fool, the Devil? Those that give up themselves and all Christ's gifts
to them, of first-covenant Life, Wisdom, and Ornaments, and second-covenant
Light (with all their fruits and effects, brought forth therein, mystical Corn,
Wine, Oil, Silver and Gold) to Baal, or Moloch, the Lord or King, and god of
this World, are willing he should reap and gather all; and so, use all Christ's
own gifts to them, and all the fruits of their own labors therein, against
Christ and God himself, to their own destruction, as qualified thereby to be
the most gygantick opposers and fighters against God. Man walk's in a vain
show, disquiets himself in vain, heaping up Riches, and not knowing who shall
gather them, Psalm. 39. 6. Till Man come to a resolution, whose Arms he will
cast himself into (with his changable Life and Riches) Christ's or the Devil's
(in order to be fixed in the unchangably good Spirit of the former, or evil one
of the latter) He knows not who shall gather all; or, what will become of him
and all he has gotten. One of these will certainly gather all, in conclusion.
All puffed up self-exalters against Christ, give themselves, and all they have,
into the hands of that Lucifcrian Head, and King over all such children of
Pride (Job 41. 34.) receiving his spirit of unchangable enmity to God, for the
Principle of their Life, Desire, Thought, and Action. All fixed first-covenant
Kings, are absolutely engaged in Satan's reign, in perfect opposition to Christ
and his invisible Saints; whose saintship, or spiritual Life, is hid with
Christ in God, till Christ's second appearing, and rendering it visible in
himself and them, which will be the Manifestation of the Sons of God. Christ
offers true freedom to all, even the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. But,
multitudes of enlightened, holy, first-covenant Professors (and no better,
whatever they reckon themselves) choose rather, for self-preservation, against
the Cross, to be slaves of the Devil (the arrantest slave of all) and so, to
have their ears boared, as his servants for ever, on their willful refusal of
true Liberty. This is figured out, Ex. 21. 5, 6. At last, Christ, by his Cross
and spiritual Gospel-Sword or Sicle, will reap down and gather or take from all
evil Angels and Men, all the Riches and Comforts, all the fading Glory and
Power they have used against him, under Satan's reign, and tread them all under
foot, in his reign. From a sober Reflection upon the whole matter, in the Spirit
of Truth (discovering the vanity of all first-creation Life, and things of Man,
with all his vain Labors, and uncertain Riches; and then the uncertainty, as
to who shall gather them, to his everlasting damage or greatest gain) he looks
on all Man's Labors, and Possessions in the confounded state of his own
Nature, corrupt or righteous (on all these accounts, put together) to be but a
hateful vanity, and vexation of spirit. So he farther declares,

Verse. XX. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
Labor which I took under the Sun.
So should every one (in union of mind with Christ) hate his own Life, with all
his Labors, and Fruits, brought forth in the but restored natural Principle
(or Spirit of the first-covenant Law of Works) for the Life, Wisdom, and
Righteousness of God, in the second, the new covenant spirit of the Gospel. The
former, at best, was but changably good; and since the Fall, enmity to God, or
filth of spirit is inseparable from it; direct enmity to that creature-spirit,
or holy Ghost, in the new Life whereof only, it is possible to please God, or be
saved. A heart, set to love that Life, in which man hates (and is hateful to)
God, is a heart fixed in (or set to do) evil, for ever. Solomon therefore sets
his heart to hate the whole Life, and all the best works, done in the single
activity of his own nature, at best, under the twofold first-creation Sun,
litteral and mystical; as abovesaid. Of this he gives a farther account, verse.
21, -23.

Verse. XXI. For, there is a man, whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge,
and in equity: Yet, to a man that has not labored therein, shall he leave it
for his portion. This also is vanity, and a great Evil.
Solomon gives an account of himself, in the Man here described by him,
traveling in Wisdom, Knowledge, and Equity; that is, in the wise and righteous
actings of his own restored, enlightened nature. All this, he finds vain, and
unprofitable; yea, a great grief and sorrow to him. Here Is the sad result of
all man's goodness and fruitfulnes, in his own nature. All is vanity, the (...)
tree of good and evil (and since the fall, of evil only, filth of spirit at
least, which is the greater sort of evil) with the Fruits; the Root with the
Branch; Principle and Operations, Desires, Thoughts, Counsels, Purposes, Words,
Actions, all naught. The loss of all, as obediently surrendered to the
sacrificing hand, Gospel-cross, Sword and Fire of God's High Priest, is our
only way of being delivered from all evil, of sin or punishment, for ever. And,
on such obedience, we shall certainly receive the promise of the Father, the
everlasting creature-life and spirit of the Son, which will fill us with all
good, for ever, above wonder.

Is not here great Gain, on all hands, to encourage us to bear such loss, the
spiritual Law of the Cross, and ordinances of God's new creation sanctuary call
for, as undispensably necessary for our admission or entrance thereinto? This
exchang-traffique of Law for Gospel, Life of Nature for Grace, Earthly for
Heavenly, the natural life of the Creature, for the spiritual life of the
Creator, is the highest and best market, man can make, of all his
first-creation vanities. Truth (or the Gospel Spirit of truth) can never be
bought, but to Man's unspeakable advantage; never sold or parted with, from
love to what is to be parted with for it, but to Man's unspeakable loss. Buy the
Truth, therefore, at any rate; but Sell it, at no rate, though all the
kingdom's of this World and glory of them (all natural, humane or Angelical
excellencies) be bidden for it. Paul, when eminent in first-covenant holiness,
parted with all, as dung, for this Truth. All that have tried this most
gainful traffic, have found it so. No active obedience, performable in Man's
own nature, ever does his work for salvation; but, passive; a right ceasing
from that life, with all its activity and labors. Should a Man live a thousand
years twice told, in the utmost fruitfulnes of his rectified naturals, he will
still find Solomon's account true; all vanity. All that is but Earthly, in Man
or Angel, all first-creation Life and fruits or works thereof, will be burnt up
by the fire of the second, 2 Pet. 3. 10. Christ's new creature spirit will try,
by its al-discovering light, all principles and works, whether natural or
spiritual, earthly or Heavenly; and then, all the former, that is changable and
perishable, will most certainly perish, or be burnt up by the fire of this
trying spirit. All that obediently submit not to this fiery trial, fall
inevitably under its everlasting burnings, in and upon them, in final Wrath.
All changable goodness, earthly, first-creation Life and Fruits, first or last,
must pass away, from obedient Saints, and incorrigible sinners, in God's Love
or Wrath. This fiery trial, seems grievous, at present, to nature, in Saints;
Heb. 12. 11. Our nature, in Christ himself, was sorrowful to death; cast out a
word, for scaping the Death-Cup, but he instantly called it back. His living
Soul, of the same kind with the first Adam's, was sorely put to it, made
exceeding sorrowful, under the death-work of his second-Adam's
quickning-spirit, or gospel-sword and fire upon it; Mat. 26. 38, 39. Obedient
submission to God's present, temporary Wrath, in this case, is the only
possible way of deliverance, from his Eternal; the Wrath to come. All willful
refusers of the former, are sure to meet with the latter. Those that with Paul,
received Gods just sentence of Death within them, On their naturals, at best,
have unspeakably the best on it. Those that please themselves awhile in
resisting and scaping it, fall under it for ever. The sufferings and shame
brought on the natural man of the Saint, are not to be compared with the joy
and glory of spiritual life, that follows. Nor does the present false joy,
stiffnecked resisters of the Cross (or holy Ghost, in its demolishing operation
upon their naturals) please themselves with, signify any thing, in comparision
of the griefs, torments, and vexation of spirit, this cross will bring upon
them, in Eternal Death. The demolishing-work of the Cross, is grievous to
nature, in Saints, at present: but, in no comparison so grievous as 'twil be to
it, in rebellious resisters; and that, for ever. True Saints soon find the
benefit of their obediently sacrificed nature, by a resurrection out of the
death of that, into the everlasting righteous life of the sacrificing high
Priest of their Gospel-profession; Melchisedeck. So have they eternal life
abiding in them, the Kingdom of Heaven within them, live and walk in Christ's
kingdom-spirit, the Gospel-principle of everlasting righteousness. Thus, by
submitting to the temporary wrath at present (brought upon them, in God's
everlasting kindness) do they escape the wrath to come.

But, what mean's Solomon, in saying, that all his wise labors, in his own
restored nature, must be left to a man that has not labored therein? Who is
this? Christ, in his originally unchangable creature-spirit of everlasting
righteousness and truth. Himself surrendered the earthly first-covenant
righteous life and labors thereof, in our flesh, to the flames of his own
eternal ( Heb. 9. 14.) everlasting righteous creature spirit, in sacrifice to
his own divine spirit, and God most high. The sacrifice, he offered; the
sacrificing Priest that offered it; and God, to whom offered; all are
comprehended in the worderful person of the Mediator, as the divine and
twofold creature form of God, originally spiritual, and spiritualized,
transformed, regenerate natural, baptized into the death, and assimilated in
the resurrection life of it, to the originally spiritual. This divine and
twofold creature-being, image, or form of God in Christ, is all called God,
even the spiritualized man Christ; Jo. 1. 1. All are the living Word and Oracle
of God's infinite divine mind; his Wonderful Counselor, to Angels and Men.
And, in all, stands he in a distinction, for ever, from God most high, in the
single and uncompounded divine essence, in which, the Father to this divine and
creature-Son, begotten from eternity, as the divine; and from everlasting (
Prove. 8- 23) as creature-Son of God. Hence is it said, the Mediator is not of
one (nature) but God is one. Gal. 3. 20. This sacrificing, Priestly,
Gospel Spirit of Christ, reapes or gather's, cut's down, burns up, and utterly
consumes all the life and labors or workings of Angel or Man, in their natural
first-creation make and life, as he served our fleshly nature, in his own
person. By his Cross or Gospel-sword, he gathers all, for sacrifice to God, as
his due required Tithes and Offerings (the mystical truth of the litteral) that
never labored or did any thing, in that natural state of life, but was
originally spiritual. This also is vanity, says Solomon, or shows the
insignificancy of man's or angel's labors in their earthly, first-creation
Life of vanity, about salvation. All must go, life and all, or they never can
be saved. And this is a great evil, or grieving consideration to man, that his
life, at best, and all done in it, are but perishing vanities, vanishing
shadows of things to come, or to be brought a-float in men, by a new creation.
It Is also Man's great evil, his unpardonable Sin, if he rob God, or withold his
Mystical Tithes and Offerings, Mal. 3. 8. (the most high and criminal Spiritual
sacriledg, many first-covenant Professors are guilty of in holy flesh; Romans 2.
22.) the best fruits or works of his own nature, life and all, from Christ's
Gospel-sword or Cross, and spiritual Circumcision-Knife; and so, from being an
obedient sacrifice, or holocaust to God, in all. There is also a great evil,
even direct enmity to God, found in all man's first-creation life of vanity,
the most restored Image of the Earthy, and best fruits producible therein. This
filth of spirit cleaves fast unto all, and is inseparable from Man's nature,
since the first sin of it. Christ's communicating to, and setting up his
spiritual life in Saints, makes them Lilies, that neither toil nor Spin, yet
grow into a flourishing fruitfulnes. No labor or toil of the natural spirit,
in the case; but, a rest from all that labor. God works all our works in us:
and we, all our works in him; Jo. 3. 21. Solomon, in all his glory, was not
Arrayed like one of these; Mat. 6. 28, 29. In all his fading natural
excellencies and perfections, he had no glory, to these beautiful new creation
Lilies, that excel. Men yield up all their fading natural life and fruits to
Christ, as the man, the spirit of everlasting righteousness; or to the Devil,
the Man of sin and everlasting wickedness. If to Christ, he offers all up, in
sacrifice to God. If to Satan, he sets up and uses all, in unchangable enmity
to God. When the Son of God had this life of vanity about him, the life of the
Law, God spared it not in him; nor did he pity or spare it in himself, as the
Devil by Peter advised him to do. Some, that have a mind to be bidding at
Salvation (and the new-building) in the way of the Cross, and will not bid up; are
willing to part with the corrupt life of nature, and palpably evil fruits and
lusts thereof, the refuse and worst of their Cattle; but, as Saul (in letter
and mystery) spare the choice things ( the King and best of the Cattle, in this
Amalekite-spirit of nature; keep back part of their earthly possessions, with
Ananias and Saphira, the righteous Earthly life and fruits thereof) will come
off, or fare as they did, lose their own selfchosen kingdom, life and all; 1 Samuel 15. 8, 9. and v. 18-23. Acts. 5. 1-10.

Verse. XXII. For, what has a Man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun?
Without a surrender of all, for that newness of life (in which alone he can
bring forth fruit unto God and be saved) all turns to his eternal loss and
disadvantage. This question is resolved.

Verse. XXIII. For, all his days are sorrows; and his Travel, grief; yea, his
heart takes not rest in the night. This is also vanity.
If first-covenant life be not, first or last, surrendered for the second (that
has bin no active principle or labourer in the way and Wisdom of the first)
all is lost. For, it is in the new life of the second, only, can any bring forth
fruit unto God, or be saved. This exchange of first for second, finally
refused, Man will have nothing to reap, of all his labors and travels in the
first, but unexpressible sorrows, grief, shame, and everlasting contempt, as
having wilfully rendered himself a Vessel of dishonor, for ever, under wrath.
He has changed all his goodness, the wrong way, into unchangable evil and
enmity to God, for which the unchangable wrath of God will be upon him. And
this will make that mystical Night of Darkness and Death, his heart can take no
rest in. This, come all men's vain labors for rest, in the life and activity
of their own nature, to; against all the faithful counsels, and timely warnings
of God. So will all the days, belonging to their immortal beings, even to all
eternity, be spent in torment, and vexation of spirit. They have rebelliously
walked in the light of their own Fire, and Sparks of their own kindling, the
fruits and births of their own light and wisdom, in the life and activity of
their own nature, and must lie down in Sorrow, for their pains. All
first-creation life of the Law, thus unlawfully used, in rebellion against God,
will be found not only vanity, but a great and sore evil to them, for ever.

Verse. XXIIII. There is nothing better for a man, then that he should Eat and
Drink; and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor. This also I
saw, that it was from the hand of God.
This eating and drinking as a taking pleasure and joy in man's labor, Solomon
recommend's, as savory advice, and a peculiar gift from God, cannot be any
thing, bordering upon brutish sensuality; nor yet Men's feeding and gratifying
themselves with the best fruits of their labors in a first-covenant Law-life:
for, in both these, men lie under the Curse of God; Gal. 3. 10. No feeding on
perishing meats, in a perishing life, can be the meaning of the spirit, Solomon
gave this counsel, in: but, a feeding on never-perishing Meats, suited to a
never-perishing life, as Christ, the true Solomon advises, with a negative dash
on all other life and meats; Jo. 6. 27. This only is a true blessing from God;
puts man under his approbation-seal; a Belly and Meats, he will not destroy;
All other, he will. All other life, finally kept up and fed in, tends to man's
final destruction. Right eating and drinking of Christ's living Bread and the
kingdom-Wine of his spirit, strengthens man in his newness of life, to bring
forth fruit unto God, daily more and more, from thirty to sixty, sixty to a
hundredfold, and from that, to a thousand, etc. endlesly. David, Solomon, and
other Saints have seen and proclaimed the vanity of all other Life and Meats,
with all Man's delusive, destructive joy, mistaken pleasures and confidences,
therein. They have recanted and declared the wrong measures they took in their
own fallible wisdoms, both of themselves, and Gods various dealings with them
and others, in this world. Enemies are gratified with more than heart can wish,
litteral or mystical riches, in their own nature, will, and way after their own
hearts, while true saints are plagued all their day long, in this World, and
chastned every morning; Psalm. 73. 4. 14. The natural man of the saint, envies,
frets, and is vexed at this worldly prosperity of the wicked; but their
spiritual, in God's Sanctuary-light, sees what all will come to; and so, quiets
their wrangling, envious natural, as an injurious quarreller at Gods
dispensations, and the methods of his wisdom; v. 16-19. Spiritual light
extricates them out of that labyrinth, and consused maze, their own wisdom and
thoughts run them, into; and sets all to rights. The blessed end of Saints
troubles, and dreadful conclusion of wicked Men's prosperity, pays for, and
answers all. This, seen, quiets the Saint, and fills him with Joy unspeakable
and glorious. This we find, over and over, Psalm. 37. and 73. (...) 21. and, in
plenty of other scriptures. Envy not their fools-paradice here, that has Hell
at end on it. All their laughter and merriment is but as the crackling of Thorns
under a pot, a short blaze, in this mortal World, and away. After their
Resurrection of Damnation, they will have time enough to pay their sad reckoning,
under the flamings forth of unquenchable Wrath, upon them. This will they have,
from God's hand. When Saints clearly see this twofold Issue of their trouble,
and others prosperity, in this world; can they envy, will they not pity them?
The afflictions of the one, and prosperity of the other, are both but a Dream.
Truth will out, at last, in the endless end, both arrive at, and come to, in
eternal life or death. When the Wicked awake out of their dreamish hapines, God
will despise their Image; destroy their life, and all their false comforts, in
the Image of the Earthy; Psalm. 73. 20. When Saints awake out of their
afflictiondream, they will be satisfied with Gods Heavenly Image, and his
new creature life, Psalm. 17. 15. One has but an Imaginary hapines: the other,
Imaginary trouble; all is but a vain show; Psalm. 39. 6. As Saints more
plentifully feed on the Lords never-perishing Meats, from his heavenly table,
they are more strengthened in that newness of life, in which they bring forth
never-perishing fruits, unto God. God requires (and delights in) their eating
and drinking abundantly, at his Heavenly Table, the glorious fruits of his
divine and creature-spirit, the Tree of Life. They can never be too much filled
with his spirit ( Ephesians. 5. 18.) and fruits thereof. No rioting or excess, at his
Table: never too much of his Wine. The more, any feed at his table, the more
they discover and nauseate Satan's worldly meats, and wine. Let him gild his
perishing vanities with never so near a resemblance of Christ's meats, 'twon't
do. They can spy out his Contemptible meats, under all the beautiful disguises
he puts upon them, and reject them. See then the mystery and truth of Solomon's
declaration, here. There Is nothing better for a man, then to eat and drink the
good of all his spiritual labors, which never are in vain in the Lord; 1 Cor.
15. 58. All other labor, in man's own nature, is in vain, as to his grand
concern. Life, Fruits, Labors, nothing vain, in a new creation state; all, in
the old. All Is unchangable, in the new; all, vanishing, in the old; Tree and
Fruit, Root and Branch, Womb and Births. Fruits in the new, are Peaceable
fruits of Righteousness, in a union of mind with God; not so, in the Old. All,
there, is done in a spirit of enmity to God; even the best and most righteous
works of man. By works of Grace, in God's new covenant spirit, Abraham was
Justified, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2. 21-24. Such works, wrought in God, or
in the spirit of faith, are ingredients into the saint's Justification; not any
works or deeds of the Law-spirit of nature; Romans 4. 2-6. The true saint does
not live, war, or walk after the flesh, but against it, in the spirit. The
ruling principle in man, denominates. A predominant exercise of the corrupt
spirit of nature (with the vile affections and brutish lusts thereof)
denominates Man, a Beast. The ruling exercise of the enlightened principles of
nature, declare a man, a Legal Christian, or, at least, a moral Heathen. The
ruling exercise of the Gospel Spirit, in man, makes a spiritual Saint, a
Gospel-Christian. And now, by this opening of these words, into the mystical
truth of them, is not excluded a shadowy litteral sense thereof, as
countenancing a right and free use of the concerns of bodily Life, for the end
by God intended in them, against the folly of those, that from an evil
covetousness, and vain, self-tormenting solicitude, find no heart or power to
eat thereof, to the best advantage of the Life, that is more then meat; and the
Body, that is more then Raiment; Mat. 6. 25.

Verse. XXV. For, who can eat? or who else can hasten hereunto, more then I?
Solomon, here, declares his Privilege, through the awak'ned Wisdom of God in
him, of hastening to, and feeding at Christ's Heavenly Table, on the things of
God. Who carried forth with a stronger bent of affection to things above (Col.
3. 2.) then I? He found a strength of spiritual appetite, carrying him forth to
eat and drink abundantly, according to Christ's Invitation to his supreamly
doubleportion'd (...) (...) Saints (of which number, himself seems to be (...)
(...) in his own mysterious Song; Cant. 5. 1.

Verse. XXVI. For, God gives to a man that is good in his sight, Wisdom, and
Knowledge, and Joy: But, to the sinner he gives Travel, to gather and to heap
up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also is vanity and
vexation of spirit.
The good man, in God's sight, is the spiritual Saint, in distinction from all
others. What Is unchangably good only, is properly good in God's sight. None
good, insinitely, from Eternity, but God only: (...) everlasting to Eternity,
is the creature-spirit in the Mediator, good. And, to Eternity, are all
obedient Angels and Saints, born of that spirit, and brought forth in the
everlasting righteous Life thereof, good before God. No Angel, no Man, no
thing, in the first-creation-make or State of Angel or Man, is, in this sense,
good; however good in their kind, and right use; yea, very good; Genesis 1. 31.
The natural man of the Saint, in the restored first-covenant Life and Image of
the earthy, is made good in God's sight, by submitting to the Plow-work of the
Cross ( Christ's spiritual husbandry upon it) pointed so deep, as to tear up by
the Roots, the natural principle of enmity. And then, by the same hand, or
spiritual Plow, is quick'ned up, the (before) dormant seed of an incorruptible
righteous new creation Life, in which Man's nature, as made new earth, brings
forth fruit unto God. This is the Earth, that, by drinking in the spiritual
Rain-waters of Life, that come often npon it, brings forth herbs, meet for them
by whom it is dressed; Christ, and God most high; Heb. 6. 7. Saints are thus,
Gods Husbandry; and Christ, the Mystical Husbandman, that does the work. He
cleanses from filth of flesh, the vile fruits and lusts of the corrupt Nature.
This yet, (...) not or enables men to bring forth fruit unto God; but to
themselves only ( Hos. 10. 1.) toward the farther enriching and adorning their
own nature. They are empty Vines, and but fallow Fields, yet, to God. Somewhat
cleared are they, from the Nettles and Thistles of the corrupt spirit of
nature; but they bring forth no right Grapes, or good fruit, unto God;
unchangably good. A seed of enmity, remaining in them, after all natural
cleansings, is a Root of bitterness, bearing Gall and Wormwood, Briars and
Thorns, in a bloody, bitter, murderous mind of enmity against God, Christ, and
all his Gospel-Saints and Truths. So see we the good man, here, rendered so, by
God's unspeakable Gift, consisting in true Wisdom, Knowledge, and Joy, joy
unspeakable and Glorious in the holy Ghost, or spiritual principle of
everlasting righteous life, desire, thought, word, and action. And hereby is he
fitted to enjoy God, in whose favorable presence is fulness of Joy, and at
whose right hand are pleasure's for evermore; Psalm. 16. 11.

Secondly then, who is the Sinner, here?

This sinner is, not only nor chiefly, the common sinner, in the corrupt spirit
of nature, unfix'd there. All are so born, Children of Wrath and death, serving
diverse lusts, hateful, and hating one another; Ephesians. 2. 3. Tit. 3. 3. All are
sinners against the son of man, or light and righteous life of the
first-covenant law, the highest edition and dispensation whereof, was found in
Christ's person, as Son of Man, in the earthly law-life of our nature, holy
flesh. If such sins and sinners were not pardonable, and the wrath thereby
provoked and demerited, atoneable (by Christ's obedient sacrifice of that
spotles law-life, and by his powerful intercessions) no man could be saved. The
sinner here, then, is of a higher rank, and deeper die, then so. The principles
of corrupt and righteous nature, in a kind of struggle and fight against each
other, in man, too generally mistaken for flesh and spirit, are but corrupt and
holy flesh, which join in war against what is truly called spirit, in scripture;
the spirit of Christ, and spiritual mind thereof, in Saints; Gal. 5. 17. Paul,
in holy flesh, was a fierce persecuter of Gods Holy Spirit, and true saints.
And, when a signal Apostle, he found that holy flesh a fighter against Gods
holy spirit, in himself, as he abundantly complain's; To. 7. While man then
interprets the words of Gods wisdom, by the short-sighted conceptions and words
of his own wisdom, he shuts up the kingdom of Heaven, excludes all the mystery
and spiritual truth of scripture, out of all his teaching, and reputed orthodox
divinity. All this lies buried in deep silence and inadvertency. And, would
this were all. When the spiritual mystery, and kingdom-sense of all scripture,
is offered, such humane divines (in their lying spirit of (...), as to all
Gospel Truths or things of God) set themselves, might and main, to (...) and
decry it; dissuade their hearers from listening to it, as the most detestable,
blasphemous doctrine, in the world.

The enlight'ned, professing, righteous Jewish Teachers, said, on this very
account, of Christ himself, he has a Devil, and is Mad; Why hear ye him? Joh.
10. 20. Do any of the Scribes or Pharisees believe him? None but silly ignorant
Women and Fishermen, Publicans and Harlots, such as know not the Law, and are
cursed, regard his words. Here Is the pass, Golpel-truths were at, amongst the
only professing people, at that day, in the world, when Christ himself was the
Preacher. Such Sinners against the Holy Ghost (or gospel spirit of truth, when
rich, full, and reigning as Kings, as needing nothing for Salvation, when they
want every thing; 1 Cor. 4. 8. 10. Rev. 3. 17.) Wise, Strong, and honorable in
Christ, as to first-covenant seize, and fruitful in the life thereof,
these are the very sinner or sinners, here meant, when obstinately fixed there.
The self-same law-spirit, or restored principle of righteous life and action,
in their own nature, fixed in, under the outward dispensation of the Gospel,
renders men a-like prejudiced, now, against the whole mystery and truth of
Gospel ( the very Christ, the very Gospel) as they were, under the outward
dispensation and ceremony of the Law. They exclude all the Gospel-sense of all
scripture, old and new Testament, out of all their divinity. (...) are the
divines that shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men, not entering themselves
nor suffering others to enter. They set up Satan's kingdom of mavelous
darkness, for Christ's Kingdom of mavelous light. They preach up that
accursed other Gospel, he preached to Eve (and is at, ever since) that man
shall not die at all, that is, that in his own enlightened righteous nature, he
has eternal Life. So Second-covenant, newness of Life, true Grace,
Regeneration, etc. are all frustrated or made void, as useless nothings, that
are all in all, for true salvation. All new covenant Titles are given to the
old, and the very new, (...), with all its doctrine, as madness. These that pass
thus for Christ's only Church and Saints, will be found, when God is Judge
himself, the most criminal sinners, beyond litteral Sodom, even a spiritual
Egypt and Babylon. In all their conformity to Christ, in that Life of our
nature, he crucified, are they in flat opposition to that spiritual, he raised
it into, in which he lives for evermore, Rev. 1. 18. These (...) painted
Sepulchers, whited Walls, full of enmity to God, filth of spirit, mystical
rottenness and corruption. They are Thieves and (...), that (having shut up the
right Door of Entrance into the kingdom, by the death of nature at best, under
the Cross) climb up some other way, to take it by violence; force their
entrance, in holy flesh, their own Wisdom and strength, with satan. Christ
crucified and abolished all that, in himself, they daringly and presumptuously
attempt to enter it, with. These are Wolves in sheeps Clothing, dressing up
their visible saint-ship in but holy Flesh, with all the words, and titles
belonging to the invisible saint, in God's holy spirit, a life yet hid with
Christ in God. In this disguise, are these mystical robbers of Christ and his
true saints, of all their titles, their fiercest and most outrageous enemies;
as Christ warn's his followers; Mat. 10. 16-18.

Next then, what is meant by God's giving such a sinner travel, to gather and to
heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God?

1. First, what is it, this sinner gathers and heaps up? 2. Secondly, in what
sense is God the giver to him, with pain and travel, so to do? 3. And, thirdly,
how, and in what sense, is what he so heaps up, given to him that is good
before God?
To the first. The peculiar treasures of the choicer sort of Kings of the
earth, mystical Silver and Gold ( v. 8; and, Jam. 5. 2, 3.) the Laodicean
treasures of such first-covenant Kings ( Rev. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 8.) of the
earthly Jerusalem-spirit, as are totally destitute of the heavenly. Men reckon
their matters safe, as to eternal life and peace with God, in a spirit of
direct enmity to him

To the second. As a present punishment for so doing, God gives them pain and
travel in heaping up such riches. How? By spiritual light, he convincingly
shows them the vanity of all that life and treasure, and requires all in
sacrifice (by a holy death) to him. This (besides the far greater punishment
that follows, under the wrath to come) gives present pain, amid'st all their
self-deluding satisfactions in this upper sort of the delights of the Sons of
men. The distinct superior excellency of spiritual life and things of God, in
the second or new covenant, beyond Man's, in the first or old ( as far as the
heavens are above the earth) convincingly set before them, in mercy, when
wilfully sinned against, torment's them. For, such conviction becomes a
self-condemning witness against them, as fixed dwellers on the said mystical
Earth, or their earthly life, when offered Heaven, or God's spiritual, heavenly
life, by a new creation. Christ sends his spiritual convictions into them, as
faithful spies, that give a good report of his true land of promise, or state
of life. These, sinned against, and not hearkened to, vex and torment them,
taking from them such full undisturbed delights and uninterrupted pleasure, as
they desire to find in their earthly life, will, and way. Gods spiritual
conviction-light (given in mercy) finally rebelled against, is, in wrath, kept
up in their consciences, as a never dying Worm, that will torment them, to all
eternity, witnessing against themselves, as unpardonably guilty; and for God,
as most just, in his unquenchable wrath upon them; Mar. 9. 44. Now, this
gnawing Worm, that will be this sinner's everlasting tormentor in the world to
come, is a sore allay to his false joy, in this. Spiritual conviction is as a
particular day of Gods Judgment in and upon man, before the general comes. The
accusing voice thereof in him, holds him to it, and forces him to see, that all
the treasure he is heaping up, for the last day's ( Jam. 5. 3.) is indeed, no
other nor better then a treasuring up wrath for himself, against the day of
wrath; To. 2. 5. This is a sowring ingredient, in the midst of all the sweet
and contentment, this unpardonably guilty sinner desires to find in his own
selfe-chosen way, and self-chusing will. He may know and conclude, nothing
remains to him of benefit, from Christ's sacrifice and intercession; and so,
nothing at all, from God, but fiery indignation, Heb. 10. 26, 27. So, of the
first part of his punishment, even at present, in this world. The second, we
shall find, in considering the third particular.

To the 3d, then. By Gods overruling hand, he shall be made to give all his
heaped up treasures, to him that is good before God, whom he unchangably hates.
And, this will be a tormenting consideration, and sore vexation of his spirit,
his heaped up vanities will prove unto him; which is the concluding word of this
Chapter. All, the sinner (in the latter part of this verse) labors for, and
gathers, he must give, or shall be given, whether he will or no, to the good man
or spiritual saint, in the former part. In the parable of the talents ( Mat.
25. 14-30) we find, that the evil servant, who kept his own single earthly
talent, or earthly first-covenant life, refusing to exchange it, for Christ's
heavenly, is called Wicked and Slothful Servant, and his Talent taken from him,
and given to him that had ten, as having made the required Exchang, by death,
to his advantage and great gain. All the (...) goodness, and Comforts, in the
first Creation-Life and State (kept up, and held fast, by Evil Angels and Men,
in Rebellion against God) shall be finally taken from them; and given to, or
Possessed by Spiritual Saints and Angels, as Comprehended in (and unspeakably
outdone by) the New Creation Life and State, where they receive their own (and
all others own) again, with Usury; ver. 27. Thus Christ Interprets his own
Parable. From him that has not the durable Riches, in New Creation Life, shall
be (...) away all his Fading, in the First; and given to him that has true
Riches in the second, with abundant Increase, for ever; ver. 29. This is of
like Significancy with that other faithful saying, and sure word of Prophecy;
whoever will spare or save his natural, earthly Life, from the death-work of
the Cross, shall lose it, under the same Cross, in final wrath; and, whosoever
will hate and lose his natural and earthly, for the sake of and love to Christ's
spiritual and heavenly (the only right use of his single first-creation Life
and Talent) shall find it with Usury, in Christ's heavenly; Mat. 16. 25. Never
was any thing in the former, could make up any degree of true hapines to Man or
Angel. God convincingly shows and graciously offer's his life to men; waits
with much patience and long-suffering for their accepting it, on his terms,
the death of their own nature, at best, or in what ever variety of condition,
in Publican and Harlot, or Scribe and Pharisee. He knocks at the Door of their
hearts, warn's, counsels, instructs, reproves them, invites, entreats,
beseeches them by his Ambassadors of grace. He calls out to them, to hear his
voice and not harden their hearts against him, while the day of his gracious
call and offers to them, last's. At length, on their willful Provoking him
beyond pardon, the great Master of the New Creation House or Building, shuts
the door, and is gone ( Luke 13. 25.) Swearing in his Wrath, they shall never
enter into his Rest; Heb. 3. 13. Then, they may seek and knock, while they
will, they will never find him (Prove. 1. 28) nor any place for Repentance, or
change of their Rebellious Mind, and desperate condition, for ever ( Heb. 6.
4-6.) Esau's Case; Heb. 12. 17. An obedient Exchange, by Death, of Fading
First-Creation Life, for the Everlasting Second, is unspeakable gain to Man.
The Rebellious keeping it up, in Enmity to the Cross, and Second, or to the
Spirit of God, and its Crucifying, Death-work upon it (in order to set up its
own Life in the Room) is unspeakable loss, to all that so do. This, Paul told
the Self-Confident Professors at Philippi, of, (in the fruitful Flourish of a
First-Covenant Righteous Life) even weeping, Phil. 3. 18.) and reproov'd the
Corinthians for, in like case (1 Cor. 4. 8. 10.) as Christ himself ( when
Ascended and Glorified) the Laodiceans; Rev. 3. 17, 18. By the very same hand,
Cross, or Gospel Spirit of Christ, will that Perishing Law-Life, with all the
Fruitfulness, heaped up Riches and meats thereof, be taken from them, in Final
Wrath, whether they will or no.

CHAP. III.
Verse. I. To every thing there is a Season, and a time to every Purpose under
the Heaven.
NExt to no difference from our Translation of this and the Seven following
Verses, in the Original Hebrew, three Eastern Versions, Chaldee, Syriac, and
Arabic, or the Septuagints Greek Translation.

In this Scripture, to Verse 8th, Inclusive, have we the Character of Man, in
his whole Personal Constitution, and Make, by the First Creation; or in
whatever Flourish of the restored Wisdom, and Exercise of a First-Covenant
Righteous Life, therein. In Body, Soul, and Spirit, no Life but Mortal, by
Creation. And, the same kind of Life, restored in him, since, is much short of
the perfection it was in, at First. Something of Filth of Flesh hangs about it,
still; and Filth of Spirit, that is worse, is inseparable from it, since the
fall. Life and all, therefore, must go, by a Holy Obedient death, in Sacrifice
to God. If (...) spared, and Rebelliously kept, it will be an Unholy life, in
unchangeable Enmity to God, doing despite to his Divine, and also, to his
New Creature, Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth.

In the Various Litteral Expressions, here, Relating to the Body, have we the
Shadow of a great Mystical Truth, relating to the Spirit, living soul, or inner
Man of Man, the life whereof also, being Mortal, is subject to (and therefore
figured out by) the like changes, as are Incident to Bodily Life, in the Birth,
Flourish, Decay, Death, and Resurrection thereof. First then, to the Figurative
Shadow, knowable to all; and after, to the Mystical Truth, knowable to few; to
none, aright, save such, as are of the same Spirit, Solomon was, when he Writ
these Words.

1. There Is a set time to all Visible things, under the Litteral Heaven and
Sun, as the Answer and Accomplishment of God's most wise design and purpose,
concerning them. There Is a time allotted for their Appearance and Manifestation;
and then, for their Disappearing and Vanishing, again. Both these general
Dispensations of God, to them, do Minister Important Instruction to Man. The
Positive Assertion of this Truth, in general ( v. 1.) does Solomon prove, by
particularizing the Various things, Circumstances and Occurrents, relating to
Man's Bodily part and Life (in reference to which, the whole Visible Creation,
in the greater World, without Man, was set up, before hand, as requisite for
his entertainment; Genesis 1. and Chapter 2. 7.) and then, to the declinings and Death
thereof, under the Various Dispensations of God, to this lower work of his own
hand, in Man. And, hereby is signified the like Various Dispensations of God
(and thence, a like Variety of Condition, Incident) to the Spirit or inner
Natural Man, as to its but Mortal First-Covenant-Life, put into and (...) up in
it, by Creation. Man therein, at best, was but a Mystical Tree of good and
Evil, a changable thing, a Fading Flower. Since the Fall, this Fleshy Tree, is
(in a manner) only, alway's Evil. Man's fallen nature, herein, is a Gursed
Mystical Earth, bringing forth Thorns and Thistles, in Filth of Flesh or
Spirit; Genesis 3. 17, 18. His Immortal Spirit, in its Unstained Mortal
First-Covenant Life and State, before the Fall, with all, done, or possible to
be done, in the Activity thereof (all Riches, Fruits, Righteous Works,
Producible, or Performable therein) all was Vanity, (...) but Vanishing Shadows
of durable substantial things, the Everlasting Righteous New Creature Life,
Wisdom, (...), things of God. Man (with all his natural, First-Created Life and
things) is, in another Sense, under Heaven, or below the Spiritual, Heavenly
Life of Christ, the New Creation Sun of Everlasting Righteousness, and things
of God. Nor Man nor Angel, in Innocence, had any thing of that Life about them,
or Fruits thereof. And, in that Life only, can any bring forth Fruit, unto God.
They that say, Adam should have held fast that Righteous Life he was Possessed
of, by Creation; kept where he was (as Job, once, through a great mistake,
said, he would hold fast his Restored Righteousness, of that sort) they that
say this, what else must they say? This. That Man, Restored by the second Adam,
to something of the lost Life of the First, must hold it fast, Establish
himself there, never part with or let it go, again; and Heaven is his own; this
is true Salvation, and Eternal Life. In their Lying Spirit of Divination, do
such Teachers warrant their Deluded Hearers, safe and truly Blessed, here;
causing them to hope, they will confirm their Word; Ezekiel. 13. 6. They follow (
Heb. walk after) their own Spirit of vanity, see nothing of God's; they are
vanity, and see nothing but vanity, the things of man, which they
presumptuously call the things of God; and so, teach Rebellion against the
Lord. They establish themselves and others in a life and Righteousness, that is
but Vanity, a Fading Flower, for Salvation. And, Irrefragably Confident they
grow, herein. All the World wonder and run after them, Rev. 13. 3. 1 Jo. 4. 5.
Mean while, no Man, in the but Restored Worldly Spirit of Nature, the Life,
Wisdom and Righteousness of man, receives Christ Gospel-Testimony, given by his
Spirit of Truth, in himself or followers; Jo. 3. 32. That, which (indeed) is
the very Unpardonable Sinning after the Similitude of Adam' s Transgression, do
Men Preach up, as their undispensable Duty, for Salvation. The holding fast,
and keeping up what they received by the First-Creation (against the
everlasting Creature-Life, Wisdom, Righteousness and things of God, clearly
showed and offered them, by a second) was the very Unpardonable Sin, that gave
the Irrecoverable fall, to the Devil and his Angels. Their fall, evil Change,
and Punishment, lies in this. They retain all the Natural Life, Glory, and
Excellencies of their First-Created State, as by their wilful Folly and God's
Righteous Judgment, turned into (and used in) unchangable Enmity to God. They
kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation; Jude 6. What was
that? A State of Unstained Natural Purity, and of changable Obedience (in their
Wavering Natural Principle) to Spiritual Light, by which, clearly showed and
offered an Unchangably Righteous Creature-Life, by a New Creation, on the
Obedient-Surrender and loss of their Changable. The Lord was pleased to deal
more favorably with Man (as of less Natural Capacity, and so, under lower
Spiritual Conviction then Angels; and then also, as Over-reached and Overset by
the Superior Subtilty and Power of the Evil Angel) taking from him the Fading
Righteous Life, Wisdom, Excellencies, and Corruptible Perfections of his
Inferior, Humane Nature; not leaving him them, to Fight with against himself,
as he did, to the Evil Angels. But, when this Life (with the things thereof) is
gradually Restored by the Redeemer, in Men, Satan is presently at the same
point, with them, as with Eve (2 Cor. 11. 3.) that they shall not die, at all;
they have Eternal Life. Though it was not so, in the first Adam; yet, when
Restored by the Second, and Men Confirmed or Established therein, by him, it
is. Indeed, this Fixing, Establishing Doctrine to (and work upon) them, is
Satan's, not Christ's. For, it fixes them in unchangable enmity to Christ's
Gospel Spirit, and all his Gospel-things or truths. Adam's attempt and design,
for keeping up the Righteous Life he was Created in (and thence, Refusing to
Surrender, and part with it, for what was Presented to him in the Tree of Life)
was his very Sin. The Losing, or falling from the Righteous life he had, was
his punishment. God took from him, What he had, his fading righteous Law-Life,
for Preferring it to his Everlasting, New Covenant Gospel-life. The day, he ate
of the tree of good and evil (or pleased himself with his own changable
righteous life, and the (...), Meats, or Delights thereof, in preference to
God's more excellent Creature-life and never-perishing meats thereof) he died
(as threatened, Genesis 2. 17.) that is, lost that fading righteous Life; and so,
with all his Posterity, became dead in trespasses and sins. Now, if
Establishing our selves in the restored Righteous Law-Life of our Nature (Called
our own) be Asserted our duty, and security for salvation; then, a sinning
after the similitude of Adam's Transgression (which done, thus, the second
time, after all Experience of man, and Warnings from God, to the contrary, is
as Unpardonable as the Devils first sin) must be the very way of Salvation.
What-else, or less? And then, as to the second Adam; Let his original
Creature-nature or Spirit ( Set up by himself, in Personal Union with his
divine, From Everlasting, Prove. 8. 23.) be denied; and the very Creation (in
effect, or rather in the cause of it) is denied. For, this Living Creature (or
all comprehensive Creature-nature, under the God of Israel ( Ezekiel. 10. 20.) and
in personal Union with him, comprehending in it, as a Polished shaft in God's
Quiver, the very man Christ, that in the Fullness of time, was made flesh) was
the very immediate hand by which God Made the Worlds. By this Creature-Wisdom
and word of God, which is called God also, were all things made, Jo. 1. 1-3.
and so, by the very man Christ, as comprehended therein, were made, both
worlds, natural and spiritual, in a first and second Creation-workmanship of
his, passing upon them; Heb. 1. 2. Col. 1. 13-16. The same WORD, also, by which
all Angels and men were made, was the provided means, Mouth, or Prophet of God,
to speak forth the whole Counsel of his Divine Mind, to them, when made; and to
Mediate between them and Infinite Divinity, which, without this Interposing
Creature-Vail would have been a Consuming fire to them all. This Word is also
the Executer (as well as Declarer to them) of the whole Mind and Will of God,
from first to last, on all Angels and Men, as Obediently Submitting to the
Methods and Terms of his New-Creating Workmanship, or Incorrigibly Rebelling
against it. He is the (...) Roll of Woes, to the one; the Book of Life and
Mercy-Seat, to the other; in which are Treasured and Sealed up all the distinct
Measures and Portions of Wrath for the one, amongst the distinct Portions and
Measures of Grace and Love, for the other; Deu. 32. 34, 35. This Living Book
(in which, all, they do toward God; and all, God will do toward and with
them, are exactly Recorded and Registered; the Living Stone, that bear's and
know's all, on all hands, God's Words to them, and theirs to him ( Jos. 24. 26,
27.) by way of Covenant) will be the Infallible Witness for, or against them,
and Irresistible Executor of the Mind and Will of God, toward and upon them
all, in Everlasting Love or Wrath. See then the case of those that deny any
Creature-Nature or Spirit in the Mediator, of elder date, then his being made
Flesh. And then, when in that Fleshy State, Crucified, they that narrow and
consine his Crucisixion only to the Violent Death of his Body, and Exclude (or
take no notice of) the Death he put his natural Spirit, to, as to the Spotless
but Changable earthy, Law-Life thereof, by kindling upon it (and Offering it up
in) the Mystical Fire of his Eternal New Creature Spirit (Luke 12. 49. Heb. 9.
14.) What Conformity to his Death, will they Preach? If the principal thing, he
Crucified in himself, be denied, the principal thing that is to be Crucified in
us, will be denied. And what then? Why then, the Subduing the Vile Affections
of the Corrupt Spirit of Nature, must be Reckoned Conformity to Christ's Death,
whereas he had no such things in him, to Crucify. And then, Conformity to him,
in the but gradually restored Righteous First-Covenant Life of the Law, Holy
Flesh (call it what else we will) which he Crucified in himself, at best; must
be reckoned a State of true Salvation, the SAINTS EVERLASTING REST. And then,
the Counter workings of (in part) restored nature, and the Corrupt, must pass
for Flesh Warring against Spirit, and Spirit against Flesh ( (...). 5. 17.)
when indeed, all is but Flesh. Paul, when Eminent in Holy Flesh, was a fierce
Fighter against Christ's Gospel Spirit. Here Is your Divinity and Anti-Gospel
Teaching, in perfect Contradiction to the declared Methods and Words of God's
Wisdom, for Salvation, in every point. Some care is taken to Preach down and
Subdue the Brutish Lusts of Litteral Sodom, in the Corrupt Spirit of Nature;
but, Mystical Sodomy, more criminal then Litteral, is Preached up, for
Salvation; to wit, such establishment in Righteousness, as is unchangable
enmity to God. Gross sins, in the dark, ignorant, corrupt Spirit of nature, are
cried down; but all Mystical Uncleanesses, Adulteries, Idolatries, Thefts,
Murders, Sacriledg, etc. are preached up, for Salvation. A hard saying! What is
Truth? Said Pilate to Christ, not waiting the answer; Jo. 18. 38. Christ had
told him beforehand, that he came into this world, to Bear witness to the
truth; V. 37. What truth? That there is nothing but vanity or vanishing shadow's
in this World, the whole first-creation; my Kingdom therefore, says he, is not
of this World (or, to be managed in my worldly, law-spirit of nature, Holy
flesh, where the Jews would fain have had him own himself a King Jo. 6. 15.)
but (as is Implied) of the next, and to be managed in my New Creation Spirit of
truth. All things in the first-Creation state of Angels and men, are but
vanishing shadows of the truth (all Substantial, durable, Eternal things or
truths) in the second. This is the good confession, Negative and Affirmative,
Christ Witnessed before Pontius (...) (1 Timothy 6. (...).) as we find ( Jo. 18.
36, 37.) the former Expressed, the other Implied in the Word, Truth. Christ
Witnessed or Declared in his Infallible Spirit of Truth, that there is nothing
of truth or substance, in God's sight; nothing unchangably good, no Eternal
good things or Truths, but in the New Creation State, and World; in, and over
which he owned himself a King. They that will finally and conclusively be
Reigning as Kings, in the but worldly restored First-Covenant-Life, Holy Flesh
(as 1 Cor. 4. 8.) will be found Pseudo-Fift-Monarchists, in direct Hostility to
the true Reign of Christ and all true Spiritual Saints, in his Holy
Gospel Spirit; and so, in a Flat contradiction to every tittle of his
Gospel-Testimony. Christ's witnessed good Confession to Pilate, my Kingdom is
not of this World, gives the dash, Solomon Proclaim's, on all
First-Creation-Life of Man or Angel, with all the things and fruits thereof, as
Vanities or but perishing Shadows of God's durable New Creation substances,
things, and truths, the Everlasting Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God, in
his Spirit of Grace and Truth; with the Blessed Fruits thereof in Men, True
Love, Joy, Peace, (etc.) to, from, and with God; and all right Fruits brought
forth by them, therein, unto God. All these are Everlasting, Incorruptible
things, the Spiritual Tree, Root and Branch, Fruits, Leaves and all; Psalm, 1.
3. In this Spirit of Truth, have Men durable Riches, Life, Food, and Clothing.
In this Spirit of the Son, only, can they rightly Worship the Infinite Divine
Spirit, or Father. He must be Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; in a Spirit of
Everlasting Righteousness and Truth. All Worshippers, in any other Spirit,
Worship they know not what (Jo. 4. 22-24.) may be, the Devil, as God. For, he
can deceive all Men, short of the Spirit of Grace and Truth, to Worship him, as
so; above, and against God himself, 2 These. 2. 4.

Verse. 2. A time to be Born, and a time to Die: A time to Plant, and a time to
pluck up that which is Planted.
Verse. 3. A time to Kill, and a time to Heal: a time to break down, and a time
to Build up.
Verse. 4. A time to Weep, and a time to Laugh: A time to Mourn, and a time to
Dance.
There Is an appointed time, for every Man to be Born, in a Fleshly Body, which
is his personal appearance or Manifestation. The Body is an Essential
Ingredient into the complete Constitution of every Man, which, under all
Temporary Vicissitudes, Alterations, and Changes, by Decay's, Death, and
Resurrection, remain's for ever, the distinguishing part of Man, from other
Created beings, in Heaven, and Hell. Angels are completed in their personal
Constitution, without any such thing as Man's Earthly Body or Life. The Spirit
of Man (before it enters the Body, or after departed out of it) is not the
Complete Person of a Man. For, Man consists of Spirit, Soul, and Body, as
distinct Essential parts of his being, which Paul distinctly Pray's, may, in
Saints, be Preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; 1
These. 5. 23. The whole Spirit of Man Comprehends, in its make, a Dormant Souly,
Animalish Life. So, has a Natural tendency of desire, to a Union with its fitly
Organized Body, in order to bring its Latent Soul, or Souly Life, into actual
Exercise and Operation. At the death of the Body, this Soul (or Souly Life)
ceases, as to exercise; lies dormant, again, in the Spirit, as before it is
entrance thereinto. So, till the Resurrection of the whole Man, the Spirits
even of Just Men made perfect in Spiritual New Creation Life, Act and Converse,
as pure Intellectual Powers, Intuitively, after the manner of Angels, only.
Now, as there is a time for the Birth of Man's Body; so, from the frail
materials, and constituting Ingredients of it, is there an appointed time for
its dissolution; and so, for the Death of the Man, by a Separation of his
essential parts. This is a truth, universally experienced and known by all.
And, the like Vicissitudes and Seasons are appointed for other parts of this
greater Visible World, without Man, as well as lesser World, the Sum and
Abridgment of all, within him.

From the Moment of his Bodily Birth, may be Dated, the Building, Planting,
Laughing, Dancing, Rejoicing, and Embracing season, during the growth, and
Flourishing State of his Bodily Life. When this is at its height, Approaches
God's appointed Season (from the perishing Materials thereof) for plucking it
up, breaking it down, and Slaying it. This Season is attended with Man's
Weeping and Mourning, as the Consequents thereof. These litteral truths are
Experienced by Man, in the Decay's, Gray Hairs, Old Age, and Death, inevitably
incident to his body. In the declining state thereof, is he reduced to a kind
of equality with Childhood, as debilitated in the exercise of his rational
Powers, in and by bodily Organs or Instruments, Brain, Animal spirits, etc. So,
if he come to 70 or 80 years, his decayed strength affords him little but
labor and sorrow (Psalm. 90. 10.) as finding himself to have outlived the
brisk and vigorous exercise of that Reason, by which distinguished from brute
Beasts. In this case, it is man's duty, and wisest course, to fall in, and
comply with God's twofold dispensation upon his fleshly body, by willingly
owning and submitting to the decay's thereof, in God's latter, demolishing work
upon it, for pulling it down, as well as to be found rejoicing and delighting
in his former planting and building up of the same. It Is man's gross folly, to
struggle and contend for an impossibillity, even the keeping up of that, which
he sees, by an inevitable Law of necessity, must be laid down. He is as sure to
die, as he was born; yea, to go stripped and naked out of the World, as he came
into it; Job. 1. 21. God has determined the time, for both. Death comes as an
armed man, on man's Body, and on all that sort of understanding, that is
exercised in, and by it. There Is no discharg in this War. The decay's of it,
all along, from the turning, declining point, preach the death of it, and of
that organical Understanding, exercised in and by it.

Come we, now, to the Mystery of all this. All the methods of God's wisdom in
his dealings with man's body (or bodily life, the outward part of his natural
man) are typical to the like methods and dispensations to his immortal spirit,
considered in the but mortal, first-covenant, natural righteous Life thereof,
planted in it, by the first creation. A birth, life, death, and burial are
incident to this also, as God's appointments to it. At the birth of the Body,
the Spirit or inner natural man is dead, as to the mortal first-covenant life
of the Law of Works, it was, at first, created in. But, a fresh birth of (or
quickening up into) this shadowy Life and Image of the Earthy, wherein the first
Adam was created, is offered to all, and may be actually received and
experienced by all, as the common or general salvation, if they will. The far
greater part of mankind, refuse to part with the corrupt life of their nature,
for the righteous. And many that receive the righteous, as the common salvation
(Jude: 3.) from the general Savior of all men (1 Timothy 4. 10.) refuse the
special (or eternal Salvation) receivable only by and in a spiritual Faith.
This cannot be received, without the obedient surrender and death of all,
received twice from Christ's own hand, by his first-creation and
general-redemption-workmanship. Such death, according to the declared methods
of God's wisdom, must undispensably be yielded to, and we become as fools, and
little Children (as to all the restored wisdom, life, and glory of our own
Nature) as the undispensable way to our receiving the Life, Wisdom; and
Righteousness of God, in his Gospel Spirit of Grace, and Image of the Heavenly,
which, alone, is Eternal. The former is but Reformation-Life, in restored,
enlivened naturals: This latter, a true Regeneration into spirituals, by the
Birth of such a new Life in us, springing up from the quickened incorruptible
seed thereof, as plants us together in the likeness of Christ's resurrection,
on our obedient likness to his death; Romans 6. 5. Nor Angel, nor Man, had any
thing of this Life, in the Innocence of both, by creation: but only, as
objctivetly presented to their understanding, in the Mediator. As God, at
first, gave Man that that is natural, and called his own, offering him that
which is spiritual, God's own; So, he first, restores something of the
first-covenant-Light, or also Life, that is natural; and after, that that is
spiritual. Paul, when eminent in restored naturals ( holy flesh, by knowledge
of, or conformity to Christ in the flesh, or righteous life of the Law) quitted
such knowledge of Christ after the flesh (2 Cor. 5. 16.) in a righteous
Law-Life, for the knowledge of him after the spirit, in his spiritual,
Gospel-life, into which risen out of the Death of the former; Phil. 3. 7-10.
This, according to his own advice, in the Holy Ghost; Romans 7. 1-4. That which
is born but of the Flesh of Christ, the Fleshly First-Covenant, Law-life, is
but holy flesh, not Eternal Life: But that that is Born of his Gospel Spirit,
only; Jo. 3. 6. The former, when taken by himself, as made under the Law, he
Crucified, as the only means and way of exalting our nature, in himself, into
the second, in which he Lives for evermore. So must we. As there was an
appointed time for him (and so for us, by his mean's) to be Born, or have this
Righteous Law-Life brought forth in him; So, was there an appointed time for
the death and loss of it, in him; and is, also, in us. By the fresh Gift and
Birth of it, from him, is he the Healer, Planter, Restorer, and Builder up of
Man, afresh, out of the Shameful, Bloody, Polluted State of Nature, dead in
Trespasses and Sins, into the Fading Glory, Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of
Man, the Goodliness of Holy Flesh, which yet is but as a Flower of the Field;
Isai. 40. 6. This Restoring, Healing-work of Christ (as to the deadly Wound
given to all Men, by the First Sin of the First) to the top-stone of this
Renewed old Building, by his comlines or perfect Righteousness of the Law,
imputed to, or put upon them, he warn's against the abuse of, by an overvalue
of it, over-considence in it, and doting love to it, so as to prefer it before
his offered Spiritual Life and Everlasting Righteousness, in the Image of the
Heavenly, the new Building. For, this is Mystical Adultery against him, as
their true Spiritual Lord and Husband, worse then Litteral. Yea, and Murder
also (as a Murdering Mind of Enmity against him, there, is Interpreted) for
which, they are to be Judged, as the most Criminal Adulterers and Murderers;
All this, we find; Ezekiel. 16. 1-15. and v. 38. Man, as Dead in Sin, is
figuratively Charactred by the helpless condition his Body is Born in, as to
any thing he can do for himself; v. 3-6. These Expressions Represent the Dark,
Black, Dismal, Bloody Condition, and Desolate State of his Spirit, that none
but Christ can help. Let him look within, without, and round about him, there is
none to Pity or have Compassion upon him, that can help him. This disconsolate
State, and Extremity, God declares to be a motive and opportunity to him, to
help him, restore Life to him, Cleanse or Sanctify him, and by Imputation of
another's Righteousness, justify him, and render him fruitful in his Restored
Naturals, under the Fructifying Influences of Christ, as a Fleshy Bridegroom
and Husband; who also puts the Mystical Ornaments, Bracelets, and Jewels of
Supernatural, Spiritual Enlightening Gifts, upon him. And, he causes him to feed
at his earthly, First-Covenant Table, on such Meats or Communications from him,
as tend to Nourish, Strengthen and Build him up, into a Fruitful Flourish in
that Life, to the Increasing with the Increases of Man; not of God; in the
Wisdom and Glory of his own Life; not of God's. So grows he exceeding
Beautiful, prospering into a kind of Kingdom State (in his own Life and way)
consisting in a Ruling Power of his Restored Spirit, over all the Inferior
Powers of Nature, in him. Such Kings, Paul found amongst the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 4. 8. Multitudes refuse this common Salvation; love their Chains and
Bondage under the Brutish Lusts of their fallen, degenerate nature, so as not
to accept of deliverance therefrom. And, Multitudes of First-Covenant
Believers and Professors, that receive this Common Salvation, refuse the
Special, the Crowning benefit of Christ's Death, his Spiritual, New Creation or
New Covenant Life, his unspeakable Gift. Their Restored Spirit of Nature or the
Law, is still a Spirit of Bondage, under the Law, and Curse (Gal. 3-10.)
another State of Death, by Filth of Spirit, or Enmity to God's Spirit, in which
alone they can be finally saved. Paul found his Holy Flesh or Restored Natural
State, a Body, a Law of Sin and Death; as Phil. 3. 6. and To. 7. 24. 8. 2;
compared, do Evidence. Man's Rational Powers and Free Will, at best, are the
Living, Holy Sacrifice, God requires, as their reasonable Service, and true
Gospel-Free-Will Offering, unto him, by the death of all; Romans 12. 1. Final
refusing to do this, renders men Conformable to this World, v. 2. yea, to the
Devil, the God of this World, who has set up his Superior worldly life, wisdom
and glory, in unchangable enmity to God. Thus, fall first covenant Saints, by
refusing the second and crowning benefit of Christ's death, under greater Guilt
and sorer Condemnation, then if they never had received the First. They refuse
to listen to Christ's Heavenly, second voice and call to them, out of the
Fading Life and Earthly Freedom of the Sons of Men, into the Everlasting Life
and Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Thus do Men sin away their
First-Covenant Life, and second Covenant Light, again, after the Similitude of
Adam' s Transgression, by preferring such Life and Ornaments, to the very
Gospel, New Covenant, more excellent Life and way; 1 Cor. 12. 31. And so come
they to a latter end, worse then their beginning, either in Innocence; or, as
Born, dead in Sin; because now Irrecoverably, Unpardonably, and Unchangably
dead.

This then is Solomon's meaning, here; God has appointed a time for the Birth
and Death, the Planting and Plucking up, the Building and Pulling down, the
Healing and Wounding or Killing and Destroying Man, as to this mortal
first-covenant-life of his own nature. The Birth of, the Planting and Building
him up therein, is the ground and cause of his Laughing, Dancing, Exulting and
Rejoicing in the Embraces of Christ, as a fleshly Bridegroom. The pulling down
and destroying all this again, by his Gospel-Cross or spiritual Sword, is the
cause of his Weeping and Mourning. All this, have we, Verse. 2, 3, 4.

Verse, 5. A time to cast away Stones, and a time to gather Stones together: a
time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.
Christ has a set time for gathering together the stones of Man's ruined,
desolated Building, in his own nature, and a time to pull down his rebuilt
natural state, and cast away the stoues thereof, again, uot leaving one stone
upon another in this fleshly Church-building. Thus served he the first mystical
Temple-building of our spotless nature in himself, figured in his Prophecy of
the downfall of the litteral Temple, at Jerusalem, in Answer to his Disciples;
Mat. 24. 1, 2. Christ has a time to embrace Men, as a fleshly Bridegroom, to
them, and a time to refrain from embracing, on his dying and departing from
them, there And he requires them to desire, expect, or look after him no more,
there, for a knowledge of him after the Flesh, but wholly fix their Eye and
Heart upon him, with Paul, in that Spiritual Life, into which (...) out of the
Death of the former; and be Married to him, there, as their Everlasting,
Spiritual Lord and Bridegroom; To. 7. 1-4. While Christ Pipes to Men, in
First-Covenant Communications, as he did by John Baptist's Ministry, they are
to Dance and Rejoice. When he with-draw's, and call's them into the death of
that State, they are to Mourn; else are they Immorigerous, and Undutiful; Mat.
11. 17. Their Natural Hearts will be filled with Sorrow, as the Disciples,
when, as a Fleshly Bridegroom and Comforter, he departed from them; Mat. 9.
15. Jo. 16. 20-22. Right Obedient Mourners, in this case, are Blessed, and sure
to hear of Christ, as a better Comforter and Bridegroom, in his Spiritual Life.
The Death of Man, as to a Mortal, First-Covenant Life, is as sure as the Birth
of it; as the case is, with the Birth and Death of the Body. And indeed, the
House of Mourning, and Death, is better to Man, in the tendency of it, then the
Birth and utmost Flourish of a First-Covenant Life, in him. For, though after
Rebuilt in the Restored Righteous Life of his own Nature, and then pulled down
again, he be seemingly in a worse condition, and more hopeless, then before
ever Christ meddled with him, at all (...) yet is this the only way to Christ's
House of Everlasting Feasting and Rejoicing. Those that refuse this way, and
Laugh now, their (...) Joy will end in Everlasting Mourning; and Saints
Transient Sorrow, in everlasting Joy; Mat. 5. 4. Luke 6. 25. Jo. 16. 20. Christ
came not to speak Peace, but War and Death, by his Spiritual Fire and Sword, to
the earthly Life of Nature, at best, in himself and followers; Luke 12. 49-51.
We must follow the Suffering-Steps of this great Captain of our Salvation, or
never come where he is. True Saints, with Paul, Glory in the Cross of Christ,
Conformity to his death, and in bearing about them the marks of the dying of
the Lord Jesus. So the Spiritual Life of risen Jesus, comes to be, more and
more, manifested in their Mortal flesh; 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11.

Verse. 6. A time to Get and a time to Lose: A time to Keep, and a time to cast
Away.
A time to seek after and recover the exercise of our nature, in the
first-covenant righteous life thereof; and to heap up Riches, by a fruitfulness
therein. And then comes a time to lose, and cast all away again, as dung and
loss, with Paul, for the more excellent Life, Christ's unspeakable gift; Phil.
3. 6-9. And so, is there a time to keep up the exercise of our nature, in the
restored first-covenant righteous Life thereof (so long as Christ own's that to
be his Dispensation to us, by continuing as a fleshly Bridegroom with us) and
a time to part with and cast it away again, for the second; in the same sense,
with what is meant, in the former clause of this Verse.

Verse. 7. A time to Rent, and a time to Sew: A time to keep Silence and a time
to Speak.
That which has been Sewed, Healed, and made up again, after the sore breach,
by the first Sin; and so, fitted (or fitting us) in its kind, to speak to, and
instruct the dark, ignorant, corrupt Spirit of nature, in others, as a Teacher
and Guide of such blind ones; all this healed, speaking State (in the Wisdom of
Man, made Wise in Christ) must, in its season, be rent, broken down, and torn
in pieces, again; silenced, and wholly laid aside, to make way for another,
better Dictatour, Ruler, and Guide, the Infallible Spirit of Truth. The final
refusal to submit to this chang of Ruler and Guide, lodges up first-covenant
Saints in unchangable Enmity to God and the spirit of the second, under the
guilt of the most Criminal Adultery, Theft, and Sacriledg; To. 2. 17-22. God
speak's once, and he speak's twice, yet Man perceives it not; Job 33. 14. God
call's Man out of his Death in Sin, into the righteous Life of a Man (or of the
first-covenant Law) again: Then, by the voice of his second-Covenant spirit,
into the death of the first, as his only pass into the Life and Righteousness
of God, in the second. Under pretense of continuing in obedience to his first
voice, does man Rebel against his second; and is found an Enemy to the
Spiritual Cross of Christ. He prefer's the oldness of Letter, in his Living
Soul, to Gods newness of Life, in his quickening Spirit. Man's Laughing,
Dancing, Speaking time is over, in his own Wisdom and Righteousness, when
showed the unprofitableness, as to true Blessedness, of all, done or said by
him, therein. The right understanding and obedient Submitting to Christ's
Various Voices, and observing the several seasons of Speaking and Silence, is
Man's safety; and he, therein, wel-pleasing to God. It Is a high point of true
Wisdom, for Man to be more ready to hear (the voice of the Spirit of Christ, in
himself or Saints) then to speak, and so, Offer the Sacrifice of Fools, in his
own; Ec. 5. 1. Man, in his highest Wisdom, is a Fool, as to all spiritual
things, his greatest concerns; the unreasonable Man Paul desired to be
delivered from the Impertinent Trouble and Babbling Loquacity of, about Gospel
things, that he has no discerning, in. The restored Law-principle of Life and
Action in Man, is but a ceremony, to be abolished, and becomes an antiquated
thing, with all the Fading Glory of it, when to be done away, to give room for
a spiritual Principle of everlasting Righteonsness, as a new Root and Spring of
his Desire, Thought, and Action. This refused, all Duties performed in the
Law-spirit, are thenceforth, but Sacrifices of Fools, that do evil. What, in
its appointed Season and day, was Obedience, in that Law-State, becomes then,
direct Rebellion. As Man has Lived therein, to God; so, the Season come, is he
to die therein, to him; that both living and dying, he may be the Lords; Romans
14. 8. Passive Obedience is the utmost, required of Man, in his own nature, to
make way for the true spiritual principle of active Obedience, to God's
wel-pleasing.

Verse. VIII. A time to Love, and a time to Hate: a time of War, and a time of
Peace.
There Is a time of Love and Peace (such as it is) to be found in a
first-covenant Union with Christ, and such obedience as is performable,
therein. But, at length, Christ speaks War and Death to this state; comes to
break down, demolish and cast away all the stones of this old (...)-creation
building.

And thus have we seen, in these eight Verses, God's twofold dispensation to
Man's Body, and fleshly or natural Spirit, in all the fading, first-creation
Life and Glory thereof. The Birth and Death of the Body; and so, of the natural
Understanding, as exercised there in, and by; all this is Typical to the like
twofold dispensation of mystical Life and Death to his Spirit, as to its
first-covenant righteous state, under the temporary wrath of God, executed by
the Cross, on obedient Saints; or, eternal wrath of God, by the same Cross, on
incorrigible sinners. And so, are we brought by Solomon, to consider the Result
from all this, which he declares, by way of Question.

Verse. IX. What profit has he that works, in that wherein he labors?
A like Question to that ( Chap. 1. 3.) already spoken to. Who is this he that
works? Man in the twofold perishing life of his Body and Spirit; both,
inevitably falling under a twofold Dispensation of Birth and Death, from God. A
vicissitude of building up, and breaking down, are unavoidable to both. For,
Man, in the utmost flourish of both, is but a fading flower, altogether Vanity,
lighter then vanity, less than nothing, Isa. 40. 7. 17. Psalm. 39. 5. and 62. 9.
The Life of both is mortal. So was that of Angels, in their innocence. So is
this Question of great weight. What profit can Man have of all his Labors, in
a Life that is Vanity? All his best Labors therein, do but increase his heap of
Vanities. And, what is he the better? Eccl. 6. 11. Both lives, in conclusion,
vanish; and all the works, fruits, riches (litteral and mystical) all the
things thereof, things of man, come to nothing. Man then, struggles under an
impossibility, to keep up the said lives, or things thereof, in rebellion
against God's declared order and Command, for surrender of all to him, in
obedient sacrifice by death. If he refuse to give up all, as demanded in love,
God will take away all, In final Wrath. It Is utterly impossible to avoid one of
these two way's of losing all. No remedy. All striving against these
unalterable Appointments of God, and fading nature of the things themselves,
renders the inevitable parting with all (and all Death-blow's of a tendency
there-towards) more Heavy, Painful, Bitter, and Uneasy, to Man's sore
disadvantage, and at last, total, amazing disappointment. If he has no other
ground to stand on, when all that is gone, where is he? What was his duty, and
beautiful in its season (righteous performances in the activity of
first-Covenant principles) when called to Passive Obedience, by the death and
loss of all (in order to active Obedience in the new covenant Spirit and
Principle of Everlasting Righteousness) is Rebellion, as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and Idolatry; 1 Samuel 15. 23. It Is a keeping that Amalekite, Law
spirit of Bondage, alive, as Ruler, that God requires the death of. Under such
Witchcraft, Paul found the Galatians; Gal. 3. 1. No saving natures head from
the irresistible Sword of the spirit of Grace. No scaping in this War, for
Fighters against God. Should the whole Creation, Angels and Men, lend their
helping hand, set their Shoulders to Boulster up and Support any one Man, in
this case, he is gone. They are all less then nothing to him we have to deal
with. All proud helpers and helped, all final Resisters must stoop and fall
under his Victorious, Flaming, Twoedged Spiritual Sword. Wherein any deal
proudly (presumptuously keeping up the Life, it 'larum's them in, and summon's
them to surrender) it will be above them. All, that submit not to it, in order
to be made by it new Vessels of Honor and Fternal Life, it will make their old
ones, Vessels of Dishonor and everlasting Contempt, in Eternal Death. To one
of these two final Periods, will the Versatile, changable Spirit of Man,
Infallibly come. The Obedient Saint, when he awakes out of the Marred Visage,
and Death of the Earthy, will be satisfied with the Image of the Heavenly; Ps.
17. 15. And, when Christ shall awake or come forth in the Visibility of the
Heavenly, he will despise or destroy, all self-exalters against him, with their
Image of the Earthy; Ps. 73. 20. In the Morning of Christ's day of Appearance
with all his Saints, in their Spiritual, Resurrection-life, (after the long
Night of this World, under the Powers of Darkness) will they have Dominion over
all their Enemies in the Earthy, and Consume all their Fading Beauty or
Comeliness; Ps. 49, 14. And, what profit then will they find of all their
Labors, in a Law-Spirit of Bondage, Death, and Enmity to the Gospel?

Verse. X. I have seen the travel which God has given to the Sons of Men, to be
exercised in it; Heb. To afflict or humble them thereby.
Here Is Solomon's experience and Conviction of the unprofitableness of all
Man's Labor and Travel, for the gratifying and keeping up the Life of his
Body, or Spirit, in the fading glory of a first-covenant state. God gives (or
permits) this Travel to Men (in answer to, and pursuit of their own vain Desire
and Thought) to humble or afflict them; even by that very self-exalting Labor,
and State, they choose, delight in, and please themselves with. They must, with
Job, Solomon, and others, sit down at last, in dust and ashes, acknowledging
the vanity of both the said Lives, and of all, done by them, in the activity of
both. Happy they only, that are timely humbled, by the due consideration
hereof, so as to be willing to cease from the same (quitting the folly of all
their unprofitable Labors and false Confidences) to walk with God, in the more
excellent Life and Way.

Verse. XI. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the
World in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God makes,
from the beginning to the end.
Man, by Creation, was made beautiful in the glory of a first-covenant
Law-life, for God's appointed season to him, there. So again, when restored by
Christ, while he continues a fleshly Bridegroom to them there, as his present
dispensation. But, when by the convincing light of his new covenant,
Gospel Spirit, he discovers all this beauty to be but a fading Flower, a Glory
to be done away, and that there is Enmity to God, under all; then does Man's
unlawful use of the Law, or Rebellious keeping up his Law, against Christ's
Gospel-Life, render that which was Beautiful, most Filthy, and Abominable to
God; Spiritual Sodomy, worse then Litteral. Man's hardening himself in his
Law-Life, against Christ's graciously showed and offered Gospel-Life, provokes
him to depart, and Swear, he shall never enter his Rest; Heb. 3. 7. 11. Thus,
does Man bring his matters to a desperate pass, by wilfully refusing so great
Salvation as is offered; and so, is excluded, for ever, from it; shall never be
offered it, more. Christ and his true Saints and Seers, will meddle no more
with him, in their Gospel Ministry; nor intercede for (but against) him; Act.
13. 46. 51. 1 Jo. 5. 16. They Will shake the Dust off their Feet, against him, and
away. If Men say to Christ's Seers, see not, Prophecy not unto us right things;
They'l'a done. Their Commission is out. In Judgment on them, they shall be
Dumb; Ezekiel. 3. 25, 26. I know God has determined to destroy thee, said the
Prophet to King Amaziah, because thou have not (...) to my Counsel; and so, on
his threatening, forbear; 2 Chro. 25. 16.

T. Also he has set the World in their Heart, etc. When Men (...) six (or set
up for themselves) in their worldly nature, and Life of the Law, and so set up
the World in their Hearts, as the only Object of their desire and delight; then
does God Judicially harden and six them there, or set the World in their
Hearts. And then, is their highest Wisdom, a Black, Darkning Vail upon their
Hearts, disabling them for ever finding out the Work of God, from the beginning
of it, in the first-creation, to the Blessed end of it, in the second. The God
of this World, fixing Men's hearts in the love of this World, that is Enmity to
God, blind's their minds, that the light of the Glorious Gospel may not shine
into them. They see not to the end of that which is abolished (2 Cor. 3. 13.)
So, set up for Salvation, in that Law-Life that is to be abolished; that Glory,
that's to be done away; v. 7. Fleshly (...) ts were not able to behold the
spiritual Glory of Moses; his true face of Spiritual Saint-ship. He therefore
put a Vail on it, that is, came forth in the appearance of the Righteousness of
Man, or the Law, to them; They that set up in the Light and Life of the Law,
for Salvation, set up in the Vail. Such, never see (to their comfort) the true
Face, inward Beauty and Spiritual Glory of Moses or other Saints, nor the true
inward Face, or spiritual meaning of any Scripture. All Spiritual things or
truths, in Scripture; all spiritual Light, Life, Wisdom, Understanding; all
things of God, in his Saints, lie quite out of their sight; as mere nothings,
in their day, their Judgment. They no more skill or ken them, than a Beast the
Rational Powers and things of a Man; 1 Cor. 2. 11. So, they absolutely deny all
Gospel things and Truths; and positively assert there is no more excellent
Creature-Life or things, Man is capable of, then what were set up in the
first-creation-state of Angel and Man. What work will such make, at Gospel?
specially, if fixed here; and so, hardened in unchangable Enmity thereto? Thus
Christ found the Righteous Scribes, Pharisees, etc. in a Murdering Enmity to
the truth, that is, the Gospel Spirit; and so, of their Father the Devil, who
abode not in that truth, or Obedience to the said Gospel Light, in which
Created, but quitted that his Habitation or first Estate; Jo. 8. 44. Jude 6.
They that Rebelliously set up this Shadowy World in their Hearts, cannot receive
the Spirit of truth, nor words thereof; Jo. 14. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 14. They provoke
God to give them their desire, in Wrath; to set up the World in them (or them
in their worldly, Law-spirit of Enmity and Death) to choose their Delusions
(Isai. 66. 4.) send them strong delusion, that they should believe Stan's Lie,
and be damned; because they chose rather to believe that, than his Spirit of
truth; 2 These. 2. 10-12. So, God, Christ, Themselves, and the Devil, all concur
and center in one point ( the setting the World in their heart, or fixing them
in their own worldly spirit) but, upon very differing accounts. Then is their
case as desperate as that of the Evil Angels; Heb. 10. 26, 27. Though yet
highly Esteemed of Men, as owners, yea, Ministers of the Gospel, are they most
abominable to God, Mystical Sodomit's, the most Criminal Sinners in the whole
World. By being set or fixed in their worldly Spirit, they become wholly
Strangers and Enemies to the spirit of the World to come, which will be upon
them, at last, in Irresistible Wrath.

Verse. XII. I know that there is no good in them, but for a Man to rejoice, and
to do good in his life.
Solomon, at a dear rate, had experienced, that there is no durable, unchangable
good to be found in all first-creation Life, and most Righteous Actions or
things thereof. No true Joy or Happiness, to be had, in this World, but by
doing what is truly good in God's sight, in the Life and Spirit of the next.
True Godliness (or power of (...), exerciseable only in the Gospel Spirit of
Christ) is profitable to all things, having the promises of this, and the Life
to come (1 Timothy 4. 8.) that is, it comprehend's the promised Spiritual Life of
Christ, and Comforts thereof, in this, and the World to come; the daily
increasing first Fruits of it, here; and fullness, there. Yea also, the promises
even of this life, or worldly things thereof, such as (...) seek, belong to
true seekers of the Righteousness of God, in (...) Kingdom spirit. All these
shall be added to you, says Christ himself; Mat. 6. 31-33. The only right
rejoicing in, and doing good (in its kind) with such things of this Life, is,
as received on the said account, and managed in the Kingdom-spirit of the World
to come.

Verse. 13. And also, that every Man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of
all his Labor, it is the gift of God.
It Is in the unspeakable gift of God, only (the spirit of Christ) the inmost
man of the Saint, in the Life hid with Christ in God, can feed upon the hidden
Manna, the divine Glory, as veiled by that Spirit of Christ, and thereby also
unvailed, or rendered visible, in a sutableness only to (...), not natural
understanding, in Man or Angel. The never-perishing Meats and Drinks, the Bread
and Wine of the Kingdom, the divine and creature-glories of God, in the
Mediator, are the things, true Saints, eat, drink, feed, and live upon; enjoy,
rejoice and delight in; even in the peculiar delights of the Sons of God,
divine, spiritual, heavenly, substantial things, things eternal. All this is
the comfortable fruit of all their right labors in that Spirit, that is the
peculiar gift of God, distinct from the natural spirit, or state of Life, with
all the Fruits brought forth by Man's utmost, and best labors, therein.

Verse. XIV. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever: Nothing can
be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: And God does it, that Men should
fear before him.
Whatever is the immediate Divine Workmanship, shall be for ever; that is, the
new creature Spirit, set up by the Divine, from everlasting (Prove. 8. 23.) in
personal union with it, and also called God, that made the worlds, Jo. 1. 1-3.
Heb. 1. 2. Both Worlds, Natural and Spiritual, and all in both, were
comprehended in it, and brought forth by it. This Fountain creature-Spirit in
Christ (and Streamings forth of the Living Waters thereof, into Saints) is of
an unchangable nature. The Gift thereof to Men, or heavenly call of them into
The Life thereof, is without Repentance, Variableness, or chang. The natural
first-covenant principle of life and action, set up in Man and Angel, by the
first-Creation, is a Starting, Variable, Wavering thing; Ps. 78. 57. Man breaks
that Covenant with God; and then God, his Promise, therein, with him; Numb. 14.
34. Though Men be Children and Spouses to Christ, therein, (Jer. 3. 14.) they
break with him; and then, he departs; Jer. 31, 32. In this sense, God Repents,
(Genesis 6. 6.) that is, changes his dispensation toward Backsliding Man. If Man
turn his changable Righteous Life, in the first, into unchangable Enmity to
God, and his second-Covenant Life, Christ will turn from a changable Husband
and Savior to them in the first, into an unchangable Enemy to them, in the
second; Isai. 63. 8. 10. If a Backsliding people return to him, he returns to
them, and repents of the Evil, threat'ned them; Exodus 32. 14. Jer. 26. 19.
Jonah 3. 10. But, he overthrew Sodom, etc, And Repented not of the evil of
Punishment, Threat'ned, because they Repented not of the evil of Sin, by them
Committed; Jer. 20, 16. On Man's obedient chang of his sickle Life and freedom
of the Sons of Men, for the unchangable Life and Glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, all this Starting, Repenting doings, is past, on all hands. What God
does for, and in Man, by his New-Creation-Workmanship, will continue for ever;
and they, in an everlasting Covenant Union with him, Established in all things,
and sure. They Will never depart from him, nor he from them, to do them good; Jer.
32. 40. No breach, incident to the new covenant ( Jer. 31. 33, 34.) because
managed in a Spirit, on God's part and Man's, too, that can never err, Sin, or
miscarry. It Is infallible Truth, and Ever-lasting Righteousness, in Christ and
his Saints. Whatever God (yea, or Man) does in this Spirit, shall be for ever.
All the Fruits, Labors, Works, produced or done therein, are Incorruptible,
Everlasting; will be for ever. As the new Root and Tree, so are the Fruits and
very (...). The Incorruptible Gospel-Tree, will be known by its fruits, in
distinction from the Mystical Fleshly, Law-Tree, and Corruptible Fruits thereof.

T. Nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it. God's offering and
setting up his new creature Life, with the glory, Wisdom, and Righteousness
thereof, in the room of Man's obediently surrendered old, is the main design and
scope of all Scripture. This, (...), where are Men, with all the words of their
Foolish Wisdom? Setting up Law-Life, for Salvation, and Calling it a
Gospel-State, is directly Satan's Gospel-Work, his Mystery of Iniquity, with
its hidden Works of darkness, under the Form of Godliness and Righteousness of
Man. All the Mystical, Spiritual sense of Scripture, is, by such, excluded out
of all their Teaching. Those that thus take away or deny a spiritual
Creature-Life in Christ, the Whole Living Book and Word of God (and so, the
Character, Doctrine, and declaration thereof, in the Scriptures, or Written
Oracles of God) do take, not only some, but all the principal intended things,
Engraven by God himself, in the former, or by his Holy Inspired Penmen, in the
latter. And then, will God take from them any part of the truly good things, in
either; and Inflict on them all the Plagu's, Written in both; Rev. 22. 18, 19.
Sure, it is no small, retail-heresy, that exclud's all Gospel Truth, and the
whole Doctrine of Salvation. This, does Man's Wisdom, that is Foolishness to
God's, and reckon's all the Word's of God's, and whole Gospel-Doctrin of his
Cross upon nature, at best, Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 18-25. It shuts up the
Kingdom of Heaven; excludes all Kingdom-Life, and sense of Scripture. But,
though Gospel-undertakers, herein, not only derogate from, and diminish; but
(what in them lies) utterly Deny, Despise, and Destroy all true Gospel-Life and
Doctrine, in Christ, Scriptures, and Saints, it is not by all their or Satan's
(...), Wiles, and Skill, that any thing can be taken from it, or added to it.
All the Opprobrious Titles of Heretics, Enthusiasts, or Phanaticks,
Blasphemers, Madmen, that they bestow on Christ ( Jo. 10. 20.) and true Saints
( Hos. 9. 7.) belong entirely to themselves. This will be undeniably Evidenced,
at Christ's second appearing, and final Decision of all Controversies between
true Spiritual Zion-Saints and these Hypocritical (...) in Zion ( Isai. 66. 5.
and 34. 8.) that in the worded-dress of Spiritual Saint-ship and New Covenant
Principles, are but a Law-spirited Generation, that only personate and would
pass for the true Heirs, and so labor to (...) them out of their right, and
take their Inheritance from them. These are the Ravenous Wolves in the
Spiritual Sheeps Clothing, that bestow no other Titles on them, but Devil, and
Mad (as Inquisitors, on Lutherans) and so Kill them, as not fit to live upon
the Earth; Act. 22. 22. The determining this Controversy, will give an amazing
Consternation and Disappointment to Hypocritical Sinners in Zion, and
unspeakable Joy to the (all along this World, under Satan's Reign, and in Man's
day) oppressed Sion-Saints; Is. 33. 14. This will be, when Christ arises, or
comes forth, to Judge Enemies, and have Mercy upon Zion; Psalm. 102. 13. In his
new-Creature-Spirit and Life, God does whatsoever he will, and Enables Saints
to do so, too; even whatsoever he will's; as universally Obedient to him, in
every thing. No Man or Angel, in single, First-Creation-Light or Understanding,
can discern this Spirit of Life, or any of the things thereof; and therefore,
would make nothing, of them all. Proud Man and Angel, will needs have any thing
they cannot see, to be nothing. But, God has so ordered his matters, as to the
final Salvation of Man, that Men should fear before him, yield to his term's of
saving them, and not Proudly and Presumptuously exalt themselves against him, in
that Life and Wisdom, the Death and utter abolition of which, according to the
declared Methods of his Wisdom, is absolutely necessary to their being saved.
So only, can any receive that Life, in which, infallibly to know and declare
the whole Counsel, and to do the whole Will of God, after his own Heart.
Solomon having declared this Incorruptibly perfect New-Creature-Life (that
admits to Chang, Addition, or Diminution, for ever, when completed; being
above all Death, Dangers, Enemies, or Fears) proceed's to show the Weakness,
Insufficiency, and unprofitableness of all other Life or things, First-Creation
Vanities, compared therewith; saying,

Verse. XV. That which has been, is now; and that which is to be, has already
been; and God requires that which is past;
Somewhat like what is said; Chapter 1. 9. That which has bin (in former
Generations) is now; a gradually Restored First-Covenant Righteous Life. And
that which is to be (set up again in full perfection, at Christ's second
Coming, for the Restitution of all things; Act. 3. 21.) has already bin, in
Primitive Innocence. But, still, still, what is this that has been, at first;
and shall be, at last, in full Perfection; and in the gradual Renewals of it,
all along, between? A Starting, Labile, Versatile thing, a fading flower,
altogether Vanity; liable, not only, to such a fall, as happened to Man, at
first, into changable; but also, into unchangable Enmity to God, and Eternal
Death to Man. This is a latter end worse then the beginning, in Innocence, or,
as Born dead in Trespasses and Sins; This Life then, at best, is of no (...)
(...), or everlasting advantage to Man, however conceitedly confident he be,
that it is. True happiness is to be found only, in New Creation Life, the one
and only thing necessary, still wanting to man, till the Obedient Surrender of
all his old things, for God's new.

T. And God requires that which is past; Heb. that which is driven away; Chal.
and Sir. will seek out him that suffers Persecution. God will call all those
Men and Angels, to an account, who have finally chosen a known changeable Life
of Vanity, for their Rest and Habitation, in wilful Rebellion against all his
manifold Warnings, and convincingly showed and offered Spiritual Life of
everlasting Righteousness. They ought to have come trembling before him, and
lay down all their heap of Vanities, with their vain Hopes and false (...)
therein, with themselves, as Old Bottles, to be made new ones, and filled with
the Mystical Wine of his Spirit, in which there can be no excess; nor they,
ever, too confident (or bold to appear before him) therein. Those that, in
stead of fearing and trembling before him, Exalt themselves against him, must
prepare (as well as they can) to meet him, that can declare all their thoughts
(Amos 4. 12, 13.) and find out all their hidden works of Dishonesty and
Rebellion. So, in his method and way of dealing with them, will he require an
exact account of all done in their natural Body or State of Life. He will make
a strict Inquisition, as to all that is past, in that First-creation State of
Vanity, in it self; and Enmity, to himself. They Will be called to give an account
of every Idle word (Mat. 12. 36.) Thought, and Action, therein; as all Words,
Thoughts, and Actions, in that Life of Vanity, turned into Enmity, will be
found. All Preachings up of that Life, for Eternal Salvation, will be found the
Idle, Vain, and Lying Words of Man's Wisdom, in direct contradiction to God's.
To Preach up a Fixure there, is to Preach up a State of unchangable Enmity to
God, for Salvation. Let them palliate their Doctrine of Devils, with what good
Words and fair Speeches, they will, it is but their own Righteousness, they
warrant Salvation, in.

This last Clause, in the Hebrew, Chalde, and Syriac reading ( God requires
that which is driven away; and, will seek out him that suffers (or has
suffered) Persecution) may import, the Inquisition, God will make, for the
Innocent Blood of his Saints, shed by this confounded World of Enemies and
Rebels, from Cain, downwards. Then, will there be a sad reckoning for all the
strong Bulls of Bashan (Ps. 22. 12.) Rich, Flourishing, First-Covenant Cattle,
that have thrust with Side, Shoulder, and Horns, all the Diseased, Lean,
Impoverished little ones of Christ, when Christ comes to Judge between the fat
Cattle and the lean. He will search out his Meek, Suffering Sheep, in his day,
that have bin scattered in Man's day (as Weak, Fools, and despicable, with
Paul, and the offscouring of all things) by the Fat, Rich, Wise, Strong, and
Honorable First-Covenant Cattle (1 Cor. 4. 8-13.) who have made havoc of
them, in the cloudy and dark day of this World, under Satan. He will Strengthen
and Establish his Sick, broken-spirited, scattered Sheep, and destroy the fat
and the strong; feed them with Judgment; but, his delivered Sheep, in a fat and
good Pasture, upon the Mystical high Mountains of his Spiritual Israel. So
shall they be, no more, a Prey to their Enemies, for ever; All this, we find;
Ezekiel. 34. 11-24. This will Christ do for his Saints, when the set time to
favor Zion, is come. When the day of the Lord's Vengeance, the Year of
Recompenses for the Controversy of Zion, is come, woe to all wilfully blind
Incorrigible Enemies, that have (all along this World) molested, Pushed at, and
scatt'red them.

Verse. XVI. And moreover, I saw under the Sun, the place of Judgment, that
Wickedness was there; and the place of Righteousness, that Iniquity was there.
The litteral Sun, all along this Book, does figuratively signify the utmost
light and perfection of Man's day, or judgment, in his own Wisdom, distinct
from God's day of Judgment, in the infallible Light and Wisdom of his yet
sevenfold brighter, mystical new creation Sun, his Gospel Spirit of Grace.
Solomon's seeing (in the infallible light of the new creation Sun, the true
spirit of Prophecy) what he tell's us of, here, may take us off, from wondering
at his observation. He saw wickedness and iniquity in the highest evil
angelical and humane I (...), Dominions, Principalities and Powers of this
World. In the highest respective natural wisdom of such (...) Men and Angels,
are they both found in a direct contrariety to the divine, and infallible
creature-wisdom and judgment of God, contesting with and fighting against both.
Paul, in holy (...) (an eminency of first-covenant light and life) was at the
same dangerous work, for a season, ignorantly. He imprisoned Gospel-saints, for
the life and words of God's Wisdom; punished them (...) in every Synagogue,
compelled them to blaspheme, gave his voice to put them to death, and was
exceedingly mad against them. But Christ, on a sudden, converts this outrageous
Persecutour into a signal Preacher of the very Gospel, he persecuted; Act. 26.
9-19. Gal. 1. 23. One would think, such a pattern should convince the stoutest
self-confident, in the utmost flourish of a first-covenant law-life, though not
convert his obstinate will into obedience to the like Heavenly vision or
discovery. But, in stead of convincing (and appeasing) the professing Jews,
with this true narrative of his Gospel-conversion, in his speech from the
Castle-stairs, to them, at Jerusalem, they grew more exceedingly mad against
him, cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the Air, saying, away with
such a fellow from the earth; for, it is not (...) he should Live; Act. 21. 40.
and, 22. 1-23. Thus say all, of the like sour, legal-spirited, leavened
temper, with the Pharisees, concerning all or any true Gospel-Saints, and their
testimony. (...) is not fit they should live. Who? even those, God reckon's not
the World worthy of; Heb. 11. 38. See you the differing, contrary Judgment of
God, and wise, righteous men? Who will be judge, at last? God himself. The earth
(man in his earthly wisdom) denies; but, the heavens will declare his
righteousness; Psalm. 50. 6. The sour legalist character's Gospel-Saints, as
the worst of malefactors (Christ himself was so handled by them) worse then
Papists or Mahumetans, the filth of the World, the offscouring of all things,
1 Cor. 4. 13. But, think ye this will always be so? If Satan's reign, and
Man's day or Judgment may take place, for ever; it will. But, run and read the
contrary; Psalm. 50. 20-22. Isai. 66. 5. Mat. 7. 21 -- 23. with abundance of
other most harmonious scripturetestmonies, in this point. Search the
scriptures. Resign up your selves to the teachings of that spirit, that dictated
them. Be in earnest, about your salvation. Let your principal enquiry be, after
the kingdom-spirit and righteousness of God. Ye never find it, else, or enter
it. (...) from your own understanding. Consult not (or conferr with) flesh and
blood, in your selves or others, what ye shall do to be saved. That principle
will never own one right word, toward eternal life. It Is a flat enemy to every
word of God's Wisdom, about it. They that despise (and wonder at) such words,
will (everlastingly) perish; Acts. 13. 41. Those that gad abroad (in a spirit
of vanity, enmity, and death) to chang their way, from form to form, in
Religion; tossed and Tumbled up and down by every Wind of Satan's and Man's
Doctrine, or other Gospel; who can help them? That that dies, says God, let it
die: and that that is to be cut off, let it be (...) off. Zec. 11. 9. Litteral
and Mystical Sodom, do seem to carry all before them, in this most
Antichristian-day and Perilous Season. A Gospel-Testimony is (almost)
universally rejected. When Christ himself Preached, he met with Multitudes of
Wilful, Proud, Heady, Traitorous, Contradicting, and Blaspheming
first-covenant Saints; Wise, Righteous, Holy Men, in the form of godliness in
the first, denying the Power of it, in the second-Covenant Spirit, the
Gospel-Principle. This was, alway's, the case: And, even so is it now; 2 Timothy
3. 1-5. Gal. 4. 29. Who but Professors, in Holy Flesh, urged Christ's
Crucifixion, when Pilate and his Heathen Party would have freed him? They Would
rather, a Robber, a Murderer, any Malefactor should escape, then he. Wise,
Righteous, Holy Men, and a Currupt, Dark, Profane, Grossly Idolatrous Party, are
in a contesting Scramble: But, both have had their season, to speak Lies at one
Table, against the Saints of the most High. Are we at a loss, for an instance?
The Vizard will fly off. The guilty Shedders of Innocent Blood, will be
unpalliated, at last, and forced to appear in their more then Ethopian hiew,
that yet lies hid, under the form of Godliness. God exercises long-suffering
toward them, and lets them think him such a one as themselves, till he set
their Sins in order before their Eyes; and so, tear them in pieces, that none
can deliver; Psalm. 50. 20-22. His long-suffering toward Enemies, is with
design to complete and fulfill the Patience, or Sufferings of his Saints, by
their hand, for their unspeakable advantage, and their Enemies final
Destruction. A Comfortable Consideration! True Saints ought to Comfort
themselves and one another, with such right Words, and Thoughts. In conclusion,
Christ will appear to their Joy, and their Enemies shall be ashamed (Isai. 66.
5.) Yea, lie down in Sorrow, and Everlasting Contempt, as Vessels of Dishonor.
Eternity will be a long day, to pay their full reckoning in. God, in the
exercise of his infinite Justice and Mercy, will bring all to rights, give
every one their due recompense, for Obedience to, or Rebellion against him.

New Covenant, Gospel-Saints are more odious to the legal, first-covenant
professor, then is the common sinner of the Gentiles, in the corrupt spirit of
nature. The wisdom of this world, in the most enlightened first-covenant Saint (
Wise strong, and Honorable in Christ, there) is (...) to God's,; and God's, in
his new covenant Saints, to theirs. Was not Paul a fool, weak, and despicable,
in Christ's Gospel Spirit, to but such wise, strong, and honorable ones, in
Christ? 1 Cor. 4. 10. Flesh and Spirit, or Man's spirit and God's, are directly
contrary to each other, in all their designs, desires, and thoughts, about true
Salvation. The former, fixed in, is the carnal mind of enmity to God ( Romans 8.
6, 7.) that will prove eternal death to man. The latter, becoming the
principle of life, desire, thought, and action, in Man, is eternal life to him,
and in him. The carnal mind of enmity, was not found in Man or Angel, the day
they were created; Ezekiel. 28. 15. Neither of them, as they came out of their
Creator's hands, were found in enmity to God, or the life of his spirit of
Grace (though they had it not) till they both sinned, and fell. The voluntary
evil, rebellious use of their own mind, introduced this enmity to God's.
Changable enmity, in man, is now inseparable from his life. Unless therefore,
life and all, at best, be parted with, he will become unchangable therein, as
Devils are; and so, be found in a state of eternal death. No wonder then, if in
the place of Judgment, and Righteousness, or in the most enlight'ned Righteous
state of the natural spirit, in fallen Man and Angel, be found (by the
al-searching spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints) the deepest and most
Criminal (Mystical) Wickedness and Iniquity, hidden works of Darkness, rendering
them most abominable to God, unchangable Enemies to the Saints of the most
high; and to ths most High himself. But, what? Have Gospel-Saints all truth,
and First-Covenant Saints, none? Can any believe this? Yet, most true. Let but
the Scripture-sense of truth, be duly considered, as the Character of the
Gospel Spirit and words thereof, in distinction from the Law-Spirit of this
World (in all its variety) and words thereof, the Wonder at (and unbelief of)
this, would cease. But, does the wise, first-Covenant Holy Man, receive nothing
of a Gospel-Testimony? Not one word. No man, in the Spirit of nature, corrupt
or righteous, rightly receives such Testimony, in any point. That Spirit is a
Spirit of total darkness, and Universal Error, an absolute Heretic, as to all
Gospel-Life and truths. This seems hard. What then? The Jews were for Moses;
who, but they? Christ found, they took not the Mystical truth of one word of
Moses; So, told them, they were Infidels as to the principal intendment, and
main scope of all his Writings. For, says he, had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me: But if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my
Words? Jo. 5. 46, 47. The Scriptures are owned as the Words of God, by all,
under the name of Christians, but how do they read, hear, or understand them?
In the litteral Shadow, only, or Mystical truth, also? As teaching and
preferring the Righteousness and Wisdom of Man, to the dark, ignorant State,
and Vile Affections of the corrupt Spirit of nature, only; or, as also, farther
declaring the everlasting Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God, in his
Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth? For this latter, nature, at best, is to
suffer death, the right way; Viz, by the death of the guilty Sinner, and so,
death of Sin, in Men; whereas by the fall, Men became dead in Sin; Sin alive in
them, and they dead; now they alive, and Sin dead; and that, for ever. This, by
the death-work of the Cross, or Gospel Spirit, on the natural. Men (in their
own confused Spirit of Darkness, as to all Gospel Truths) have much variety of
thought, and Opinion: But all, as one Man, are against every tittle of
Gospel Truth, words of God's Wisdom, which the Holy Ghost teaches. Though they
all read all the Words of God's Wisdom, in the Letter, they do not read them in
the sense of Christ's Question to the Lawyer (or teaching Legal-Spirited
Professor) how (...), that is, understandest thou, what is Written in the Law?
Luke 10. 26. Let any come in the true spirit of Prophecy; King, Princes,
Priests, and People, in the once only Professing Nation of the whole World, all
against him; Jer. 1. 18, 19. So, when Christ Preached, (...), Pharisees,
Sadduces, etc. with all their differences of Judgment, all against all his
right Gospel-words, to a tittle. And, so is it now; as much, shall I say, or
more then ever? Why not the latter; if these be the latter (and therefore worst
of) times?

Solomon, having thus declared, goes on, to acquaint us with his thoughts in
the Holy Ghost, What the most high will do with all these literally righteous
workers of Mystical Iniquity; how he will handle them, at last; as fallows,

Verse. XVII. I said in mine Heart, God shall Judge the Righteous and the Wicked:
For, there is a time there, for every purpose, and for every work.
God will be even with all his Enemies, both sorts of Satan's Subjects, the
righteous and the Wicked. In righteousness and truth will Christ Judge and make
War upon them both; Rev. 19. 11. And, have they an arm, like God? What then
will become of them? The righteous sort of Sinners, will be found most
Heretical Enemies to Gospel; and so, the most loathsome to God, of all; the
very Spiritual Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon. The sixed litteral, in the corrupt
Spirit of nature, will have bad enough on it, in Dooms-day-work, and what
fallows. Neither of them can escape the Damnation of Hell. If Judgment begin
at the First-covenant House or People of God (that, by fixing there, in Enmity
to the second (and so, not obeying the (...)) become no People of God, but a
Synagogue of Satan) where shall gross Sinners appear, that are fixed in Enmity
to all (...), God's and Man's too, with Elymas the Sorcerer? 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18.
The Light or Law of nature, restored in every Man, (...) Damnation to
themselves, as fixed in the vile affections of corrupt (...). And, the
al-searching Light of Christ's Gospel Spirit (...) (...) of the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus) Preaches absolute Damnation, to fixed first-Covenant righteous
Men, who have rend'red any Repentance or Change of their Mind to the better,
Impossible; Heb. 6. 4-6. and 10. 26, 27. and 12. 17. This is the case of wilful
Sinners against the Holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit, and all its counsels; its
Reproofs of Death, upon their Spirits; and, Instructions of Life, by their
being transformed into, and built up in its own Life of everlasting
Rightoousness. Esau' s Morsel of Meat ( for which he sold or parted with the
offered Birthright, or New Creation Life and never-perishing Meats of Christ)
comprehend's all sorts of first-Creation Vanities and Shadows, from the highest
part of the Dust of this Mortal World (all Humane and Angelical Excellencies,
natural) to the lowest, the gratifying delights of Brutish Men. The particular
Books of all Wicked Men's Consciences, shall be opened (by the setting up of
Spiritual Conviction-Light, in Wrath, therein) and found to agree with that
other, general, Living Book or Word of God (Rev. 20. 12) Christ's
Gospel Spirit; and so, shall the inward parts of the very righteous Sinners, be
found very Wickedness, unchangable Enmity to God. All the most hidden works of
darkness, in the Mystery of Iniquity, shall be Proclaimed upon the House tops,
manifested to all Angels and Men, good and bad. Then shall it be seen, there is
a Reward for the Righteous (and Wicked, too) because he is a God that Judges
in the Earth; Ps. 58. 11. All sorts of Sins shall then be brought into
Judgment, and reckoned for, even the most hidden works of Dishonesty, Mystical,
Spiritual Wickednesses; the most secret Intents of all Wicked Men and Angels.
All will be manifested and laid open, before that Judge, whose Judgment Seat
they will be Summoned (and irresistibly forced) to appear, before; Heb. 4. 12, 13.
2 Cor. 5. 10. Then shall it appear, there is a time for every purpose, and for
every work (desire, thought, and intent of the Heart, in the corrupt or
enlightn'ed Spirit of nature (fixed in Enmity to God and his Spirit of Grace)
to be brought into Judgment, and laid open, before all.

Verse. XVIII. I said in my Heart, concerning the Estate of the Sons of Men,
that God might Manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are
Beasts.
In this and the four next Verses, Solomon Summ's up, in a manner, all,
insisted on, before, in this and the two former Chapters. Men, made by God,
rational being's, good, in their kind, have made themselves Beasts, by their Sin
and fall. In the corrupt spirit of their nature, are they Beasts; by loss of
their changable goodness, Created in, they Inherit a Brutish Spirit or
principle of sensuality. Bestial Powers Rebel against, and insult over their
rational. And, the predominant Power, Denominates. This, Solomon saw, and
desires God would manifest to them, that they may see what a deplorable
condition they have brought themselves into; and clear God, as having no hand
therein. And this yet, is but one part of the consideration, in which they are
like Beasts. Man, restored out of the dismal, dark, (...) Life of his corrupted
nature, into the clean, enlight'ned, righteous state thereof, as to filth of
flesh, and taking up there, for Salvation, is yet, but another sort of Mystical
Beast; yea, a worse Beast then before, in the unfix'd corrupt state of nature,
because now, fixed in Enmity. His Carnal Mind, and Earthly Wisdom thereof,
that, at best, is but sensual (in Scripture Language) when fixed in, becomes
Devilish; Jam. 3. 15. This brings Man into the same condition, with fallen
Angels, or Devils, in unchangable Harmony with them, against Christ and God.
Man, in the highest Honor, Wisdom, Righteousness and Glory of his own restored
nature, is but as a Beast, and altogether Vanity; Ps. 39. 5. and 49. 12. 20.
From a self-ruining mistake, he puts himself under the conduct of a spirit of
unchangable Enmity to God. Man, also, in his bodily part, is like a Beast. Of
this, a larg account is given; v. 19, 20.

Verse. XIX. For, that which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; even
one thing befalls them: as the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they have
all one breath; so that a Man has no pre-eminence above a Beast: for, all is
vanity.
Solomon, here, speaks of the Bodily, sensual part of Man; consisting of the
like corruptible ingredients, and feeding on the like perishing Meats, with
mere Brutes. So, the same dissolution befalls them. All alike, in birth, life,
and death. Dust, both, and all, and turn to dust, again. This is positively
asserted of Man's Body, in distinction from his Spirit; Genesis 2. 7. and 3. 19.
God breathed into his nostrils the breath of Life; Heb. the spirit of Lives
(one Soul, with sundry faculties and operations, vegetal, sensual, and
rational) Called. a speaking, reasonable Soul, different from Beasts. So, in Man
are found all sorts of mortal, first-creation Life, with the operations
thereof; intellectual and intuitive, with Angels; sensual, with beasts, birds,
and fishes etc. Vegetal, with plants, trees, etc. And then, has he bodily
parts, made of elementary materials, with all inanimate compounds. Every
individual man therefore is fitly called a Microcosm, or little World; an
Epitome or Compound of all, found in the greater, without him. And, all these
Lives in him, are mortal; All, vanity. The very righteous first-covenant Life
of his immortal spirit (whether in the intuitive, inorganical; or rational,
organical operations thereof) is mortal too. All men are witnesses of this, by
the death and loss of it in all, for the first sin of all, in, and with the
first. Yet farther; One sort of Life, Man has, that is not found in the whole
Macrocosm, or greater World, without him; a Life of rational-sense, exercised
in and by his Body. Neither Angel, nor Beast have this; no Creature, above or
below him. The Result, from God's uniting Man's Spirit, and fitly organized
Body, is called a living Soul; Genesis 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 45. The Soul (Souly or
animalish Life) sleep's (or remain's dormant and unexercised) in the Spirit,
when departed, till a reunion with its Body, at the Resurrection, whether of
Life or Damnation; John 5. 29. The essentials of Man, Body, Soul, and Spirit
(whatever suspension of exercise, or temporary alteration be incident to any of
them) make up the discriminating form of Man, from all other Creatures, in both
Worlds, for ever, in Earth, Heaven, or Hell. Man's corruptible Body, at first,
made of dust, received an additional frailty by his sin, in the degenerate
state of his whole Nature. The Spirit departed out of it, it soon moulder's
into dust. Then does Man cease from the exercise of Bodily Life, as well as the
Beast, when he dies. In this, therefore, Man has no pre-heminence above a
Beast. For, he is made of the same materials, has the same Breath in his
Nostrils, and comes to the same end. The Beast receives his animation, by the
quickening up of a mere sensual Life in his Body. So, his Spirit never has its
Body again; nor any Life above, and without it: but ceases for ever. Brutified
Atheists would fain persuade themselves and others, out of the immortality of
their Spirits; and, that Man has no other kind of Life or Being, than the
Beast; but only, a superiority to the Beast, therein; as Angels have to Men, in
intellectual Life, though man had the same kind of Life, by Creation; and that,
perfect too. See the Apocryphal Wisdom of (...), sor a Character of these
Atheistical Reasoners; Wisdom 2. 1-9. Plenty of these brutish disputants (that
labor to out themselves and others, of all the Prerogatives of man, above the
Beast) find we, at this day. Having wickedly made themselves Brutes, fain would
they persuade themselves, God made them so. And, if others think themselves
better, they set themselves to prove their thought, a whimsical Imagination; and
that, we have no being or Life, for ever, after the dissolution of our Body.
What Is Eternal death? Annihilation? No. That Is the thing they plead for, and
seek after, but will never find. The incorrigibly vile, will be most
exquisitely sensible, under everlasting Burnings, in every particle of their
beings.

The Righteous Life, Man had before the fall, he lost by his first Sin. That
was but mortal, and a perishing Vanity, as well as the Life of the Beast,
though of a more excellent sort. But, he has degraded his nature, into a kind
of Equality with the Beast. He may know the insignificancy of his lost Life, as
to true Blessedness, by its being lost. But, in stead of looking upwards, for a
better, he chooses rather to sink down into a worse (the mere Brutish Life of
the Beast) hating all Discourse, Counsel, or Instruction, of the least tendency
toward a Gospel-Life of immortality, suited to the immortality of his being.
This appears the case of most Men, by the following Words;

Verse. XX. All go unto one place: All are of the Dust, and all turn to Dust
again.
Here Is the condition of all Men, as to the Mortal Life of Body and Soul; the
Mortal, first-creation earthy righteous Life of their Spirit, turn's also to
dust again. Their Spirit, indeed, as an Immortal being, is distinct from, and
Superior to the mere sensual Spirit of the Beast. This appears,

Verse. XXI. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of
the Beast that goes downward to the Earth? Or,
Who knows and rightly consider's the Spirit of Man, in its distinguishing
Prerogative, from the Beast? What is said (v. 18-20.) may seem to countenance
the mistaking sensualist's forementioned Atheistical Doctrine. But, this pulls
him back, to another Lesson. Man, in his bodily part, Life, and Breath, was
like the Beast, even before the fall. But, his sinful doting on the same
sensual delights, with Beasts, (and so making his whole Man, a Beast) this was
not his case, by Creation. God made him a Man: He has made himself a Beast.
And, the Beast has vastly the start of him, herein: Sin's not, in his delights;
has no principle of Life, desire, or palate, in his nature, to which, any thing
above mere sensual Objects, is calculated; Is not subject to the Judgment, Man
is; nor, has any Immortality of being, to sufler the pains of eternal death,
in. The Spirit of the Beast goes downward to the Earth, as well as his Body.
There Is an end of him. He never hear's of himself, more. Such death,
incorrigibly Wicked Angels and Men, will vainly seek, but never find. It will
ever flee from them. They Will find themselves in a fixed hatred to what is eternal
Life. And, they will find themselves dreadfully Tormented, in eternal death. What
then can be their desire, but insensibleness, or annihilation? They Will never
find either. Being will stick closse to them; and most exquisite sensibleness,
never depart, one Moment, in Eternity, from them. They must lie by it, for ever,
in Sorrow; Tormented in every particle of their make.

Man, by the Right use of his rational Powers, in law or first-covenant-light,
ought to Perform active obedience to god's law; and when called to it, yield
himself up in passive obedience to his Cross, and so, receive his Gospel spirit
and principle of eternal and wellpleasing active Obedience. Thus ought Man to
live to the Lord, and die to the Lord (To. 14. 8.) in his Law-Spirit of nature,
that he may live for ever to the Lord, in his Gospel Spirit of Grace. Thus is
Man to obey God, in a Law, and Gospel-state, successively, one after another;
in the Life of his own Spirit; and then, of God's. This is the Method and
Doctrine of God's Wisdom, for Man's Salvation. tion. Man's unbelieving,
contradicting Wisdom, will (if persisted in) bring him to Weeping and of
Gnashing of Teeth, for ever; the Just Portion of all his (...) company ( Luke
12. 46.) the Just Punishment of all wilful Mistake, Unbelief, and Rebellion, in
this matter. The aggravated madness of Man, lies herein. He chooses rather to
lay his Ruling rational Powers, under the sensual, in his own person, then
Submit to God's terms and way, for the bringing them, by way of Death and
Resurrection, into eternal Subjection to the ruling Powers of Spiritual Life;
and so, unchangable Obedience to God most high. Man chooses rather to be like a
Beast, then God. He is offered an advance into a kind of Equality with the
new-Creature-spirit, in Christ, by personal Union with it. And this, in Christ,
is in a kind of equality with the infinite Divine Spirit, by personal Union
with that; the Man God's fellow; Zee. 13. 7. True Saints are personally one
with this Man, as he and the Father are one; Jo. 17. 21, 22. What Words, what
Tongue of Men or Angels can express this Folly; Man's choosing the Life of a
Beast, to his eternal Damnation, before all this, that would be his eternal
Salvation? God has made Man, Lord of the visible Creation ( Ps. 8. 5-8) and he
alone, of all visible Creatur's, walks unsutably to his principle, in Rebellion
against his Creator. Man's Wisdom is capable of receiving Conviction, by the
right-Gospel-opening of the Word's of God's: But, his will may not be trusted,
for Gospel-Conversion. That Is to die, by the way. It likes not that. Every
thing would live. His understanding can tell his will, it must die; cease from
all its own Activity, Life, Desire, and Motion, as the only possible way for
the final Salvation of his whole person. Man, abusing his rational Powers, to
fetch in gratifying Provisions for his sensual, only, turn's his earthly nature
upside down; perverts the whole course and order of it; serves, what he ought
to rule over: So, makes himself a Beast, by the very Verdict of his own
Conscience, and all mankind. When he suffer's the Bestial Powers, within him,
to rule over him, it is Just with God, to give the litteral Beast, without him,
Power over him, so as to kill him, for Rebelling thus against God; Deuteronomy. 32.
24. Ezekiel. 14. 15. Man, by yielding Obedience to the Law (but, much more, when
to Gospel) shall be freed from Beasts destructive Dominion over him. They shall
not devour, nor make him afraid; Ezekiel. 34. 28. Solomon had sadly experienced
the boundless Ramblings of his Bestial Powers, after whatever was gratifying to
the inordinate Lusts and vile affections thereof. But, as the Face of Man's
Body, so of his Spirit, is fitted to look upward, to a Life, a Glory that
excell's; and so, to God most high. Man and Angel, by Creation, had abundantly
the ascendant over the Beast. But, the best things corrupted, become the worst.
The Devil, with all the Glory, Wisdom, Power, and Righteousness of the
First-Creation, turned into (and used in) unchangable Enmity to God, is, in
God's sight and thought, the most contemptible varlet, in the World.

Solomon, in this interrogatory, bewail's the wilful ignorance, folly, and
inadvertency of Man; his Brutish unwillingness to take any right notice of his
prerogative-difference from the spirit of the beast. He is ready, even to deny
the Immortality of his Spirit. They would gladly die like Beasts, that live
like them. If they own their (...), they suspect a sad reckoning, behind, for
the abuse of it. Man, in his natural Creation, had (and is, since the fall,
capable of recovering) the intellectual, intuitive, inorganical exercise of his
mind, after the manner of Angels, by which, immediately to see, what organical
reason call's hidden essences, qualities, and properties of things; all which,
still, are Vanities, and that, of the lower order. Organical reason,
discourses, or, run's from one thing to another, from what is seen, to prove,
gather, and guessingly conclude something not seen or known, before. This way
of getting the knowledge of things, by sensible species, taken in by the
outward, and presented or conveyed by inward natural senses, to the
understanding, was Aristotle's low, conjectural way of gaining knowledge, far
short of the Soaring, Intuitive Platonist. But, no Spiritual, Eternal things
are the Objects of either of these ways of natural understanding, in Men. These
are wholly out of all their reach. Now, what a wretched wicked self-denial are
they guilty of, that neglect all these advantages of their nature, to level
themselves with Beasts? To throw up all rational and Intellectual pleasures,
and betake themselves wholly to Bestial? Their Practice Inclines them to Judge,
or, at least, declare, they have no other principles of Life, but Bestial.
Their Immortality is a tormenting consideration, to them. For, this renders
them, by their own madness, fit Subjects and fuel of God's unquenchable Wrath.
Man's great fault of all, is the wilful refusal of God's convincingly
discovered and offered New Creation Life. When this Gospel-Life of Immortality
is brought to light, in his Immortal being, all is his own. For, then he is
Christ's, and Christ is God's (1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.) one with Christ, as he with
the Father. So, comes Man to be an Infallible seer and doer of the whole Will
of God, for ever. Man, in his whole natural being, Body, Soul, and Spirit (all
his essential parts, and Powers of natural Operation) is to be considered, as
distinct from a first or second Covenant Spirit, or Life, by Christ (as
Creator, or Redeemer) put into him; by which, he is found in a shadowy
changable righteous State, and Earthy Image of God; or unchangable Heavenly
Creature-Life and Image of him. The former is but a fading slower, and Man
therein, at best, altogether (...), Principles and Operations. By Christ's
second, new-Creating Workman-ship, attains he a State of Everlasting
Righteousness and true Holiness; Ephesians. 4. 24. So, has he the Kingdom of Heaven
within him, and (...) Life abiding in him. He lives and walk's in that Spirit,
Christ, with his Saints, will Reign in, and Judge the World.

Verse. XXII. Wherefore, I perceive, that there is nothing better, then that a
Man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his Portion: for, who shall
bring him to see what shall be after him?
What works? deeds or works of the Law, wrought in his own Law-Spirit of
nature, such as Paul excludes from ( Romans 4. 2-6.) or, such as are wrought in
Christ's Gospel Spirit of Grace, which James, in the same Spirit, with Paul,
own's as Ingredients into Abraham's Justification, before God? Jam. 2. 21-24.
Own works, here, which the Holy Ghost, by Solomon, commands (and commends)
Man's rejoicing in, as his Portion from God, cannot be any thing, done in his
own nature, that, since the fall, in its highest renewals, is found in direct
Enmity to God. This State of Man (with all possible Labors therein) is so far
from being his happy Portion from God, that he lies directly under the Curse
and Wrath of God, in and with all this, which is altogether Vanity. But, can
right Gospel-works, which God work's in Men, be called their own works? Yes; as
owned by God, co-workers with him, in his spirit; living and walking therein.
He that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be manifest, that
they are wrought in God (Jo. 3. 21.) Deeds, wrought by God in Man; and Man, in
God. Thus God Judges of, and calls such works; the Labors of Man, in Christ's
Gospel-Life. See what is said, in this case, on Chapter 2. 24. and, v. 12, 13, of
this Chap. Solomon does not here countenance Man's rejoicing in such Labors of
his own Spirit, as he reckon's vain in themselves, and unprofitable to himself
( Chapter 1. 3.) as to any final good to him, therein, or by. Nothing, short of the
new-Creature-State, and Man's Labors therein, signify any thing, toward
eternal Life; Gal. 6. 15. Neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, righteous or
corrupt nature, or any thing done by Man, in either, can be of any avail, or
(...) thereunto. So have we found out these works of Man, he is to (...) in;
done in that Life, which is his peculiar portion, and New Creation Birthright
gift, from God. If works, wrought in Man's own spirit, will, and way, were
meant, it would be a Flat contradiction to the main scope of this whole book,
which Proclaim's the absolute Vanity and insignificancy of all first-Creation
Life and things, at best, as to Man's pleasing God, or finding true
blessedness, for himself. Such works are meant, as Man may, ought, will, cannot
but rejoice in, with Joy unspeakable and Glorious. Here Is Man's inward Summum
bonum; a Life, wherein he can do all things, after God's own Heart, Steddily,
Infallibly, Eternally; and so, enjoy the transcendently yet higher Summum
bonum, without him, the Divine Glory, in Favor and Love, shining upon him, for
ever. First-Covenant Divines (as well as Evil Angels, and Heathen Philosophers)
place Man's Summum bonum, in but first-Creation excellencies (whatever other
title they give it) within the compass of natural Objects, and in the activity
of their natural State, that is a fading flower, altogether Vanity. The Spirit
of truth, by its Penmen, acquaints us with other matters, for hapiness; another
Life, other excellencies, objects, and works, Man is capable to be found in the
possession and exercise of. The spiritual Man's Joy and delight, meets and
center's in the same works or things, with God's. True Saints are in a Union
with his Divine Spirit, in Will, Understanding, Desire, Thought, Love and
Hatred. They love what he loves, with a perfect love: Hate what and whom he
hates, with a perfect hatred; Ps. 139. 21, 22. All Man's Labors are vain, in
his own Spirit of Vanity: Not so, in the Lord; 1 Cor. 15. 58. Paul rejoiced in
that Gospel-Life he had, by the Faith of the Son of God (Gal. 2. 20.) and his
Labors therein: but found his Law-Life and best works therein, Dung, when
touching the Righteousness which is the Law (or to be found in that Law-State)
blameless; Philip. 3. 6. Enmity to God Tinctur's, Sullies, and desiles all that
Life and Works, at best, with filth of Spirit.

T. For, who shall bring him to see what shall be after him? If Man Submit not
to God's terms for receiving his new-Creation-Life, who can bring him to see,
what shall be after him? Either what will become of good or Evil Angels or Men,
in Eternal Life or Death, after their fading Life of Vanity (with all the
things thereof) is over, and gone? These grand and most concerning futurities
(things, no natural Eye, Heart, or Understanding can see or imagine, on all
hands; the things provided in Heaven, for those that truly fear God; or, in
Hell, for incorrigible haters of him) lie quite out of the reach of Man or
Angel, in their natural, first-Creation State of Enmity and Vanity, Darkness
and Death. The Spiritual Man, in the true Preaching Spirit of Prophecy,
discern's or judges all things (1 Cor. 2. 15.) and can declare, Infallibly,
what all Men and Angels will come to, as finally Obedient or Disobedient to
God's term's of receiving Eternal Life. He (knowing the Terrors of the Lord (2
Cor. 5. 11.) and, what a fearful thing it is, to fall into the hands, or under
the final Wrath of the Living God) does, Might and Main, Labor in the Spirit
of Christ, to warn and caution Men, as to the only way of entering into the Joy,
and escaping the Wrath of the Lord; the Wrath to come. By refusing so great
Salvation, as God offers them, come they to Eternal Death, Want, and Vexation
of Spirit; Prove. 8. 34-36. They Will want every thing that is good, and have every
thing that is evil, in and upon them, in Extremity, for ever; unchangable
Wickedness in them, and positive Inflictions of God's Wrath (as Punishment)
upon them, without any Interruption, or Relief ( Luke 16. 24, 25.) to Eternity.
They have chosen rather (in the declared, known causes and way thereto) to be
Vessels of Dishonor and Everlasting Contempt; then, on God's term's, to be
made Vessels of Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life. By Enmity to
God's Divine and New Creature Holy Ghosts or Spirits, do they bring siery
Indignation, on their unpardonably guilty heads; Heb. 10. 26, 27. To. 2. 6-10.
These great things, that will be found and felt hereafter, do evidence the
great weight of these Words of Solomon; and grand concern of Men, to be
circumspect, in taking the true meaning of them. Who, but the awak'ned
Spiritual Saint, can foresee and tell, the unutterable Confusions, final
Refusers of God's Counsel, will be found in, for ever? The Cares and Pleasures
of this Life, choke Men's understandings, as to any right and hearty enquiry
after their grand concerns, in the next. The Noble Bereans did set themselves to
search the Scriptures, for the Gospel-Kingdom and Righteousness of God. Who
does so, now? Those that, in this World, seek not the Kingdom and Righteousness
of God, in the next ( Mat. 6. 33.) will never find it; let them flatter
themselves in their Loose, Negligent, Inadvertent course, while they will. The
most trifling, outward Vanities of this World, do universally amuse, and take
up Peoples time and thought, so as to detain them in a deep oscitancy, and
regardlesness, as to the unutterable Woes, prepared in Tophet, for Incorrigible
sinners; or unspeakable Joys, in the Kingdom of God, for Spiritual Saints.
Believe not your own Thoughts, O ye Sons of Men, about Salvation. Lean not to
your own Understandings. Conferr not with Flesh and Blood. Regard not the Voice
of Strangers, the Words of Man's Wisdom, about it.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. I. So I returned, and considered all the Oppressions that are done under
the Sun. And behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no
Comforter: And on the side of their Oppressors, there was power; but, they had
no Comforter.
I Returned ( Heb. was Converted) from my fallible wisdom, to see the Affairs
of Mankind, in the infallible wisdom of God: particularly, to consider duly,
the manifold Oppressions, under the Sun. Even himself, through his vastly
expensive extravagancies, had given occasion to his oppressed Subjects, to
bespeak his soolish Son (...), after his Decease, on this wise. Thy Father
(...) our (...) grievous: make his heavy Yoke upon us, lighter, and we will
serve (...); (...) King. 12. 4. He takes three days, to consider of an Answer
to them, verse. 5. He consults with his Fathers Old Counselors of State, who
give him good Advice. But he (...) their Counsel, and consults with his Young
Companions; verse. 6. 7. So, His answer was; My Father (...) your Yoke, heavy;
and I will add to it. He chastised you with whips; but, I will (...) you with
Scorpions. They reply; To thy Tents, O Israel, and let David's House look to
itself; take their course; Verse. 8-16. The (...) Son acknowledged his wise
Father's oppressing them; but, in stead of relieving, threatens to add to their
grievances; though he saw them upon the turning point, with Jeroboam the in
head of them, whom they make King of ten of the twelve Tribes, which never
returned to the House of David, more. This got he to himself, and Successors,
by his madness, in following the counsel of his rash, young Hectors. But, if
even holy David, and his wise Son, Solomon, eminent in spiritual Saintship, and
signal Penmen of the Holy Ghost (through some remain's of uncrucified nature)
demeaned themselves so, in King-ship, as to cause many grievances to the
Subject, what is to be expected, in the utmost degeneracy of Heathen Monarchy,
from Golden-head Nebuchadnezzar, to Iron and Clay, though called most
Christian? God gratified Israel's foolish request ((...) a corrupt humane
Monarchy, like the Nations round about them, to a Theocracy, the Government of
God himself; 1 Samuel 8. 5 -- 7.) Giving them a King, in his Anger; whom he took
away in his Wrath (Hosea 13. 11.) by the Philistines Sword, on Mount Gilboa; 1 Samuel 31. And were not the sad Consequents of David's numbering the People (
seventy thousand men's Lives) with the quelling his Son Absolons Rebellion, and
matter of Uriah, etc. sore Grievances?

But, in the principal meaning of these words, we shall find the Oppressors,
more; and the Oppressed, fewer than is commonly considered. Till the truth,
concerning both, be brought into public view, It Is matter of wonder, to hear
it. Solomon, in God's, found the mistake of his own wisdom; so, endeavored to
take off others, with himself, from wondering; and also, to show them the Cure
of the Evil, that, through ignorance, they wond'red (or were amazed and
discouraged) at. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent
perverting of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter
(Heb. Will, or Purpose of God in it, who can use evil Magistrates, as
Instruments of his Providence, though they be not properly, Ministers of his
Ordinance; but indeed, directly contrary; a terror to good works, and workers,
and a countenance and encouragement to evil; Romans 13. 3.) for he that is higher
than the highest, regards, and there be higher than they; Eccl. 5. 8. The
good Angel is higher than the highest, invisible, evil angelical Principalities
and Powers of this world; and, Christ and God most high, are yet (unspeakably,
infinitely) higher than they. In this Reason, is contained relief enough for
the Oppressed, in the last, and worst of times; and Power, more than enough, to
deal with the Oppressors, Devils or Men; as we shall farther and more clearly
see, when we come, in course, to consider Chap. 5. 8. In this Chap. 4. verse. 1.
and that, with diverse other passages, in this Retractation-Book, does Solomon
prepare his spiritual brethren, to quit their ignorant natural man's wondering,
by having recourse to spiritual sanctuary-Light, with the Psalmist; Psalm. 73.
19. The highest wisdom of Man, in first-covenant Light and Righteousness,
secures him not from being a Fool, and as a Beast, before God, in this matter,
verse. 22. And so, indeed, is he, as to all his spiritual, eternal concerns, all
the heavenly things or truths of God, and methods of his Wisdom, in his
dealings with Men; with Friends, as Foes; and Foes, as Friends. All these
things are Uninterpretable Riddles, Unintelligible Mysteries, not only to
largparted and most Cultivated Learned Heathens; but, to Wise, Strong, and
Honorable in Christ, as to first-covenant seize in him, and Union with
him. These, yet, are Fools and Beasts, to the truly or Spiritually Wise,
Strong, and Honorable in Christ, who seem (and are reckoned) Fools, to them,
with Paul; 1 Cor. 4. 10. God's giving Incorrigible Enemies, more (in this
World, within and without) then heart can Wish; and plaguing his Friends,
Spiritual Saints, every Morning (as to all, he gratifies the other, with)
puzzles the Prophet's Servant, or natural Man, even in the Saint himself; till
Baptized and Advanced (through a Mystical Death and Resurrection of his Spirit;
the only true Regeneration, Transformation, or New Creation thereof) into the
Spiritual Light and Sight of the true Seer and Prophet, in him. The figurative
Shadow or Type hereof, we find; 2 King. 6. 15-17.

In fallen-nature (even when, in Measure, restored from filth of Flesh, often
deeplier guilty of filth of Spirit, Enmity to God's) do all worldly Governors,
more or less, pervert and violate (under all specious and plausible pretenses
of doing) Judgment and Justice. Those, appointed to redress and remove (by
forming up, and contriving a corrupt Interest to themselves, contrary to the
Community) do oppress, and make the Grievances. This, two general way's; by
perverting good, or making Evil Laws. The Throne of Iniquity frames Mischief by
a Law. And then, do they gather together against the Soul of the Righteous, and
Condemn Innocent Blood; Ps. 94. 20, 21. The Wicked Compass about the Righteous,
and then wrong Judgment proceeds; Hab. 1. 4. The Wicked walk on every side,
when the vilest Men are Exalted (Psalm. 12. 8.) and the worthiest rejected; yea,
cut off, as dangerous to the Peace of Tyranny. An evil selfinterest in Rulers,
suggest's deceitful Policies, called Reasons of State, ugly unreasonable
Reasons, for oppressing the helpless, in stead of doing them Justice. Such
Reasons have been remarkably recompene'd, sometimes, even in this World, by
God's Righteous Visible Judgments on the guilty Heads of the Wicked Inventers
and Contrivers thereof. Pharaoh and his Council Judged it Reason of State, to
kill the Male Children of the Hebrews, as soon as Born, least they should grow
too many for them. This was paid off, with a Vengeance, upon them. After
several other Plagu's, their own firstborn Sons died for it. Exodus 12. 29. And,
at last, Pharaoh himself, etc. with a Multitude of Egyptians, were overwhelmed
in the Red Sea. Jeroboam, for a reason of State, set up the old Egyptian
Idolatrous Worship of Calv's, to prevent his Peoples going to Jerusalem to
worship at solemn Feasts, which he feared, might endanger a Revolt from him, to
the House of David. 1 King. 12. 26-28. This was the very trade, Israel had bin
soundly punished for, in the Wilderness. What will warn Vain, Vile Man? All the
Israelit' s were Threatened with Destruction for it. But, on Moses his
Intercession, the Punishment was narrow'd, to three Thousand, Killed by the
Levit's, and a Plague on some others of the People; Exodus 32. They said, (v.
4.) and Jeroboam said, after them, in the like case, behold thy Gods, O Israel,
which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. O Madness! To the Egyptian
God's, that could not deliver their own People from them, do they ascribe their
deliverance from their Egyptian Bondage and Taskmasters. So, Ahaz Sacrificed
to the God's of Damascus, which were the ruin of him and all Israel; 2 Chronicles.
28. 22, 23. and 2 King. 16. 10-13. So also, Amaziah set up the Edomit's Gods,
to be his Gods, and sought after them, which could not deliver their own People
out of his hands (2 Chro. 26. 14, 15.) and was destroyed, for his pains, as
threat'ned by the Prophet, for not harkening to his Counsel, though against
and contrary to the King's Wicked, Idolatrous Council. v. 16. 27. And, what
became of Jeroboam, for his Calf-worship, erected on a self Interested Reason
of State? See, 1 King. 14. 10, 11. I Will cut of Jeroboam, and take away the
Remnant of his House, as a Man takes away Dung, till it be all gone. Him that
dies of him, in the City, shall Dogs Eat, and him that dies in the Field,
shall the Fowls of the Air Eat: For the Lord has spoken it. Is not here,
enough?

When Christ shall take possession of (and actually reign over) all the Earth
(his right, always Psalm. 2. 8.) all Visible and Invisible Principalities and
Powers of this World, Evil Men and Angels, will be laid in the Dust. Nothing
but Righteousness (of one sort or other, Man's, or God's in Man) will be found
in the whole World ( his Holy Mountain, or Kingdom) by his Executing that
Judgment and Justice in the Earth (Jer. 23. 5. always, all along his peaceable,
Righteous Reign) that they allway's perverted. Saints also, that he will bring
with him, to Reign, will do the like, in Harmony with their Universal Fifth
Monarch; Dan. 7. 18 -- 27. Jude 14, 15. Rev. 5. 10.

Solomon, in Spiritual Light, sees and mean's, not only, nor chiefly, the
oppression of the Body, in the concerns thereof, by Heathen Governments,
violating the Common Law or Light of rational nature, in mankind: but, the
Oppression and Violence, exercised by first-Covenant Brethren, against the
second, the only true Heirs and Saints of the most high. The new Light and
Life, they are found in (under the fructifying Influence and Beamings forth of
the Mystical New Creation Sun of everlasting Righteousness, Christ, as a
Spiritual Bridegroom) is Scorned, Hated, contradicted, Blasphemed; and they,
Persecuted and killed for it (by none, so much as) by their envious Brethren, in
Holy Flesh, restored Law-Life, under the Mystical first-Creation Sun, or
First-Covenant Spirit, wherein Christ has bin a sleshly, Law-Bride-groom to
them. Thus, are true Saints, the Oppressed, peculiarly and most properly (here,
and Chap. 5. 8.) meant by Solomon. And then, shall we find the vast number of
Dead Heathens, in the corrupt Life or Spirit of nature, dead in Trespasses and
Sins, and the far smaller number of enlivened first-Covenant- Brethren,
professing Saints in Holy Flesh (in all variety of Judgment, Form, or way) in
one kind or other, Oppressors of the smallest number of all, Christ's little
Flock, the few that are saved, true Saints of the most High (in God's Holy,
New-Creature-Spirit) stripped and destitute of all Worldly Power or help. All
in this World, against them: No thing, No body for them. They are Men Wondered
at, Scorned, Hated, by all: Men of Contention with the whole Earth. The whole
Earth (or wordly party of Angels and Men, fixed in their earthy, natural,
first-Creation-make and State, despiteful Enemies to the Spirit of Grace, and
all in the second) are their Implacable Adversaries, in every thing. The but
first-Covenant Righteous Professor (call himself what he will) sometimes gets
a considerable Share in the Civil Sword, or Power; and uses it, with greatest
fierceness, against the New Covenant professing Spiritual Saint; who, with
Christ, look's not after the Kingdom of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Heavenly,
managable only in the Spirit of (...), not the most enlight'ned, righteous
Principles or State of nature) and, not actually commencing, till Man's and
Satan's be at a Period. Such a Kingdom, such a King (or Kings) as Christ (and
his true Disciples) lay claim to (or own themselves, of right, to be, as Sons of
God) even Heathen Pilate was able to see and Judge, carries no clash in it, at
all, with Worldly Ceasars, or Magistracies; John 18. 36-38. True Saints are not
for throwing down all Heathen Magistracies, in the corrupt Spirit of nature,
that they may rule over all, in the renewed worldly spirit thereof. They that
design (and drive at) this, are the Pseudo-Fift-Monarchists, who, in all their
Zeal and high Pretenses for the King Jesus, are the highest, and fiercest
Enemies and Opposers of the very Jesus, the very Christ, in his very
Gospel-reigning Spirit of Grace and Truth. They are, themselves, the most signal
part and Branch, at least, of that little Horn, with the Mouth speaking very
great things (Dan. 7, 8. 11. 20, 21. 24, 25. Rev. 13. 3. 5 -- 8. 11 -- 17)
which they would wholly fix upon, and appropriate unto a corrupt and grossly
Idolatrous Heathen party in the Fourth, Roman Monarchy, under the name
Christian. These are they, with the deadly Wound Healed (given by the first
Sin, that laid all Mankind, dead in Trespasses and Sins) who, with a great
mouth, speak great things, blasphemous words against God, and his new-name, or
Gospel Spirit, the Holy Ghost, God's Heavenly Sanctuary or Tabernacle; and them
that dwell in it, even the Saints of the most high, that dwell (or have their
conversation) in Heaven, Christ's Heavenly Gospel Spirit of Grace. By the false
Fift-Monarchist, is to be understood, not only a party, peculiarly, and apart
from their Fellows (at Munster, or lately amongst us, or in any former
Generations and other Countries, pretending this way, by throwing down all
corrupt Worldly Monarchies or Governments, to set up themselves) but the whole
fixed first Covenant-Spirited Generation and Party of Professors, in all times
and places, found in the same uniform Spirit of unchangable Enmity to the true
Spiritual Saint, on the one hand; and a selfconfident, Disturbing, Traitorous
Opposition to corrupt worldly Cesars, on the other. This troublesome Spirit, is
charactred by the Apostle, in the Jewish Professors, that both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and Christ's Apostles: And, therein, please not
(but indeed, highly displease and Provoke) God, and are contrary to all Men, on
their right and left hand, Spiritual Saints, and polluted Heathens. For this,
Wrath came upon those Jews, to the uttermost; and will, upon all, in like case;
1 These. 2. 15, 16. These are they that speak great swelling Words of Vanity
(with their self-exalting Luciferian Master, Satan, the old, great,
Bloody-minded Red Dragon) against the most high himself, and all his true
Spiritual Saints. These are they, that said of Christ himself, the Supreme
Preacher and Prophet or Mouth and Living Word of God; he is a Blasphemer, a
Sabbath-breaker, a Glutton, a Wine-Bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners
(implying him to be a Hater of, an Enemy to Good, Holy, Righteous Men) and that
he has a Devil, and is Mad. These are they, that Persecute the Spiritual
Brotherhood; say, in their hearts, to true Spiritual Prophets and Seers, see
not, Phophesy not unto us right things; speak to us smooth things (pleasing to
nature, when righteous; things, after, or according to our own Hearts) Prophesy
deceits; turn aside, out of the Path, the good old way; cause the Holy one of
Israel (and all his right words of Counsel and Instruction) to cease from
before us; Isai. 30. 9-11. We desire not to hear of him, to have any knowledge
of his Words or Ways; Job. 21. 14. and, 34. 27. Jer. 44. 16, 17. Desperate
Resolutions! But, why should the Servant look to fare better then his Lord,
amongst them? These are they, that proudly say to the blind Heathen, on the one
hand, in Scorn and Contempt, stand by, come not near me (touch me not) for I am
Holier then thou; Isai. 65. 5. And, the same do scorn, ravenously trample upon,
and insult over the Spiritual Saint, on the other hand, as the filth of the
World, the very offscouring of all things; 1 Cor. 4. 8. 13. These are the
signal Objects of their Scorn and Hatred, they shoot forth their most Malicious
Arrows, even bitter Words, against; Psalm. 64. 3. As for their left hand Men,
the corrupt Heathen; they can, on occasion, call and make use of them ( as the
Professing Jews did) even the most Debauched and Corrupt, amongst them, any
lewd Fellows, of the baser sort, to help carry on their Persecuting-work,
against Gospel-Saints; Act. 17. 5. But, seldom shall ye take them calling in
them, to their assistance, against the corrupt Party, except unawares, or in an
exigent. And, when succesfully helped and delivered by them; rather then bear
their Words, if they cannot otherwise suppress them, they will e'ne call in their
Subdued lewd party again, to their assistance, in the case. So, has the true
Fift-Monarchy-Saint (not allowed any name or place, at all, amongst these
corrupt and Righteous worldly Scrambles for the Scepter) the slip given him, on
all hands, by the whole twofold earthly party, Professing and Profane. When the
former have made use of his assistance against the latter (and then, find him,
not to be for their turn, in that first-Covenant Principle, or Life of the Law,
the Pseudo-Fift-Monarchy-Spirit, Christ would not Reign in, Jo. 6. 15. Paul
could not Reign in, 1 Cor. 4. 8.) they call back the latter, to their
assistance against him; deliver him up into their hands, as Guilty of Death,
for what he did, in Union with them, against them. This, though what he did,
was, in such extraordinary, unusual, and, never before, happening Circumstances
(the dissolving and parting asunder of the Supreme, Legislative Powers) as,
might reason have had any hearing or place, would fairly have (...) to justify
him, as doing the best, that, in so difficult a case, could be done. On the
reformed Parties Victory over the Corrupt and Idolatious, in any Nation, the
Trumpet is (presently and confidently) blown, and makes a ringing Noise, as a
tinckling Cymbal; gives a Confused, Uncertain Sound, for the King, Jesus. But,
in what Spirit? In that, he would never own himself a King, in; yea, directly
contrary to that, in which he did; so, in a flat contradiction to that good
profession, he made before Pontius Pilate, concerning his true Kingly Spirit,
and Reign, both Negative and Affirmative (the one expressed, the other,
necessarily implied) 1 Timothy 6. 13. Jo. 18. 36, 37. He bore Witness to the
Truth; or, to and in that New Creation- Spirit of Truth, in which alone, his
Reign is to be. There Is nothing but Shadow, Letter, Figure, Type, as to any
life or Goodness, found in the first Creation. All truth is found only,
according to Scripture-Testimony, in the second. So, Pilat's question, what is
Truth? (v 38.) was answered, beforehand; v. 37. Thus are true Saints, the
truly poor and needy (inwardly in their Spirits, as to first-Covenant Life and
Laodicean Treasures; and often, also, outwardly, in bodily concerns) Shuffled out
of all Play, on all hands; and, at length, out of the World, as not fit to live
any longer, in it; Act. 22. 22. Heathens and a first-Covenant people, mean
while, can join Counsels, and speak lies at one Table, against them (Dan. 11.
27. even against those, that are the best Subjects of the one, and, on lawful,
warrantable grounds, the best helpers of the other) yea, they will join forces,
also, in one Army, against them. Thus, down goes the true Saint, on all hands.
They have no visible relief. All are against them. They are men of contention
to the whole Earth (Jer. 15. 10.) or earthly party, corrupt and righteous. They
are poor and needy on all accounts, within and without, while their combined
Adversaries, Heathens, and a professing People ( Psalm. 2. 1.) are fat, rich,
full, and flourishing (in outward or inward, litteral or mystical riches, or
both) and join hand in hand, or hand and heart, maliciously, against them. On
the side of both these Oppressors, there is Power; but, they have no comforter.
God helps them, supports them; Christ and good Angels are for them. But, all
this Relief is invisible; and is not visibly put forth for their deliverance
from Persecution, and violent bodily Death; but makes such (...) and Death, the
method (in their wonderful, mysterious contrivance) to secure them from eternal
Death, and bring them into eternal Life. Here Is comfort for them, to purpose,
in their utmost Trials. And this, are they well aware of. Enemies, of all
sorts, hate and despise the marred Visage of their natural man, which they see;
and they mortally hate their spiritual man ( hid with Christ in God) which they
see not, but only hear, hate, and dread the unpleasing words or doctrine of.

But this, yet, is not all, nor half the worldly power, engaged against them;
which they have to deal and grapple with, combat and wrestle against. We
wrestle not against flesh and blood (only, or chiefly, in our selves or others)
but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high Places; against unchangably
wicked spirits, Devils, coming forth in their counterfeit, heavenly, spiritual
appearances of God, Christ, and holy Angels; a disguise (by their permitted,
sinful transforming arts) put upon them, whereby to deceive, if (...), the very
Elect. These are more subtle and potent, than both their visible, inhumane
enemies. But, There are higher than these highest enemies of the Saints of the
Most High, on their side; and then, who can be against them, and finally
prosper? or what can any do against them, that can (...) them? yea, that shall
not be of a direct tendency, under God's overruling order, to their final and
everlasting good? comfort, enough. Good Angels excel (all Enemies, evil Angels
or Men) in strength; Psalm. 103. 20. And Christ, and God most high, with their
Infinite, Almighty, and irresistibly mighty, divine and new creation power; all
these are on the Saints side. Power, more then enough. Yea, Saints themselves
have that Life and Power of Godliness in them, that will render them more than
Conquerours; Romans 8. 37. Yea, when but Babes and Sucklings, Low and Weak in the
Life of God, or of his Spirit of Grace, are they able to still (quell, or
subdue) the Enemy and the Avenger; Ps. 8. 2. Here Is Power, upon Power; and so,
Comfort upon Comfort; strong, rich consolation to the spiritual, in the
greatest tribulation that can befall the natural man of the saint. But still,
while visible and invisible enemies are permitted to oppress them, for their
good (during Christ's and their suffering season) on the side of their
oppressors, is power; but they have no comforter. This is the case, all along
this world, under Satan's reign, till the holy angels be commissioned to come
forth about their preparatory work to Christ's second coming, for preaching
the Everlasting Gospel, for the wakening up, and gathering Saints out of all
Nations, to Christ; and, for the giving of signal dashes on all their Worldly
Enemies, by the gradual pourings forth of the Vials of Gods Wrath, upon them.
Till this, are Saints, Men wondered at, in Scorn, ( Zec. 3. 8.) Men of
contention with the whole Earth; Jer. 15. 10. All, in the but single worldly
spirit of nature, corrupt or righteous, are against them, to a Man; to a Devil.
And, as deprived of all worldly Power, within or without, are they (in the
Judgment and sight of their own reason, as well as of their Enemies) naked, and
exposed to the insulting Fury of all their said Adversaries (to all their
Proud, Rhetorical Mockings and Insolences) without Relief. But, since Flesh
and Blood are set aside, as far Inferior to a higher and more dangerous,
subtle, and more Powerful sort of Enemies, evil Angelical Principalities; let
us, more particularly, take notice of their more unperceived Practices, and
methods of proceeding, against the true Saint. They Accused God, to Adam and
Eve, as envying the happy Life and State he had set them up in, by Creation.
And so, engaged them, in a Union of Mind with themselves, as far as they could,
to Envy, Hate, and (...) themselves above and against, both the Divine and
Creature-Life of God; Isai. 14. 14. 2 These. 2. 4. And, as Satan, their
Luciferian head, falsely Accuses God to Man; so, Man, to God; Job 1. 9-11. and,
2. 4, 5. Satan is the Accuser of the Spiritual Brethren, before God, Day and
Night (Rev. 12. 10.) that is, continually. This, though abundantly convicted of
Perjury and Falsehood, in all such Witness-bearing; as in Job's case. What
reception can he hope for, in his Testimony against true Saints, at the Bar of
their Infallible Friend and Judge? What most gall's this Insolent Adversary? To
see Christ approach, in the garb of an Enemy, to the Saint, with his two-edged
Flaming Gospel Sword. This may seem yet more strange, to Man's Wisdom. Why
should this Sworn Mortal Enemy of Saints, be troubled at Christ's coming as an
Enemy upon them, too? He know's, why. Christ comes to kill and offer up his
party, the natural Man, Life, and Will, in them, in Sacrifice to God. And, he
know's a Gospel Spirit and Principle of Life and Action, will be set up in
them, in the room thereof, that is Wiser and Stronger then he; which he can
never reach, or touch; Jo. 4. 4. and 5. 18. This is the Thing, the Life, he
unchangably hates, and dread's. It Is the Friend of the World and Devil, and
Enemy of God, in the Saint, that Christ cast's into the fiery Furnace of his
Cross, to destroy. And, this Destruction of Man's Flesh (or fleshly natural
Life and State) makes way for his Salvation in God's Spirit. This Devil, Enmity
to God, is not cast out, but by Fasting and Prayer. (Mat. 17. 21.) the
Impoverishing of nature, the Mourning-State, and Death thereof, at best; an
abstinence from all the Serpents Diet, all worldly desireables; and earnest
Prayer, for; and labor of the Spiritual Mind, after the never-perishing Meats,
at Christ's Heavenly Table. When Satan observ's Man, in a long course of
Faithful Obedience to Law-Light, and cannot fix him there, but find's in him a
dangerous Inclination to obey God's farther, Gospel Light (as giving notice of
a better State, yet, in the New Creation Life or Land of Promise; and so also,
fair warning of Christ's Approach with his Cross, on that Law-Life, he long
owned him in) he bestirr's himself, and labors (might and Main) to cause him
to resist the work (and so, prevent the effects) of this Cross. Job was sore
put to it, for a season, under the demolishing, death-work thereof. And Satan
was in a wonderful toss, through fear of what matters might come to, with him.
That which Job feared, did come upon him (Job. 3. 25.) the Death of his
Law-State, at best. And, that which Satan chiefly feared, came upon him, too;
the Life of Christ's Gospel Spirit, that is greater then he. One First-Covenant
Saint (fixed in Holy Flesh, and the Law-Life thereof, against God's Holy
Spirit, and the Gospel-Life and words thereof) becomes a more Useful,
Creditable Instrument, for his Service, against the Gospel, then a thousand
Profane Persons, in the corrupt nature, that have no color of Religion, about
them. Till then his matters are sure with Man, by a fixed Enmity (or, the
business is determined, beyond all hopes of recovering him into a fixed Enmity
to the Cross) he plies it, in accusing God to such a Man; and him, to God. Thus
turn's he every Stone, leaves no Means unattempted, for the carrying on of his
Oppressive and Destructive Designs upon Saints. For shame, says he, to them, be
not baffled out of all Sense and Reason, so as tamely to deliver up your selves
(in a Life, by Christ himself, twice set up in you) to a Murderer. So
Represents he Christ himself (in the Shakings and Brandishings of his Spiritual
Flaming Sword, over their Heads) as no other, or better, then a Murderer, a
Devil, and Mad; Jo. 10. 20. He offered at persuading Christ himself, by an
Apostle, to spare his own Innocent, Spotless, Righteous, Earthly nature, Life,
or self; Mat. 16. 22, 23. But, Christ kindled his Spiritual, Gospel-fire, on
that Earth, or earthly, Law-Life, in himself; spoke no Peace, but War and
Death, to it; Luke 12. 49. 51. But, when the subtle Enemy has seemingly
prevailed with any (hopefully secured and steeled them, with his Serpentine
Armor and Doctrine) against the harsh Accents and sharp Discipline of the Cross,
as a most Absurd, Unreasonable, and Destructive thing; he frisk's about, turns
his Dragon's-Tail upon them, and Accuses them to God, as those, whom (if he
touch them to the quick, in the Mystical Skin and Life of their righteous
natural Spirit, break the Mystical Bones, cut asunder the Nervs thereof;
Enervate, Abolish and take away all the Strength and Power thereof) will Curse
him to his Face; that is, utterly quit and separate from him, for ever; Job. 2.
4, 5. Thus, as the Father of Lies, and a Murderer, on all hands, from the
Beginning to the end of this World, in a Murdering Mind of Enmity toward God,
Christ, and Saints (and an actual Murderer of all he fixes, with himself,
against them) does he act his part, toward God and Men; belying Saints, to
God; and God, to Men. If true Saints be guilty of lesser Slipps, he will Aggravate
and Aggrandize them. If they cannot be caught tripping, he will forge downright
lies against them. See all this, in the Practice of his Inspired Instruments,
against Jeremy. All tends, in their design, to the Invalidating his true
Spiritual Testimony; that no heed may be given to any of his words; Jer. 18.
18. and 20. 10. Who were these that Watched for the haltings; and lay at catch,
for advantages, against true Prophets, Christ himself, and Apostles, all along?
Familiars, Brethren, a first-covenant righteous party of Professors, and their
Teachers. So, David found it also, Psalm. 41. 9. The Spiritual Saint, that is a
Lively Stone in the House on the Rock, sets Fire on their House upon the Sand,
he once was in, and of. Will this be born? No. Away with such a Fellow from the
Earth, say they; Act. 22. 22. Then, they betake themselves to the use of such
Fire and Sword, as they are furnished with, against him. Their Tongue is set on
fire of Hell. They forge (...) against him, to prove him a Traitor against
Caesar; and so, make the Heathen Magistrate, their Executioner. Christ himself
was thus handled, by the Professing Jews. Thus, Solomon beheld the Tears of the
natural Man of the Saint, under the Cross, as, on all hands, Oppressed and
Suppressed, by God, or Christ himself; and by evil Angels and Men. Enemies are
all for destroying (and Christ makes all, they do, exactly serviceable to his
design of saving) them, for ever. He sits at the head of the work, as the
Master-Contriver, and Over-ruler of all. He designs the destruction of their
flesh (or fading natural State, Enemies can reach and touch) that they may be
saved in his Spirit, which they can never touch; though all their spite, and
aim, be at that. He uses wicked Angels and Men, as his Sword, and hand on
Saints; Ps. 17. 13. This Sword is in his hand. He manages all: Keeps all, on
the right Wheel. All works for good, to his Saints. All mischievous intents of
Enemies, for utterly destroying them, are frustrated. They cannot go one step
out of the ready Rode to his designed favor, for them. They can hit nothing
but their Friend, the natural Man of his Saints, which he would give
Death-touches to, were there no such Enemies, in being. They do his work, then;
remove that that lets, or hinders the springing up of that Life, in which the
Saint is sure to break all their Heads, and tread them all under his Feet. This
is all they get, by bruising their Heel, or destroying their natural Man,
that is to die. Saints ought to Comfort one another with such words, and rejoice
with Joy unspeakable and glorious, a-midst the utmost Tribulations, can befall
them; not reckoning the present Sufferings in their Flesh, worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed, to, and upon them, in Christ's
Spirit; To. 8. 18. For this Joy, set before them, and made known to them, well
may they, with Christ, endure his Cross, and despise the Shame; Heb. 12. 2.
Here are the richest Cordials, in (and Glorious allay's to) their sharpest
Trials, in the fiery Furnace of the Cross. The Son of God is among them, as
Nebuchadnezzar saw and said, of the 3 Children; Dan. 3. 25. He has a
fellow-feeling with them, as their Compassionate HighPriest; Heb. 2. 18. All Is
but to hasten away the Old Man, with all his old things, that all may become
new. Would not Oppressors let them alone, if they knew the good they did them,
by their Injuries? But the natural Man, even in Saints themselves, knows not
what to think on it, when stormed on all hands; finding God, Christ, good and
evil Angels and Men, all against him, on differing accounts, and with (...)
contrary designs. He finds no Comforter, among them all, after his own heart,
or in his own will, and way. All runs Cross. Paul earnestly groaned after the
complete dissolution of his Earthly Tabernacle (2 Cor. 5. 1-8) natural body, or
whole State, which kept him short of a compleatness in Christ's
Resurrection-Life; Phil. 3. 11-14. The Jews false Accusations of him, for
Treason; and Nero's Sword, did his work. The complete Death of the Saint's
natural Man, sets him free from (and above) all Enemies and Deaths. It Is the
death of death in them, of their Spirit of Enmity and Death; and so, frees them
from him that has the Power of Death (or over all that is subject to Death) the
Devil. Hereby, enter they into Peace, lie down in a Bed of perfect Rest, for
ever. Is. 57. 1, 2. Would Enemies hurry such out of the World, if they knew all
this? But, what care they, so they are rid of such Tormentors, at present? Rev.
11. 10. They Rejoice and make Merry, for being shut of them, till they see them
upon their Feet again, an exceeding great and Invincible Army; then their high
rejoicing, is turned into great fear and amazement; v. 11, 12. and Ezekiel. 37.
10. And then appears a Judgment Seat, and Righteous Judge, all of them must
stand before (2 Cor. 5. 10.) and give an account of all, done against him, and
his Saints. What care they? Let them rule in this World, take the next, that
will. Awakened spiritual Saints, does Satan look upon as unalterably
principled, to be Fixed Enemies and Traitors to his Crown and Dignity; the
Peace of his most Oppressive, Tyrannical Domination in his Universal Province
of this World; the only, Dangerous, Mischievous spies, that discover all his
wiles and secrets, in his whole Mystery of Iniquity; as Elisha (in Figure)
served the King of Syria. But, as bad as Legal-spirited Professors reckon them,
so as falsely to accuse, and charge them with Treason against Heathen Cesars;
they are their quietest and best subjects. Their Principle is absolutely
against Tumultuous Insurrections. Christ himself paid Tribute to the then
Heathen Caesar. And, Pilate acknowledged his owning himself a King, no clash
with his Master, Caesar. Indeed, had he owned himself a King of the Jews, in
that worldly, first-Covenant spirit, they would have had him ( Jo. 6. 15.) he and
they had bin Enemies to Caesar, as outing his Government. That Is the
Pseudo-Fist-Monarchy-spirit. Judge, who are Traitor's against Caesar,
first-Covenant Professors, that struggle with him for worldly Sovereignty, as
their right; or, spiritual saints, that with Christ, pretend to no such matter.
Would worldly Cesars, Heathen Magistrat's be Lictors and Executioners of
Traitorous, Heady, High-minded Professors Rage (in the form of Godliness,
denying the power; 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5.) on their most Peaceable Subjects, spiritual
saints, if they knew what they did? (...) not lawful for us, to put any Man to
Death, said the Fanatic Jewish Professors. Such are not usually possessed of
the Civil Sword or Power; have no way, but to get the Magistrate to do their
Bloody work, upon the spiritual saint. The whole Earth, all the World is
against the true saint; and he, with Jeremy, a Man of Contention with them all,
Heathen, and a first-Covenant people. These belie him, make him a Traitor, and
the other Execute him. Every Man's, every Devil's hand, is a natural Enemy to
saints. All, against them. The better they see, the worse they like, the more
they hate them, as in an (...) contrary way, to them. Their help is in God, in
that new name and Life of the Lord, that is a Rock and strong Tower. Enough,
enough. Infinite, Almighty, and Irresistibly Mighty Divine and New Creation
Power, is on their side. But Enemies, seeing them destitute of all worldly
Power, say also, there is no help for them, in God; Ps. 3. 2. and 42. 3. Were
this true, they were gone, indeed; quite gone. The like was Reproachfully said
by Men, under the Devil s Influence, to Christ himself, as to David, his Type;
Psalm. 22. 6-8. Mat. 27. 39-43. And so, find we it, in the Apocryphal Wisdom of
Solomon ( Chapter 2. 10-22.) concerning Christ, and all his true followers. The
natural Man, in the saint himself, is in a union of mind and Judgment, with
Enemies without, also, against his spiritual mind; the fleshly Warrier, in
every desire, thought, lust, and motion, against it; alway's for War, no Peace
to be had with it; Psalm. 120. 7. Gal. 5. 17. Romans 7. Psalm. 73. 1-20. Jer. 12.
1. Till saints have recourse to Sanctuary-light, the exercise of their
spiritual mind, all appears dismal; but then, all is Right, and Comfortable,
again. Psalm. 73. 17. Jer. 20. 7-13. Not fully Crucified and Transformed Humane
Reason and Wisdom, in Saints, is the most dangerous homebred Traitor to them,
within Doors, of the same mind and party against God and himself, with all
Enemies without Doors, Devils and Men. This Foe, these Foes, of the Saint's own
House (a Multitude of evil lusts and thoughts, peopling his own soul, and
making up a Tumult of those in him, that rise up against God and himself,
Increasing, and Ascending continually, to provoke, and cry for Vengeance, upon
him) must be run down by him. This, through his powerful stirring up of the
unspeakable Gift of God in him, watching constantly all their motions, and
skilfully managing all Spiritual Weapons, put into his Hands, to Crucify that
fleshly mind and life in him, that, in all its Affections and Lusts, Fights
against God and his own Soul. Steady walking as well as Living in God's Spirit,
and continual earnest Prayer to God, therein, will do the work; Gal. 5. 16. and
v. 24, 25. When these Enemies, within, are stormed on all hands (from Christ,
without, in answer to their Prayer; and by themselves within, in answer to their
Duty and grand concern) they will certainly fall under their Feet. Paul found
himself, when looking on any Body, any thing (within, without, or round about
him) of this World clear gone, there; as by his Marred Visage and Image, of the
Earthy in Holy Flesh, rendered a Spectacle of Scorn and Derision to the whole
World, wicked Angels and Men; stripped of all Power or Defense, they can take
any right notice of. So, in their sight, was he most despicable, as the
offscouring of all things. And this seemingly deplorable condition, will be
more the lot of Saints, in the last Age of this World, then ever, before.
Ezekiel's natural Man, could not see the possibility of spiritual Israel's
recovery out of the desolate State of dry Bones in a Valley, then, or now; but
said, in answer to the Lord's Question, thou know; Ezekiel. 37. 3. With him,
what seems Impossible to Man, is Possible. This can God do. And, he reserves
the Exercise and Demonstration of his Power, herein, for such a desperate
season; to fetch up Saints out of all their Visible and Invisible Enemies
Hands; and put their Enemies Necks under their Feet; as in Type, Josua, the
Kings of Canaan, under his Captains Feet; Jos. 10. 24. The natural Man's
thoughts, even in Saints, are not as God's thoughts, in this matter. The
Powerful breath of his quicknnig Spirit (Ezekiel. 37. 5. 10.) recovers all; as
Abraham (in Type) Lot, etc. out of the four Kings hands, who were Types of the
four worldly Oppressing Monarchies, Assyrian or Babylonish, Persian, Greek, and
Roman.

Solomon, in the same prospect of things, by spiritual Faith, with Ezekiel,
would secure Saints from being dismayed at the universal oppression they are
under, from all worldly powers. These meek, poor, oppressed ones, shall have
their day, to inherit, even the earth, at Christ's coming to Reign over all;
Mat. 5. 5. Mean while, all their Oppressors are perfectly seen and noted (by
God, Christ, and holy Angels, that are all higher than the highest Powers of
this World) with a black Character, to the unspeakable Comfort and relief of
the Oppressed. Their helpers, will be unspeakably above all their Enemies. And
they overruled all (Oppressors do) for their good, even now. In the close of
the bloody red-Dragon's day, they will be found the manifested, visible, declared
Heirs of Salvation, in the view of all, Friends and Foes. This, will matters
come to, after all scrambling Controversies between Zion-Saints, and their
unreasonable Adversaries, hypocritical Sinners in Zion-dress. In this world,
Enemies find no sure way of silencing them, but by violence. The professing
Jews, not able to resist the wisdom in which Steven spoke, stoned him. This is
their way. Now from the certain sight of what fallows, Solomon, and Christ
himself, would have Saints possess their souls in faith and patience, under all
worldly Oppressors. God exactly marks, and regards all their demeanor under
Oppressors, as well as Enemies demeanor toward him and them. Comfort enough!
come what will. They are Coheirs with Christ, of God; Romans 8. 17. What would
or can they have more? They that laugh now, will have time enough to weep; and
weepers now, to laugh. Eternity. Eternally blessed are the latter:
Everlastingly cursed, the former; Mat. 5. 3 -- 12. Luke 6. 21 -- 25. Oppressors
will be paid home, at last, with everlasting sorrow; the Oppressed, with
everlasting Joy. For shame, leave off Complaints, O Saints of the Most High.
For shame, leave off exulting, and rejoicing, O mad enemies of God and them.
Saints see ground for this advice to them. Enemies (not seeing all, at winding
up) will on, and rejoice in their oppressing-work. They oppress them, who
alone, in greatest love, show them the way of Salvation. But, this disturbs
them in their large and swift steps, toward damnation. They desire to hope
well; and so, march on quietly to their everlasting torment. Hell here; torment
here, and hereafter too, they reckon too hard. Let them please themselves with
false hopes, and confidences here; and come what will, think they, hereafter.
At length, they must leave their false present rest, and lie down in
everlasting sorrow. Who can help? Satan's twofold party, corrupt and righteous
men (fixed in nature, with him) will on, in their fools Paradise; in their
various paths, under Satan's counsel and steerage, to the same Tophet. Saints
ought to do their best, in all meekness, to recover any out of the snares of
the Devil, till evidently fixed in Enmity. God's method with men, is, that none
should (usually) have two Heavens or two Hells.

All Good, is the Saints; all Evil, the incorrigible sinners; in the world to
come. All Saints tears are put into God's bottle of remembrance, to requite
all, hereafter; as Enemies, oppressive madnesses shall also be paid off, with
such recompense of their Errors, as is meet; the vengeance of Eternal Fire;
Jude 7. All will come to their rights, at last; Friends and Foes. This very
Argument does Paul comfort oppressed Saints with; 2 These. 1. 4 -- 10. At
Christ's second coming, will Saints ride in their Triumphal Chariots (as more
then final Conquerors) over the Heads of their Oppressors, Devils and Men; who
have had their turn, to ride over their heads; Ps. 66. 12. The Lord regards
every sigh and groan of his Prisoners, appointed to death, under worldly
Powers; Psalm. 12. 5. and 69. 33. and 79. 11. 146. 7. He will make his despised,
oppressed ones, a praise in the Earth, in the sight of all that have scorned
and trampled on them; Psalm. 102. 13. 16. 19. 20. The true Saint pants after
final deliverance from all Enemies within him ( Romans 7. 24.) as well as
without. All will be (...), at last, in Answer to their Prayer; Psalm. 74. 10.
and ver. (...). Saints groan after deliverance from their mortal righteous
earthly life of Enmity, as well as from that of the Body; 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. All,
in nature, within and without them, is in a universal confederacy against them.
What matter? If God be for them, who can be against them? Or, who can hurt
them? Romans 8. 31. Here Is enough. The whole first-creation world, lies in
wickedness, litteral and mystical, filth of flesh or spirit (1 John 5. 19.) and
so, in a universal daring affront, and contradiction to all words and things of
God, in the next; Jer. 44. 16, 17. But, God will hear (or deliver) Saints from
the horns of the Unicorns (Psalm. 22. 21.) That is, from all oppressive Powers
of this World, visible and invisible, without and within. So have we, in some
small measure, the meaning of these words.

Verse. II. Wherefore I praised the Dead which are already Dead, more than the
living which are yet alive.
The weight of these words lies not in the Litteral Sense. For, no miseries or
oppressions, incident to bodily Life, in this world, are comparable to the sad
condition of the wicked, after death, under final wrath. The spiritual truth,
here, relates to Saints. Saints departed, are in a far better condition, than
those left behind them, in the Body, that have not fully passed through the
twofold, inward and outward oppression, or suffering-work, that is to be
undergon by them. Saints departed out of the Body or (while in the Body) out of
the Law-life of their own spirit, are those, A voice from Heaven, command's
John to write, as a most certain Truth, blessed. Blessed are the dead, in the
Lord; Rev. 14. 13. All, so dead with Christ, will live with him, for ever, in
his Immortal, Gospel-life. All others, will perish in their own corruption (or
corruptible Law-life and state) which they have rebelliously chosen, and
trusted in, for blessedness, against the Lord's known commands and warnings, to
the contrary. By keeping up, what Paul cast away as dung, for Christ's
spiritual Life, will they perish as their own dung, for ever; Job 20. 7. A
perfect death of the natural Spirit and Principle of Life and Action, in man;
an everlasting cessation and rest from all the desire, thought, and
unprofitable labor thereof; and so, the honorable burial of it, in the
mystical grave of Christ, is true conformity to his death. Christ came not to
do his own Will, nor speak his own words, the Dictat's of his own
understanding, though spotlessly perfect in our fleshly nature; but Crucified,
and ceased from all. We must follow his suffering steps, through the same fire
of his eternal Spirit, (Heb. 9. 14.) kindled, by him, on us, as on himself;
Luke 12. 49. Spiritual Circumcision, and fire-Baptism, put nature (corrupt or
righteous) to death; cut off, and burn up all flesh, even Holy Flesh; Col. 2.
11, 12. Man, in the restored righteous Life of his own nature has nothing but a
Body of Sin and Death, about him, which Paul prayed for deliverance from; To.
7. 24. Phil. 3. 6-8. Since the fall, filth of Spirit, Enmity to God, is
inseparable from the Life of nature, corrupt or righteous. Nature (in whatever
condition) and Enmity to God, Live or Die, breath or expire, together. Paul,
when eminent in Holy Flesh, breathed out Enmity, Threatenings and Slaughter
against God's Holy Gospel Spirit, Saints, and Truths; Act. 9. 1. From the time,
this Spirit of Enmity was Death-struck, by Christ, in his way to Damascus, he
lived and brought forth Fruits unto God, in a newness of Life. In the restored
Life of nature, the great Sin of Enmity revives; gather's Strength, Credit, and
Authority. By the death of it, under the Cross, that, and all other Sins are
plucked up by the Roots. He that is so Slain, and dead, is freed from all Sin,
for ever; To. 6. 7. When Planted together in the likeness of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, the Old Man is Crucisied; the Body of Sin, destroyed; v. 5, 6.
Man's natural Body, or whole natural Man, at best, as a Righteous Living Soul
(1 Cor. 15. 44, 45.) is, by the twofold, death and Life-work of Christ's
quickening Spirit, Transformable into the likeness of his Glorious Body, or the
glorified Body, Soul, and Spirit of our nature, in his person; Phil. 3. 21. On
such death of nature, Man ceases from sin, for ever; 1 Pet. 4. 1. If Obedient
to the Slaughter-work of Christ's Gospel Spirit, on our Lawless, or Law-Spirit,
in corrupt or righteous nature; shall we, by the second operation of it, be
quick'ned up into the Life of his Gospel Spirit. All, dead with Christ, shall,
after their season of dwelling in Dust, arise with his dead Body, into a
newness of Life, and Sing, for ever; Isai. 26. 19. Paul's argument in this
case, looks both way's. If the Dead rise not, Christ is not Risen (1 Cor. 15.
12-19.) implying, if Christ be Risen, the Dead with him shall be Raised, into
that (...) of Life, our Crucisied nature, in him, Lives in, for evermore; Rev.
1. 18. Our nature in Christ, is raised also into (and possessed of) the very
Divine Life. So, the fullness of the very Godhead dwells in him, bodily; in
personal Union with his Manhood. This is his peculiar Prerogative,
transcendently above the highest Saint, for ever. But, all Saints, in
New Creature Life, are in Personal Union with that, which, in him, is in
Personal Union with the Divine nature, and thereby fitted to see and Enjoy the
Divine Glory, as coheirs with him, of God; To. 8. 17. They are thus one with
him, Personally, as he and the Father are one; Jo. 17. 21, 22. We must
Obediently suffer and die with the Man Christ (as to the best and most
righteous first-Covenant Law-Life, in our restored nature) or not live with
him, for ever, in his Spiritual, Gospel-Creature-Life; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Such
dead ones rest from all their sinful and unprofitable Labors, in their own
Spirit of Enmity; and their righteous works or fruits, done and brought forth
by them, in the Spirit of Grace, follow, stand by them, before the Judgment
Seat of Christ; and justify them, as owned and approved, in their whole
persons, and all such works. The changableness before the fall, and enmity
also, since, found in Man's whole nature, render it, not properly, that is,
unchangably good, and truly Holy, in God's sight, as under his
Approbation-Seal. Yea, since the fall, is Man, at best, in his single naturals,
hateful to, and a hater of God; and therefore, cannot be profitable to himself,
by any thing done therein, as to true hapiness. Wilful fixure in nature, at
best, is unchangable Union with the Devil, in Enmity to God. So, that which he
willingly mistak's for Salvation, is Everlasting Damnation, to him. In stead of
the Saints Everlasting Rest, he will find the Sinner's Everlasting Torment and
Vexation of Spirit, as the Fruit of all his Vain Labors. Solomon therefore
Preferr's the dead, in and with Christ (as to the Life of their own nature,
corrupt or righteous, in the Profane Publican, or Righteous (...)) to any yet
alive in their own nature.

Verse. III. Yea, better is he then both they, which has not yet bin; who has
not seen the evil work that is done under the Sun.
Better are the completely dead in the Lord, then either those Saints that yet
live in the Mortal Body (and have something of the remaining Uncrucified
first-Covenant Life of their own Spirit, about them; so, are yet under the
Oppressive Practicings of Devils and Men, without; and Fleshly Lusts, within
them, Warring against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17.) Or, those Saints, who are yet
Unborn. The departed Spiritual Saint is better then the Saint, yet in the
Mortal Body, amidst a throng of Enemies, without and within, surrounded with
all sorts of worldly Allurements, Disturbances, wicked Men, and Devils. Paul
therefore earnestly groaned after deliverance from his earthly Tabernacle, by
the dissolution of it, that he might be at home, with the Lord, in his Heavenly
House; So only, comes Mortality to be completely swallowed up of a life, that is
above all death or chang; 2 Cor. 5. 1-6. And, if Saints departed, enter into a
full peace, and rest (Isai. 57. 1, 2.) and so, a better condition, then that of
Saints, in the Body; more yet are they beyond such as shall be Saints, that are
yet Unborn, who have all the said Miseries and Oppressions, without and within,
wholly behind, to pass through. But, the letter of this Scripture seems to look
another way; that the yet Unborn may seem better then the actually engaged in
this Mortal World of Miseries and Troubles; or then the deceased, who has
passed through them (and that, all sorts of deceased, good and bad Men) as not
having yet seen the Oppressions and evil work, that is done under the Sun. This,
as relating to the Miseries of all, in this Mortal World and Life of Vanity,
only. He that is dead, is freed from all these things, be he unchangably good,
or evil, for ever after. The wicked cease from troubling them, and the weary
are at rest. Prisoners no more hear the voice (or feel the hand) of the
Oppressor; Job. 3. 17, 18. The sense, in which the yet Unborn is better then
both they that are in, or have passed through (and out of) the Miseries of this
World (singly considered, without what fallows, to wit, the Grievances and
Oppressions, incident to the natural Man of Saints or Sinners) may seem to
import a never being Born, at all; a mere nullity. Such a nullity, by an
annihilation-death, will all that finally perish, ever desire and seek, but
never find, as better than to be tormented for ever, in Hell; or afflicted with
the miseries and Oppressions of a mortal Life, on earth. In this twofold sense,
had it bin good for Judas, never to have been born, or bin, at all; Mat. 26.
24. And this, Job seems to mean; Job 3. 11, 12. 16. and 10. 18, 19.

Verse. IV. Again, I considered all travel, and every right work; that for this
a Man is envied of his Neighbor: This is also vanity, and vexation of spirit.
Fallen Man is so brutishly wicked, as to envy and hate every right work, and
worker, in the but restored Spirit and Life of his own nature, as condemning
him, for the contrary. Some of them have affirmed, God gave not Man Free Will,
but with intent, that he may lawfully walk in the uncontrolled liberty thereof.
And so, is it lawful to hate the righteous Life and Action of their own nature,
in Legal Christianity, or Heathen Morality. Hence, Speak they evil of all that
run not with them into the same excess of riot; 1 Pet. 4. 4. While such Brutes
please themselves with (and promise others) such Liberty, they are the servants
of (and will utterly perish in their own) corruption; 2 Pet. 2. 12. 19. Thus do
they render the righteous works of restored nature, which yet are but vanity,
vexation of spirit to the workers. And hence, does Satan puff up such
persecuted conscientious workers, with a confident opinion, that they are
Christ's true persecuted Gospel-Saints. Thus, does he play his game, so as to
be a Winner, every way, in both these bussling worldly Combatants, corrupt and
righteous; keeping them all in his differing snares, and at his beck, to let
them both loose, as he sees occasion, against the spiritual Saint. One sort of
them hates all that run not with them, into litteral uncleanesses, with
greediness; the other, all that run not with them, into mystical uncleanness.
The righteous first-covenant-professor, is the odious Butt, at which a profane
party shoot their revengeful Arrows. And, they are at the same work, toward
the spiritual Saint, Because his way's are of another fashion from (and better
then) theirs. For this very cause, Cain killed Abel; 1 Jo. 3. 12. Cain,
mystically wicked (the fixed Enemy of God, in the established righteousness of
man) a first-covenant Brother, murdered his natural Brother, as found a
Second. The right work (...) here meant, is, what is done in the Spirit of Grace
(not of Nature) that can never deceive, be deceived, sin, err, or miscarry.
All, done and said in this spirit, only, is pleasing to God; hateful to
righteous men, in restored Nature, only. All, in the right, or constant, steady
spirit of everlasting Truth and Righteousness (and Works thereof) David prayed
for (Psalm. 51. 10.) All, fixed in the but starting, righteous natural spirit or
principle of Life and Action, hate with a perfect hatred; as they, them; Psalm.
139. 21, 22. Righteous first-covenant Brethren are the most fierce persecutors
of the second; cannot afford them a good word: sit and speak evil against them;
Psalm. 50. 20, 21. Such Crucified Christ. Profane persons hate all such right
works, as are performable in renewed naturals. But, all of both sorts, Profane
and Professors, are against all spiritual Saints, Works, Things, and Truths.
Many lesser Ruffles may the fixed first-covenant righteons have, with the
Profane party: but, they mortally envy and hate the spiritual Saint, with all
his right works and words, as seventy times seven fold more abominable to them,
than the profane party, with all their brutish vilenesses. Away with them, it is
not fit they should live, say they; Masqu'd Papists, worse than barefaced; or
Mahumetans. Spiritual Saints, with their truly right works, are a thousand-fold
more envied by sour, leavened Legalists, then common sinners of the Gentiles,
and their generally discernable wrong works. This has bin found, in all times
and places, toward all true prophets, Christ himself, and Saints, before, and
under Law and Gospel. Christ came to his own, in the first-covenant; and they
blasphemed and Crucified him, for the Gospel-doctrin of the second. Never more,
will the whole World be in an uproar, against Christ and his Saints, then when
he is just at the Door, ready to come forth with them, to reign over all such
enemies. What a universal surprise and amazement will this be, to them all, one
and 'tother, Heathen and first-covenant people? As wondering at both their
madnesses against Christ, in his first and second coming, the Psalmist ask's (
Psalm. 2. 1.) Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? What
vain thing do they imagine, and tumultuously assemble (in a Union of their
otherwise (...) minds) to do? to cast down Christ, God's supreamly anointed
one; and Saints, Christ's anointed ones; verse. 2, 3. A likely Project, to
thrive in! Do either or any of them, know what they do? The Mystical Kings, do,
in some measure; the greater their madness: the litterai, less; the less their
folly, though they also Rage, and Tumultuously Assemble, in this case. Both are
guilty enough, to find a conclusion bad enough, to them all. Let the two
earthen Pot-Sherds, corrupt and righteous, tugg and fight it out with one
another. That Is a lower trade of Sinning, in either. But, if they piece up, and
jointly fight against their maker, they are at the highest point of Folly and
Madness. And then, highest woe to both and all. Isai. 45. 9. They contend
against Almighty, and Irresistibly mighty, Divine and New Creation Power. Is
all this Hubbub, and Tumultuous Assembling of Mankind, with all their combined
Counsels and Forces, against the insinite Divine Father, and his Divine and
Creature-Son, like to Prosper? They Would break their Bands, and cast away their
cords srom them. This is the Rebellious Design and Plot. They Will not be subject
to; limited, or bound up by their Laws, or words of command. This is their
desperate case, and Resolution.

This Universal Conspiracy (to be remarkably the case, in the last, beyond all
former times) is, on the very account, here declared, their incorrigible envy
at (or Enmity to) God's Divine and new- creature-Spirit of Grace, with all the
right words, works or fruits thereof, in true Saints, which offer to lay Bands
on all their unruly Wills. This, they will not endure, but labor (might and main)
to shake them off, and cast them away from them. This is that, which corrupt
and righteous humane (with Evil Angelical) nature, make head against God,
Christ, and Saints, about. The two-edged Spiritual Sword, in all these hands,
speaks death to nature, in them all. Therefore, they all fight against it. But
this will, in Love or Wrath, perform the whole Will and Counsel of God (as to
the death of nature) on every Angel and Man, good and bad; Isai. 1. 19, 20. and
55. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Christ, in that Spirit, wherein any can (or ever
could) be saved, is the stumbling-Stone, and rock of Offense (the only Rock of
Defense to Saints) to the numerous Troops of innumerable evil Angels and Men,
that Build on the Sandy, fallible Principles of nature, for Salvation. They
utterly defy all the words of the Builders on the Rock, that speak nothing but
War and Death to them, attempting to set Fire on their House. Guess, who, of
the Earthy party, are like to take this, most heavily, at Christ's and his
Saints hands, as offering to take down a beautiful Church-building, with
pretense to set up a better, unchangably glorious. That Mystical Temple of his
Body, or whole natural State, that, Christ said was to be pulled down (So as
not to have one stone of it left upon another) and in which, he Refused, at the
Jews desire, to be their King, saying, he would build it up into another, more
glorious Temple-State, in which he would be a King; this was the very ground of
the Professing Jews proceeding against him, to the death. He has built up our
nature, in himself, by way of Resurrection, into a New Creation Temple of the
Living God, for evermore. His Doctrine of the Cross upon them, and Practice of
it upon our nature in himself, did the Professing Jews and their Teachers,
Priests, Scribs, Pharisees, etc. call Blasphemy or evil-speaking against the
first-Creation. Temple, and Life of the Law, as no State of true Salvation.
This, they reckoned an Evil, Hurtful, or false speaking, that is, Blasphemy.
And in saying so, they Blasphemed or spoke (and did) evil and hurtful things,
Maliciously, of, and against him, and all his Gospel Truths. First-Covenant
Brethren hate the very Gospel-Principle, and all the Right Works and Words of
Christ and Saints, therein. For which of my good works do ye stone me? Said
Christ. Not for any good work, but for Blasphemy; replied the Jews. Jo. 10. 32,
33. What must Steven, or any Servant expect, if the Lord were thus handled? See
(Act. 7. 51-60.) with the ground; Act. 6. 9-14. A first-Covenant People, among
the Gentiles, under Gospel, do the same things ( to their Spiritual Brethren,
as the Jews, under the dispensation of the Law) in the self-same Law-Principle
and Life, the very leaven of the Pharisees. But, these disturbers of Gods true
Israel, in both, will be cut off; Gal. 5. 12. They labor to keep off all true
Gospel-Doctrin from all hearing, as the most abominable Heresy; and Preachers
of it, not fit to live; Act. 22. 22. and 24. 14. Law-circumcision for cutting
off Filth of Flesh, they prefer to the true Spiritual Gospel-circumcision, that
cutts of Holy Flesh, restored, righteous nature, from which, filth of Spirit,
or Enmity to God's Gospel Spirit, is inseparable. For this, Murdering-minded
Cain's, Envy, Mortally Hate and kill Spiritual Abels, from first to last. This
is their evil work, in Enmity to God, and the Power of Godliness, under the
form thereof, and Righteousness of Man. Their envy, in this case, is called
Murder, though they be not furnished always for the ouvert act, on Saints
Bodies. They Breath out Threatenings and Slaughters, against Christ's Spiritual
Disciples; and so, against himself, his new name and Life. Why Persecutest thou
me? said he, to Paul. Here Is the Butt, all their Revengful Arrows, even bitter
Words, are Shot (...). They are six'd, with their Father, the Devil, in the
first-Creation; and so, in unchangable Enmity to God, and the second; Jo. 8.
44. They Mortally hate that, which is Eternal Life. How then should they have
it, abiding in them? 1 Jo. 3. 15. Joseph' s Brethren, Paul and other unawak'ned
Spiritual Saints, have, amongst others, said, lets kill these Dreamers (so call
they, the most awak'ned true Prophets and Saints) and see, what all their
Dreams, or aerie Notions, will come to; Genesis 37. 19, 20. But, the guilt of the
convinced (...) (in Christ's Vineyard, that saw him, and his Saints, the true
Heirs, and said lets kill them, that the Inheritance may be ours) is of another
hiew. All such knowing, wilful Sinners against the Holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit
of true Saintship, are unpardonable. True Saints are a wonder, even in Israel,
a first-Covenant People of God; hatred, in that House of God; Hos. 9. 7, 8.
They are a Spectacle of Scorn and Derision, in their Marred naturals, to the
World, all Angels and Men, in the Flourish and Glory of a fixed worldly Spirit;
1 Cor. 4. 8. 13. Such despisers of true Saints, Wonder, and Perish. They will
in no wise, believe, though a Man declare it to them; Act. 13. 41. They persist
in a wilful Enmity, against Spiritual Conviction-Light. These Hypocritical
Sinners in Zion-light (Justling out, and killing those, they know to be the
true Spiritual Heirs) when sorely Oppressed by Heathen-Rulers, beyond hope of
Visible help, will pitch, for relief, on Christ's appearing for them. And, his
appearing will be a thousand-fold more Amazing and Tormenting to them, then all
Oppressions they groan under, from their Brutish Egyptian Taskmasters. His day
will be darkness, and not light, to them; the most sad, gloomy day, that ever
befell them; Amos 5. 18-20. They Will be found in unchangable Enmity to the very
Spirit and Light of that day.

The true Saint, then, we see, is called to, and required, patiently to pass
through all sorts of Oppression, from Devils, and from the corrupt and
enlight'ned Spirit of nature, in other Men, and in himself. All desires,
thoughts, and motions of his own nature, are constant fighters against his
Spiritual Mind; 1 Pet. 2. 11. and To. 7. No treating about Peace. They are
always for War; Ps. 120. 7. Gal. 5. 17. As true Soldiers of Christ, therefore,
are we to fight down, and Crucify our Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts,
that War against our Souls. On the death of all Enemies within, will Saints be
completed in a ResurrectionLife; and therein, become more then Conquerors of
all Enviers of their right works, and words. But, till this, all along their
Warfare in the Mortal Body, their Envious first-Covenant Brethren and
Neighbors, labor to make their Travel, under the pangs of Mystical death, to
appear a sore vexation of Spirit. But the downfall, weeping, and tears of the
natural or Old Man, is the ready and only Road to the everlasting Harvest-Joy
of the new; Ps. 126. 5, 6. Saints, aware of this, ought with Paul, to Glory and
Rejoice in nothing, save the Cross (or Spirit) of Christ; Gal. 6. 14.

Verse. V. The Fool foldeth his Hands together, and Eats his own Flesh.
The Fool here, is a Man, that, through wilful Folly, makes no right use of
his first-Creation Talent of light or life, restored by the Redeemer. A
Character of this Fool, have we; Prove. 6. 9-11. How long will thou sleep, O
Sluggard? Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little folding of the hands
to Sleep. So shall Poverty and want come upon thee, as an Armed Man;
irresistibly. And, Prove. 24. 30-34; The Field of the Slothful is all grown over
with Thorns and Nettles: The Stone Wall thereof, broken down; etc. A remiss,
negligent, slothful person, failing in his outward call, and civil capacity,
brings these inconveniences upon himself, which render him miserable in
himself, and despicable to others. The deep mystical truth of this, we find in
the Parable of the Talents; to wit, Christ's several distributions to Men, in
restored first-Creation-Life. Mat. 25. 14-30. He requires a diligent
improvement of all. This was answered, by them that received the five, and the
two Talents. They doubled them. So, as good and faithful Servants, are bid
enter into the Joy of their Lord. But, he that received the one Talent, hid it
in the Earth. This is the Fool, Solomon means. His Talent was a Measure of
restored first-Covenant Light and Life. This Light tells him what he should do:
And this Life furnishes him with Power, to do it. He is not, therein, to live
to himself; but, to him that died (or put that State to death, in himself, to
purchase and recover that life, again) for him; 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. This is done,
by our giving it up again, in Sacrifice to God, as he did; the only way, to
come at that Life, above all death, which he raised our nature into, in
himself. This way, did the five, and two-Talented Servants, improve their
Talents. And, he that had but one, knew he ought so to have done; by putting
his Money to the Exchangers. Christ Condemn's this wicked and slothful Servant,
out of his own Mouth; that, knowing he Reaped where he Sowed not; and that to
receive his own again, would not serve his turn; ought, by Exchang to bring it
to him, with advantage, in Usury, as the other two did. He knew, he had
received it, on the same terms, with the other two; to improve it, by a
faithful and fruitful exercise of it, in its own activity and way, for a
season; living therein, to him that died to Purchase it for him; and then, to
cease from that way of improving it (as called and warned, to do) in order, to
receive, in way of Exchange, a Gospel-Principle of Everlasting Righteousness,
and Fruitfulness to God. This Foolish, Slothful Servant neglected both duties;
the improving his restored Law-Principle, in its own activity and way; as also,
the obedient Exchang of it, by death, for a Gospel-one: Or, if he performed the
former; yet, neglecting the latter, he falls under the same Condemnation, as
if he had failed in both. If he indulg himself, and follow his own evil
Concupiscence, into the enormous Practices of the corrupt Spirit of nature; or,
in preferring the most fruitful, righteous exercise of his enlight'ned spirit,
to the Gospel Spirit of Grace; he is gone, as unpardonably Criminal. By either
of these Rebellious ways, he comes to the same dreadful conclusion, as justly
and unanswerably charged with hiding his Talent in the Earth. Not using it at
all, to Suppress and Resist the vile affections of his corrupt Spirit of
nature; or, evilly using it, in Preference and Opposition to the spirit of
Grace, and Everlasting Righteous Life of God, brings him to the same point.
From both, or either of these Follies, comes his whole person to be a Mystical
Field or Vineyard, all overgrown with Thorns and Nettles, and to have the
stone-wall (or Fence) thereof, broken down. God puts it to such a fleshly
Israel themselves, to judge, what they can desire he should do for them, that he
has not done; Isai. 5. 1-7. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to
Death, for us all. That Son spared not his own natural Life, at best, but laid
it down, of himself, for us. What unpardonable folly then, must it be, for any
to keep up the shat-ter'd, Sinning Life of their own Spirit, in preference to
the everlasting righteous Life of God's? But, so far are they, after all, done
and said, from yielding to the Exchang-Traffick of old for New Creation
Principles, that they signally hate and Oppress those that do. Christ gathers
out the Stones, Thorns and Weeds, found in Man's Barren, Wilderness-State of
Polluted, fallen nature; cleanses him from filth of Flesh, the Pollutions of
his worldly State; and then, requires and warns him, not to return to his Old
Sins therein, with the Dog to the Vomit; Nor commit new and more dangerous
ones, under all the righteousness thereof, in despite to his Spirit of Grace,
the only infallible Principle of every truly right work, which would secure men
from an unpardonable return to their old, or being guilty of the said new Sins.
On returning to their old, or committing the said new Sins, the stone-Wall is
broken down, and they become a ruinated heap, a Barren, Desolate, Howling
Wilderness, a Habitation of Dragons, Devils, and Wild Beasts, or Bestial Lusts;
worse then before cleans'd and restored; as now, unchangably so; 2 Pet. 2.
20-22. By observing what, other Sluggards and Apostat's have thus come to,
ought they, with Solomon, to receive Instruction, and avoid the like evils of
Sin and Punishment. Christ's restoring them into the righteous, cleansed nature
of Man, does clear them, for a season, and in degree, from Thorns, Nettles and
Brambles: But, they are yet but Fallow Field, bring forth no Fruits to God,
till the Plow of the Cross go so deep, as to fetch up that very Life and Tree
of good and evil, by the Roots, to make way for quickening up in them, the
incorruptible Seed of a new Life, in which only they can so do. When, by
following Spiritual Conviction Light, for a season, they ran well (Gal. 5. 7.)
putting their hand, with God's, to the Plow of the Cross (to carry on such
mortifying-work on their renewed Earth, or Earthly State) by looking back, and
turning from such Husbandry on themselves, become they Apostat's, unfit for the
Kingdom of God. Such looking back, is a Repentance (or chang of mind) unto
death; which they can never truly Repent of, or chang back again, from. This
turns them into a Mystical Sodom. As Bewitched with their Holy Flesh, a Glory
to be done away; they Recant, fly back from, and quit Christ's Holy Spirit;
Gal. 3. 1-3. Such persuasion comes not of God, that call's them forward, toward
Salvation; but of Satan, that call's them back again, to Destruction; Gal. 5.
8. So, a Spirit of unchangable Enmity to God becom's the principle of all their
Desire, Thought, Life, Word, and Action; a Root of bitterness against God,
Christ, all Spiritual Saints and Truths. This renders their Earth, or earthly,
natural State, not only nigh unto Cursing, but for ever Accursed, without
Remedy or Chang. Obedient yielding to the declared Methods of God's Wisdom,
(...) Salvation, is the only way to prevent all this mischief. From a contrary
demeanor, all the good, benefit, or comfort of their restored natural Talent,
is taken from them, which the right Users and Improvers of, Receive again with
Usury and great gain, in another, a New Creation Life. In this sense, is the
Talent taken from the Wicked, Slothful Servant, and given to the true Spiritual
Sons of God. These go into Lise Eternal; and the other, into outer Darkness,
where shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. Thus, Eternal Poverty (Woe, and
Misery) comes upon such Sluggards, as an Armed Man.

They lose all the fading good, they once had; and are, for ever, excluded from
the unchangable goodness, once offered them. This, come Sluggards, to. They
fold their Hands together, and Eat their own Flesh. In love to their own Flesh
(or sleshly, natural State, and Food or things thereof, and Hatred to God, and
his Spirit) they choose it, as turned into unchangable Enmity to God. So become
they sit Fuel for his Unquenchable Wrath. God, in just Judgment, gives them up
to Satan's strong Delusion, and their own mad and wilful choice. So, all
concur, on one account or other, to destroy them, for ever. All this, because
they refused to submit to such a Temporary Destruction of their Flesh (or
fleshly nature and life) under the kindlings of the same Mystical Fire of the
eternal, Gospel Spirit (Heb. 9. 14.) Christ kindled upon it, at best, in
himself (Luke 12. 49.) as their influencing and Meritorious Pattern. They
pity, spare, and save their Fleshly Life of nature, in their own will, and
way, after their own Heart, (as Satan, by Peter, would have persuaded Christ
himself) and so, lose it, and Perish for ever; Mat. 16. 21-26. By refusing to
have it rightly and most advantageously Destroyed, by the (...) of the Cross,
in Sacrifice to God; they do Destroy it, and so, themselves, for ever. They lose
their own Soul, for ever, after all their conceited worldly gain, in
Rebelliously keeping up their Fading life, with the Perishing Food, Moth-eaten
Clothing or Filthy Rags (their best Righteousnesses are no better, Isai. 64.
6.) and Cankered, Rusty Riches, Mystical Gold and Silver, their Laodicean
Treasures, heaped up in the Fruitful Exercise of their restored nature, in a
Righteous first-Covenant Life. For this most Criminal, Sacrilegious robbing God
of his Mystical Tithes and Offerings (Mal. 3. 8.) by keeping up the Life and
Activity of nature, as the fit Sacrificing Priest (that, God requires, by
Passive Obedience, to become the Sacrifice to him) do they Provoke him to
kindle a sire within (as well as upon) them. He will set up his
Spiritual-Conviction-Light, in their Spirits, Hearts, and Conscicnces, by which
they shall everlastingly be kept in the forced sight of what they had bin
fairly warned about ( Mat. 6. 19, 20. Luke 12. 33.) in their Mortal day and
State, on Earth; that all they trusted in, was liable to Moth-eating, Cankers,
Rust, and Thievs; and so, in conclusion, would (as to all the Goodness and
Comfort thereof) Vanish, and Perish for ever, as Dung. This very Corruption,
Rust, and Canker, coming upon their Riches (all they are, or have) will be a
Witness against them, for their Madness and Folly, and Eat their Flesh as Fire;
Jam. 5. 1-3. They refuse the kindly kindlings of the Fire of the Spirit, or
Cross of Christ upon them, to eat up their Flesh, as Fire eat's Wood, by
Consuming it, in Sacrifice to God. He therefore kindles it in, as well as upon
them, in Final Wrath, as a never dying Worm in their Conscience, a Fire that
never shall be quenched; Mark 9. 44. 46. 48. Thus, shall Incorrigible Sinners,
or Fools, find that, in and about them, in which they will become Eaters of their
own Flesh, or fleshly nature, without ever such a Consuming it, as Annihilation
would amount unto; the only death, they will ever seek, but never find.

Verse. VI. Better is a handful with quietness, than both the hands full, with
travel and Vexation of spirit.
Here Is the opposite state, to the mystical Fool. In effect, of the same
significancy are these words of spiritual counsel from or by Solomon, as those
of Christ himself; Mat. 5. 29, 30. 18. 8, 9. Mar. 9. 43. 47. The right (...),
Hand, and Foot of Man, offend themselves, oppose their own true intorest, in
being offended at the Cross, that comes to cut them off, and cast them away, as
dung and loss, for a more excellent life and way. The best light, wisdom, or
understanding, the most righteous practice, or walking, signified by the right
Eye, Hand, and Foot of Man (in his own nature, restored, by Law-conversion, to
the first-covenant or first-creation sort of righteous Life, Discerning,
Action, and Walking) are to be cut off, and cast away, by the kindly death-work
of the Cross; or the demolishing, crucifying, mortifying operation of Christ's
heavenly, Gospel Spirit, upon Man's righteous natural spirit, in the said
Law-life; as Paul found and yielded to; Phil. 3. 6 -- 11. He counted (and
parted with) all, as loss and dung, to win Christ, in his spiritual
Resurrection-Life. So only, can any be truly acceptable to God; or, bring forth
fruits unto him, in a newness of Life. All the former state, to be quitted, is
called (in Scripture) but oldness of Letter. In the best Life thereof, Man
brings forth fruit, but to himself, for the enriching and adorning his own
deceitful nature; not unto God, in his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth, in
which only he can be rightly worshipped, to his wel-pleasing acceptance, and
man's true advantage. All others worship they know not what; Joh. 4. 22 -- 24.
They know not what they do, or whither they go. The divine spirit of the
Father, can be rightly worshipped in the Gospel Spirit of his Son, only. All
that finally refuse to part with their natural, Law-spirit, and Life (by a holy
death, under the spiritual Cross) never receive, or partake of Christ's
Gospel Spirit of Life, in which, only, it is possible to worship God, aright, or
do any thing well in his sight. The natural man, by Legal conversion, made
wise, strong and honorable in Christ, by his first-covenant communications of
Life and Light to him, hates Christ's Gospel Spirit with all the crucifying
work and Cross-doctrine of death upon nature, corrupt or righteous; as Paul,
once, did. Man hates that, which he undispensably needs; must submit to, and
pass through; or never be saved. His restored natural right Eye, Hand, Foot,
must off, and be cast away. This, Man stumbles (and is highly offended) at. He
is ready to reckon such doctrine the damnablest (...), heresy, madness, and
blasphemy, that ever was broached or uttered by man. The enlightened professing
Jews reckoned it so, when Christ himself preached it. Yea, his very Disciples
stumbled sorely at it, and took it heavily; Mat. 16. 21, 22. Mar. 10. 23 -- 26.
John 16. 6. 20. Though he Preached his Resurrection, in the same breath with
his Death ( Mat. 17. 23.) still they were exceeding sorry. This would not do,
no not so much as allay their grief. They knew not clearly what he said, or
meant, by Death, or by Resurrection (Mar. 9. 31, 32.) and were afraid to ask
him. What he Preached the Death and loss of, in himself and them, even of a
first-covenant Life, they somewhat perceived, to their sorrow: But, as to the
more excellent Life and Glory, he declared was to follow, to him and them (by
way of Resurrection, out of the Death of their fading) this, they understood
not; and so, got little or no relief, yet, by the bare tidings of it: But,
enough, when they came to experience it; Act. 2. The Cross is a stumbling block
to the righteous first-covenant Law-Jew (or Gentile, under the outward
dispensation of Law and Gospel, and before either were written by the Penmen
thereof, in the Bible) and foolishness to the wise Greek, with all his moral
Righteousness, and obedience to the common Light or Law of rational Nature, in
Mankind; 1 Cor. 1. 23.

Both these sorts of Wise and Righteous Men (bidding at, and fondly pleasing
themselves with a hope of true Salvation, in their several way's) do stand, as
with Drawn Swords, in the Armor of Man, on Satan's side, to bid defiance to
this seemingly Bugbear Doctrine of the Cross, upon all they are Possessed of,
and trust in. They decry it, as the highest Blasphemy and Folly, Imaginable.
They warn others, by no means to regard a word of it, in Preaching, or Books.
As for the Brutified, Immorral Heathens, the far greater party of Mankind,
walking (and allowing themselves) in the Abominations of Litteral Sodom, Egypt,
and Babylon, hating all Righteousness (God's and Man's too; Man's in Moral
Heathenism, or legal Christianity) they little regard the Doctrine of the Cross,
on one or 'tother. The hopeful Party of Mankind, in Moral, or Legal,
first-Covenant Righteousness, that have something (considerable, as they
reckon) to lose, by the Cross, these are ready to fight against it; as Paul
found and told the Philippians, even Weeping, Phil. 3. 18. But, Jews or
Gentiles, that answer Christ's Heavenly call (into the death of their fading
earthly State, however good in its kind) in Obedience to the Cross, as the only
pass into the Everlasting Life of the Crucifying High Priest of their
Gospel-Profession (Heb. 3. 1.) they find the said Cross, the Power and Wisdom
of God, to, and in them; 1. Cor. 1. 24. This they receive, in lieu of the form
of Godliness and Wisdom of Man, as made Wise, Strong, and Honorable in Christ,
by First-Covenant Artainments in him, and Union with him; 1 Cor. 4. 10. Others
choose rather to keep their first-Covenant-State, Whole, Unmaim'd, Unbroken, or
Uncrucified, and so, to go with their whole Body or (...), their own two Eyes,
Hands, and Feet, to Hell; then (...), and Crucisied, in Conformity to the Lamb
Slain (and his true Saints, that suffer with him) to Heaven. What if one Man
had all the single, first-Creation Glories, Excellencies, Riches, Wisdom, and
Power of all Men and Angels, and lose his own Soul, what is he the better?
Where Is his gain? Mat. 16. 26. All, Man gets, by pitying and sparing himself,
in this case, is the loss of all his own fading goodness, and the positive
Inflictions of final Wrath upon his whole being, for ever. Sad gains! Beware
then of Satan's most destructive, (...) Counsel, for sparing righteous, first-
Covenant-self, in Enmity to God, and his Everlasting Creature-Life and
Righteousness, offered in the second. If Satan could make an Apostle his
SpokesMan, for this, to Christ himself; guess at your danger of being Beguiled
by the same old subtle Serpent, that so Beguiled Eve, at first; and a World,
since. Take heed of following this Enemie's pleasing Counsel and Example, and
so, of Rejecting Christ's. The highest Glories (tallest Cedars) in the
first-Creation-State of Angel or Man, are fading flowers, perishing vanities.
Look about you, and consider what ye lay hold on, or trust in, for happiness.
The same death of nature (that qualified the slain Lamb, to open the Sealed
Book of the Mind and Visions of God) can qualify any followers of him, to read
it, when opened. Till they have a spiritual understanding, read while they
will, the main Scope and Intent of the Author, God himself, is not seen, or
taken out. The Scriptur's (that are a Transcript or Copy of that whole Mind and
Counsel of God, about the Salvation of Angels and Men, that is Engraven in the
Gospel Spirit of Christ, the Original Book and Living Word of God) are a Book
Sealed up, from Learned; and more, from Unlearned Man; all, destitute of
Spiritual Wisdom. See, else; Isai. 29. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 2. 14. But, after all
that can be said, still, still, the Cross is a Stumbling Block, and
Foolishness, (and the truly Obedient followers of Christ, under it, are highly
offensive) to Moral Heathen, or Legal Christian, in the flourish and Wisdom of
their unbroken naturalls. They are what, and where they were; say or warn the
Spiritual Seer, what or while he will, or can. The more will be their sorrow,
for such destructive Self-Love and Pity. They loath God, and he them; Zec. 11.
8. Who can help them? All, offended at the Cross of Christ, become an offense
to Christ. Where are they then? who will be found uppermost? Have they an arm
like God? Can they thunder with a voice like him? Job. 40. 9. If flesh, Holy
Flesh, that cannot Inherit the Kingdom (1 Cor. 15. 50.) be kept up; and that
Holy Spirit, in which Men can, be rejected) where will they be? On supposal, a
Man should violently crow'd into the Kingdom, in Holy Flesh, and sit at
Christ's Wedding Supper; still, what the better? Bind him, hand and Foot, says
Christ, and cast him into outer darkness, where shall be Weeping and Gnashing
of Teeth. Why? Because he has not the Spiritual Wedding Garment of Everlasting
Righteousness, but of the filthy ragged Righteousness of his own nature, kept
up and held fast, in direct Enmity to (and Rebellion against) God. The Man, so
handled, will be Speechles; he will see, he has nothing to say for himself; Mat.
22. 11-13. The hating the fading Life of our own nature, that is, at best,
altogether Vanity, is a requisite qualification of all true Disciples; Luke 14.
26. Jo. 12. 25. Loving our own, loses us Christ's Eternal Life: Hating our own,
is the only way to get it. A fixed self-Love, in corrupt or Righteous nature,
is Eternal Damnation. It Is unchangable Enmity to God. And what think you, then?
Better is one handful with quietness, then both hands full, with Travel and
Vexation of Spirit. Better is it, to go to Heaven, with one Eye, Hand, or Foot;
then to Hell, by keeping both, and all. Better, go Slain to Heaven, then alive
to Hell. Better, die under Christ's Sacrificing hand or Cross, then be caught
alive in Satan's Snare, a first-covenant Righteous Life; the very Snare, by and
in which he takes Men, at his Will (2 Timothy 2. 26.) and so, fixes them with
himself, in Enmity to God, and the second. Better, go Poor, Halt, Maimed,
Crucified, to Heaven, with Christ; then Rich, Wise, Full, Strong, and
Honorable (in the fading natural Glory of a first-Covenant Life, turned into
unchangable enmity to God) with the Devil, to the lake of fire and brimstone,
prepared, of old, for both; even all incorrigibly wicked Angels and Men. The
Spiritual, (...) Eye or understanding, set up in the (...) natural Man of the
Saint, is that single, Chaste, Dove-like Eye (Mat. 6. 22.) that fills the (...)
Body, or Man, full of Light. This is the Eye, or (...), by which, Man
understands all things (1 Cor. 2. 15.) not that Eye, that turns and looks both
way's, to good and Evil; and that good, it regards, but fading. It Is Man's
unexcusable Folly, to (...) the (...) (...) and Labor of his own Spirit, to
his Vexation and Everlasting Destruction; rather then quit that, for God's, and
unspeakable, everlasting Joy and Blessedness. But, notwithstanding all the
known advantages (of quitting all evil, with the Life of his own will, for all
good, in the Life of God's) Man will on, in his own self-chosen way and course,
come what will. Man's one handful (in quietness and final Peace with God, in
his Gospel Spirit of truth) is transcendently better then both his Hands full
of such Riches, in his own Law-Spirit of nature, as are Vanity, and will prove
Eternal Vexation of Spirit, to him. Mystical as well as Litteral Riches, the
Laodicean Treasures of nature, in but a first-Covenant Righteous Life, are
heaped up with Disquietment, kept with Anxiety and fear of loosing, from the
known, self-Evidencing Perishableness thereof; So that Men are in continual
Bondage, all the days of their Life therein, through fear of the Death and loss
of all. Ps. 39. 6. Heb. 2. 15. Out of this Life, and Spirit of Bondage, are
true Saints brought into the Glorious liberty of the Sons of God; made truly
Rich, Wise, Strong and (...), in his New Covenant Spirit of Everlasting Life
and (...). Amidst all Jollity in the first-covenant House of Feasting, Men
cannot but with (Job 3. 25.) have a Secret, bottom-fear of losing all, from the
Perishing nature of all, therein. All there, is gotten, and kept, with sore
Travel, and Vexation; and then, leaves a Man ( after all his Labor, Sorrow,
and (...), Anxiety, and disquietment) in Eternal Vexation of Spirit.

Verse. VII. Then I returned, and I saw Vanity under the Sun.
What Vanity? This.

Verse. VIII. There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he has
neither Child nor Brother: Yet is there no end of all his Labor, neither is
his Eye satisfied with Riches; neither says he, For whom do I Labor and
Bereave my Soul of good? This is also Vanity; yea, it is a sore Travel.
Here Is another Similitude or Comparison, to manifest the truth, already spoken
to. In Letter, Solomon Character s the Vanity and Folly of the Covetous Man,
that Toil's and Labors wholly for the Litteral Wealth of this World, when
destitute of any Heir, Child, or Brother, to Inherit the same; any second, to
Succeed, and enjoy it, after him. Yet, grow's he daily, more and more
Solicitous, about heaping up, and increasing this lowest sort of worldly
Riches, as he draw's nearer his Journey's end, Death. The less he needs, the
more Covetous and Raking is he, to heap up such Treasure; the more Tenacious
and Churlish, as to the free parting with any thing, to those that want. This
is familiar to common Observation. Thus, is Vanity and Folly Written out, in
all his Foolish Labors, Solicitud's, Carking Thoughts, and Sharking Practices,
to heap up Wealth in his last day's, which render's them his worst; his
Litteral latter end, worse then his beginning, or any other part of his Vain,
Shadowy Life in this World. All he Labors for, is but Vanity of Vanities,
Shadows of Shadows, Figures of the inward, Mystical, Laodicean Riches, heaped
up in the fruitful exercise of our own nature, in a first-covenant righteous
Life. All Is but Shadow, and perishing Vanity, one and the other. All that are for
either, walk in a Spirit of Darkness, as to all Gospel things and truths, in a
vain show, disquieting themselves in vain, in direct contradiction to Christ's
own Counsel, and Irrefragable Arguments for it; Mat. 6. 25-34.

In every Circumstance of the Litteral Rich, Covetous Man, does Solomon
Represent the Mystical, in all the inward Riches, Glory, Comeliness, and
Fruitfulness of his restored, righteous natural Spirit, which, at best, is but
a fading flower, and he therein, altogether Vanity; lighter, worse then Vanity
it self; less then nothing. All the Rusty Mystical and Litteral worldly Mammon
of Unrighteousness, heaped up in a Spirit of Enmity to God, will be found by
the final Choosers and Possessors thereof (with their Moth-eaten Garments, or
filthy, ragged first-Covenant Righteousness) to Testify against them, for their
Folly, in trusting thereto, for acceptance with him, at last day, against all
his faithful warnings, and their own experiences, to the contrary; Mat. 6. 19,
20. Jam. 5. 1-3. The only profitable use of the said twofold (...) Mammon,
according to the command of the giver, is the giving all up (with themselves)
to his disposal, to do with them and that, as seems good in his sight. For,
then will God and Christ bestow upon them, that durable Life and true Riches,
in which they will ever be owned by them, as Friends of both; and they, to
them. Luke 16. 9. This making themselves Friends of the Mammon of (...) or the
Unrighteous Riches, is the only way for the gaining of the true Riches, in
which they will find their own again with Usury, and be received into Everlasting
Habitations, even Mansions of Glory, in the (...) House.

But, of the two, the mystical rich man is in a state of deeper vanity, and
(...) travel, than the Litteral. And, he is at the same loss; has no Heir or
Second, Child or Brother. He cannot, without self-deceiving, propound any good
end to himself, in his distinct higher scene of Vanities, beyond the litteral
covetous rich man, as the issue and result of all his labor and travel,
therein. For, his Riches are equally perishable as the others. And he has no
Heir, to inherit them, more then the other. They are both and all under the
same impossibility of ever finding any true content or satisfaction in their
Riches. They Both fall under the same just Judgment of God (for doting upon,
inordinately laboring for, and coveting after such fading Riches) by which,
they are given up to, and caused more and more to increase in their unsatiable
desire after, and love to them. And so, are they gradually, more and more
alienated from God, and his durable Life, (...), Food, and Clothing, till
absolutely fixed in unchangable Enmity to all. The whole design and course,
then, of both these sorts of Rich Men, who Trade wholly in Vanities, is
downright madness.

Two things are, here, distinctly to be considered.

First, What Is meant by the unprofitable Labourer and Labor, reproved here?
Secondly, What, by the said Labourer's being destitute of an heir?
To the first, Man's Immortal Spirit is the Labourer. His unprofitable foolish
Labor, is the whole Desire, Thought, Word, and Action of it, in a restored
first-creation or (...)-covenant-Life. All this Life, Action, Desire, Thought,
and Things thereof, the Tree with the Fruit, is but a lump of perishing
Vanities, Shadows, mere Impertinencies and Nullities, as to any thing of (or
conducibleness toward) the true blessedness of man's Immortal being. For his
heart, labor, tug, toil, and lay about him while he will; do what he can, he
never arrives at the enjoyment and possession of any good, that exceed's the
sphere of vanities. The fleshly Tree, with the Fruit; Root with the Branch, as
to any goodness thereof, will be burnt up, and vanish away. And then, will all
that trust therein, be left in the most destitute, helpless condition,
imaginable, to eternity. No Creature can secure or deliver them from being torn
in pieces, by their Creator's wrath; Ps. 50. 22. None of their fellow-rebels,
humane or Angelical Rocks or Mountains, Principalities or Powers of this World,
can shelter or hide them, or enable them to stand before him, when the great
day of his wrath is come; Rev. 6. 15-17. Yea, those Supreme Rocks and
Mountainous first-Creation Powers of Darkness, the evil Angels, proud Man's
proud helpers against God, shall not themselves be able to keep upon their feet,
in their unchangable hostility to him; but stoop, and lie down for ever, with
all their children of pride, from amongst men, under the same final wrath of
God; Job. 9. 13. The whole mystical and litteral Babylon, King and Subjects,
will all go to wrack, into eternal Confusion, darkness, and death, under wrath.
This will be the end, all such proud, covetous, boasting, traitorous, heady,
high-minded despisers of Christ's dominion and Government, will come to; 2 Timothy
3. 2-4. Those that finally resist the Government of God, delegated to the Man
Christ, will receive final damnation; Romans 13. 1, 2. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Jude 8. What
Man (that deserv's to be reckoned in his wits) can think any possible Labors
in his own Life of enmity to God (and that spirit of Grace, in which alone any
can be saved) can signify any thing, toward his true Rest, or Blessedness? Can
he ever be blessed in his deeds of the Law, that does all in a spirit of enmity
to God and his Gospel-Life? (...) (...) does, or teaches others, in his own
wisdom, finally persisting there, (...) not the least aim toward the Saints
Everlasting (...); but, (...), wholly to a fixing them in an (unchangable
enmity to God, and) everlasting exclusion from it. Such Preachers do shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven, exclude and detest the Righteousness of God, In a
perfect contrariety to their Judge's own counsel; Mat. 6. 33. Hence, will that
most righteous Judge (who, if (...), obeyed and (...) to, would be their
Advocate, to plead their (...) with the Father; 1 John 2. 1.) intercede against
them, as his implacable Adversaries. They that hear not Moses and the Prophets,
will not be persuaded though one rose from the dead; Luke 16. 31. Be willing
and obedient to the spiritual Counsel of Moses and the Prophets; and, all is
(...). The Jewish Teachers and Professors wilfully missed and rejected all the
spiritual counsel and sense of their own Prophets, whom they highly pretended
to obey and follow. When Christ, the great Master Prophet came to work with
them, they were found in direct Enmity and contradiction to them, and him. He
finds, and unanswerably proves them to be Insidels or Unbelievers, as to all
the Spiritual Gospel-meaning of Moses and the Prophets. Is ye believe not
Moses's Writings, says he, How shall ye believe my words? Joh. 5. 45-47. Both
Christ and they appealed to the Law and to the Testimony. The whole Controversy
lay (and still lies) in the right understanding it. So found he, and proved
them (...) enemies to Moses, and himself, the true Accomplisher of all the
significant Types, Shadows, Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Commands, Ordinances,
Statutes, Judgments, and Institutions, that Moses under his Conduct, taught and
writ. Such self-confident Professors, when the Visor is taken off, are found
Infidels, as to the Gospel-sense of all Scripture. Christ asked the Lawyer,
enquiring after Eternal Life; What Is written in the Law? How read thou?
These are two Questions. As to the first, about the Letter of the Law, this
they were presently agreed on. But, How read, or understandest thou this
Law? In the first-covenant wisdom of Man, or new covenant wisdom of God? Here
arises all the Dispute and difference; about the reading. As to the first Query
about the Letter, Christ granted he answered right. Do this, and thou shall
live, said he, that is, have Eternal Life; the thing queried. Both the Lawyer
(Luke 10. 25-29.) and the young Man, in like case ( Mat. 19. 16-20.) willing
and ready to justify themselves, reckoned all this, already done by them. But
indeed, nothing. For, it is not in the first-Covenant Spirit of the Law, but new
Covenant Spirit of the Gospel, any can answer the true meaning of the Law; as
Austin said. Both Lawyer and Young Man loved themselves in the fading Law-Life
of their own nature, not the Lord their God, at all, in the everlasting
Gospel-Life of his spirit of Grace. This is Charact'red, in its own Oracles, by
the word, or title, Love (1 Cor. 13.) as unchangably loving, and beloved of
God. So, is positively asserted to be the fulfiller of the whole Law (Romans 13.
9, 10.) on all accounts, to all intents and purposes, to God's well-pleasing,
and Man's Salvation, in the comprehensive litteral and mystical meaning, sense,
and requirings thereof, toward God or Man. The terms, on which it is possible
(according to the methods and appointments of God's Wisdom) for any to receive
and be possessed of this Gospel Spirit (or principle of Life, Desire, Thought,
Word, and Action) being rejected, and the Law-spirit of Nature kept up alive,
in which it is impossible to do any of the things required, for eternal Life;
what must such self-confident, vain boasters come to? In their own Law-spirit,
at best (from which enmity to God is inseparable, since the fall) in stead of
loving the Lord their God with all their heart, soul, strength, and mind, and
their Neighbor as themselves, they will be found to hate both God and his
new creature Gospel Spirit, the supreme mystical Neighbor and Friend of God
and Man, in personal union with God, and offering, personal Union with its
self, unto Man. And, if unchangably fixed in their Law-spirit, they will, with the
fallen Angels, Hate the Lord their God, and their said Neighbor, with all
their heart, soul, strength, and mind. All their good words, and fair speeches,
by which they deceive themselves, and simple, undiscerning hearers ( Romans 16.
18.) all their plausible pretenses of love to God, Christ, and his
Gospel Truths (by which they palliate their evil matters) will not serve their
turn.

This great Mystical Neighbor, Christ's Gospel Spirit, called LOVE, is the
Fountain Creature-Vine-Tree, that brings forth right Fruit, true Wine, cheering
to the Hearts of God and Man, as in Jothams Parable; Judge. 9. 13. Christ, in
our fleshly nature and fading first-Covenant Law-Life thereof, would not leave
this right and true, steady, constant Gospel Spirit (Ps. 51. 10.) of
Everlasting Rightcousness, in which alone, he is to Reign, to go to be Promoted
over the Law-Trees (Inferior to that pure and spotlesly perfect Law-Life, in
himself) to wit, Scribs, Pharisees, and Professing Jews, the Mystical Princes of
this World, that Crucified their true King, for owning himself in his Reigning
Gospel Spirit of Life; and, because he would not be their false King, in his
Law-Spirit and Life, as they desired, yet, would have forced him to be; Jo. 6.
15. This had spoiled all. For had he so done, he had quitted the true reigning
spirit, for a (...); the Gospel, for a Law-spirit, as they did, and Devils have
done, in unchangable Rebellion against the true King Jesus, and God most High.
He would not thus quit the true Vine-Tree, his Gospel Spirit, the Wine or
Fruits whereof, are cheering (or delightful) to God and Man (Spiritual Men) to
be promoted over Men, as Mystical first-Covenant Trees, in Holy Flesh, Trees of
good and evil, in Enmity and Rebellion against both God, and Caesar, the Jew's
then worldly Sovereign, at Rome. Yet, even they, that would have made him such
a King, Crucified him because he would not be such a King, as had bin an Enemy
to Caesar; and, told Pilate himself to his Face, if he let him go, he was not
Cesar's Friend; Jo. 19. 12. They Mortally hated him for making (or owning)
himself a King, in the Spirit of the World to come ( that Pilate saw and
declared to their Faces, was no fault, at all, against Caesar) and for not
owning himself a King in that Law-Spirit of this World, in which he had bin an
Enemy to God, and Caesar too. Yet, in a Tumultuous Vociferation, and most
Brutish, Irrational Outcry, admitting of no distinction, the general Word
King, served their turn to Proclaim him an Enemy to Caesar; and to get Cesar's
Roman (...), Pilate, to Crucify him, as King of the Jews. Whosoever makes
himself a King (in any sense, tell not us of Niceties and Distinctions, a King
is a King, and there is an end on it) speaks against Caesar. And, we have no King
but Caesar, say these very Jews, that would have set up Christ, a King, against
Caesar. (...) ye, how matters go, between Heathen Magistrat's and first-Covenant
Brethren, against Christ and the second? A plain case. What unutterable
Confusion, Blindness, and Madness, on all hands? Pilat's Conscience, and his
Wive's Dream, are against (...) with Christ. Yet the Jews Outcry, Crucify him,
Crucify him, carries it, without any reason given; and Crucified he was. And,
the Spiritual Servant must not look to fare better then his Lord. What evil
has he done? Said Pilate. Not a word, to that question. But, they cried out
the more, saying, let him be Crucified; Mat. 27. 22, 23. Stark Madness! But,

To the second Query. What Is meant by the said Frivolous, Vain, Carking,
Sharking, Covetous, Unreasonable, Unprofitable Labourer's being destitute of an
Heir? This. Man's whole Immortal being, in a Resurrection of Damnation (Jo. 5.
29.) will have nothing of good, to Inherit. This second Child, that shall stand
up, for ever, in his stead (v. 15.) in an Immortality of being (which, in the
true Saint, will have everlasting Life, Joy and Blessedness; even God himself,
for his Inheritance) will, for ever, be laid down in Sorrow, under the Positive
Inflictions of Wrath, in unutterable Torment and Vexation of Spirit, Inheriting
Everlasting Darkness and Death. So, will this Covetous worldling, doting wholly
upon Vain, False, Deceitful, Worldly Riches, Litteral or Mystical (and, as
wholly Neglecting, Hating, and Rejecting the true) find no Heir to Inherit, no
Child, Brother, or Second, that will have any of that fading good, to Relieve
or Comfort him, for ever. Whoever has no second, no younger, Spiritual Brother,
in his person, no true Heir of Salvation (that will help and fetch up his
natural, elder, first-Covenant, Law-Brother, into his newness of Life,
Gospel-Life) will find himself undone, to all Intents and Purposes, for ever.
The Old Man, or Elder-Brother, left alone (by his own choice, and Gods
Righteous Judgment) to shift for himself, will find himself (in a Resurrection
of Damnation, and Immortality of his whole being, Body, Soul, and Spirit) an
Heir only of God's final Wrath; a Dismal Inheritance! But, in the true Saint (
Holy as God is Holy, Pure as Christ is Pure (that is, unchangably) as Partaker
of Christ's, of God's Everlasting Righteousness and true Holiness) is found a
younger, Spiritual Brother, that will fetch up the Elder into the same
Everlasting Righteous Life, with it self. And so, will Crown all the Righteous
Labors of the natural, Elder Brother (or Old Man, in his Law-Life, and nature)
with a Glory never to be done away, in an Immortal Gospel-Life, with Christ in
God; a Life, suited to his Immortal being. He that spares and saves his Old
Law-Life of Enmity to God, from the Death of the Cross, will lose it, in
Eternal Death. He that obediently delivers it up to a Temporal Death, will find
it again, with Usury, in Eternal Life. These are of the true and faithful
Sayings of Christ's Spiritual Law of Liberty; Mat. 16. 25. This is the one
thing necessary, for the rendering Man truly acceptable to God, or profitable to
himself (a true and right Heir of the Kingdom) even the true Second, Child, or
Brother, Son and Heir. The Old Man; or Man, in his old, natural Spirit, Life,
and State (in whatever Variety of Condition, found) is under an absolute
impossibility of ever finding true Rest, Food, or Satisfaction, after which he
has bin (all along his day in this World) Coveting and Laboring. In a wilful
blindness, Inadvertency, and Stupidity, he will not allow his own Heart or
Understanding, any fair Play, by reflecting upon himself, and considering his
own Folly. He does not so much as say in his Heart; for whom do I Labor, and
to what end do I bereave my Soul of good? And all this, under a self-Condemning
Light, which tell's me, all, I am Treasuring up and Laboring about, is but a
heap of Perishing Vanities. From inordinate love to, and evil Concupiscence
after this, shall I turn from, hate (and so, bereave my Soul of) that blessed
new-Creation-Life, convincingly showed and offered me by God, that would render
me everlastingly blessed? Unexpressible Madness! Shall I choose and Steal my own
Eternal Death, Torment, Vexation, Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, by Stealing
from, and Robbing God of his Mystical Tith's and Offerings; withholding my
nature, from Sacrifice and Death? Shall I, with Esau, greedily choose and dote
upon my own first-Creation Morsel, and lose the New Creation Birthright; while
the true Spiritual Jacob's get, and go away with all? It highly concerns Man,
thus to commune with his own Heart, and alter his vain Course, for so great
Salvation as is offered him.

Verse. IX. Two are better then one; because they have a good reward for their
Labor.
The Birth of New Creature Life, in the true Saint, makes, with his natural
Man, the two that are better then one; or, then the natural Man, single and
alone, however Perfect, Wise, Strong, Honorable and Glorious. The natural Man
of the Saint, is, by his Spiritual (under and with the Fountain-Spirit of Life
in Christ) fetched up, by way of Death and Resurrection, into the everlasting
Life of the Spiritual, in lieu of its fading natural. This, completed, the
whole person is Spiritual. I live, yet not I; but Christ, in me; says Paul;
Gal. 2. 20. He had the two, better then one; He, and the spirit of Christ. By
the death of nature, as to its own Law-Life, and quickening of it up, into
Christ's Gospel-Life, the Spirit of Christ lives in the whole Saint, and he in
it, as his Ruler, Lord, and King. But, Man alone, in his own nature, however
Wise and Righteous, will find himself, at length, not only destitute of, but in
unchangable Enmity to that spirit of Christ, in which alone any can be saved.
The natural Man, in his own Uncrucified Will, and selfchosen course therein,
remain's single and alone, to his final ruin. The reason, why the said two are
better then one, is, because they have a good Reward for their Labor. Man,
fixed in his own Life and way, and so, in Enmity to God; what reward can he
expect, but final Wrath, as the meet Recompense of his Error? On the Obedient
death of nature (in which it is impossible to please God, in any thing) is man
raised into that Life of Grace, in which it is as impossible not to please him,
in every thing. The Reward of this, will be the full enjoyment and clear Vision
of God, for ever.

Verse. X. For if they fall, the one will lift up his Fellow; but Woe to him that
is alone, when he falls: For he has not another to help him up.
The Gospel Spirit of Christ, in the Saint, takes his whole natural Man (partly
Crucified, and partly not) into its care and Protection. And so, the Fountain,
Gospel Spirit, in Christ himself, takes the whole Man of the Saint into its
Protection, under the covering Shadow and Cherishing Influence of its twofold
Cherubin-Wings, as also under the joint regard and care of his Infinite, and
Almighty Divinity. The Saint is deeply concerned, in this case, when Christ has
committed to him (set up in him, and entrusted him with his unspeakable
Spiritual Gift, or Life) that unchangable good thing, to recommit that and
himself back again, to Christ, for the Nourishing, Strengthening, and
Encouraging it, against all the Counterworkings of his Rebellious, and (in
part) uncrucified natural Mind or Man, which will, to its last Gasp, without
any Interruption, fight against God, and his Spiritual. Till all the Mystical
Nervs and Bones thereof be cut asunder and broken, all the Life and Strength
thereof, utterly Extinguished and Abolished, is it a perpetual Warrier against
the Spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints. Paul found this fleshly Foe of his
own House, this Carnal Mind of Enmity, about him, long after his
Gospel-Conversion, and true Spiritual Saint-ship. To. 7. 15-23. On this, he
Cries out, O Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? v. 24. This Enemy, within the Saint, till fully run down into Death,
exposes him to frequent Slipps, and sore Miscarriages, as in David, Solomon,
and other Saints, has bin evident. But, that that is Born of God, in them, and
never Sin's, recovers their falling, Miscarrying natural Man, or Spirit (by a
gradual, and at length, total deathwork thereof, upon it) into Harmony with it
self, Christ, and God most high, in a newness of Life, for evermore. This War
of Spirit against Flesh (Gal. 5. 17.) is not finished, but by the total death
of the fleshly Mind. Flesh will not leave fighting, till dead; and therefore,
ought not Spirit (or the Spiritual Man in the Saint) leave off Fighting, while
any thing of Life is left in it. The continually sinning natural Spirit, till
fully Crucified, will, in the course of its own will, need daily forgiveness,
as well as an offending Brother, even to Seventy-times seven; Mat. 18. 21, 22.
Through the Propitiatory covering-Mercy-Seat, which, Spiritual Life brings the
Saint under, God so looks on his Obedient Spiritual Man, as not to Impute to
him, the daily Sins of his natural; To. 4. 7, 8. Thus, is the Spiritual Man,
also, under Christ, as a covering Shadow to the natural, in the same person,
and qualified to help up, or recover it out of all its failings, and
Back-sliding-Steps. The Spiritual Man, under the Holy Anointing, is, to the
Decayed, Old, Gray Headed, Crucified natural, the fresh Oil, David Prayed for
(Psalm. 71. 9. 18.) that gives a new Verdure and fresh Luster to the whole
person of the Saint; a Glory that excells, and remains, for ever. Thus, on all
accounts, to wit, the Sins of the guilty natural Spirit (or, the Mystical Gray
Hairs, decay's, Old Age and Death, brought upon it (by the demolishing,
Crucifying-work of Christ and the Spiritual, as its only cure) the spiritual is
ready at hand to help it up, out of all falls, in his lifetime; and out of
that grave or death, that extinguishes all power of sinning, or falling, in
him. Christ and the spiritual man, fetch him up, into an everlasting harmony
with them, in their newness of Life.

T. But, woe to him that is alone, when he falls: for, he has not another, to
help him up. Here Is the deplorable condition of all, fixed in the life of
nature; and so, in unchangable enmity to the spirit of grace, that is the only
meet helper and lifter up of the natural spirit, out of all its falls.
Submitting to the death of the natural Man, is the only way, by which the Saint
receives that spiritual Life, that can help it at all dead lifts, out of its
falls; and out of that death (that is the only Cure of all evil, in it) into its
never-sinning Life. When Man chooses his fading creature-life, before God's;
and God, in judgment on him, gives him his choice, or, chooses his delusions
(Isa. 66. 4.) Who can help him up? If God be against him, who can be for him?
Himself, he cannot help. He is gone, then, on all hands. All that finally
refuse the terms of receiving the spirit of Grace, reject it. And all, that
wilfully reject it, God will reject, with all their false confidences in their
own. He will swear in wrath, they shall never enter into his rest. What then
can they say, or do? or, any other, for them? who will, or can help them up,
when fallen under the final wrath of God?

Verse. XI. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but, how can one be
warm alone?
The natural man of the Saint, receives light and warmth from the spiritual, as
fast as baptized, transformed, and raised into a marriage-union with it, in its
Life, and so made an equal yoke fellow to it, under Christ's most easy and
delightful yoke, or government, over both. As fast as the natural and spiritual
man of the Saint, come to a right conjugal union, as of twain made one new man,
the whole Saint and Christ do lie in the intimate embraces of conjugal love,
with mutual delight and satisfaction in one another, for ever. A most
comfortable spiritual warmth, and cherishing influence from Christ, does the
Saint find in this mystical marriage-union with him, figured by the litteral;
Ephesians. 5. 22-32. Christ and the Saint are one spirit; as man and wife, one flesh.
1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Christ is head to all saints, and every saint: They, members
of his mystical body, slesh and (...). So, is Christ's spiritual state of life
and headship, and saints relation to him therein, expressed in the very words
of the figurative litteral headship and relation of the man to the woman. The
marriage-union of the saint with Christ, and their mutual love therein, is
indissoluble and everlasting, because founded in a spirit of everlasting
righteousness, and love. Saints are everlastingly subject, and most
delightfully obedient to him: and he, most delightfully kind to them, beyond
all words, for ever.

God, having, from Everlasting, set up his Creature-Son, the Spiritual or
second Adam, Creator of the first (the natural state was first in Creatures,
Angels and Men; afterward, that which is spiritual, in the Life of the Creator)
he judged meet he should have a Wife, as is figured in what he saw meet, for
the first Adam, who had a litteral Woman, taken, and formed out of his own
Body; Genesis 2. 20 -- 24. This Wife, taken out of Christ, Spirit of his Spirit,
is, from the borrowed Language of the Litteral, said to be Bone of his bone,
and slesh of his slesh. The insinite divine King, that set up his Creature-Son
from Everlasting, did, from the said everlasting, appoint a Marriage for him,
and a Wedding-feast, to which all Men and Angels have been invited. But
abundance of both, refuse to come. For, through their willful folly, are they
found unchangable haters of the Bridegroom, Bride, and Feast; all the diet, the
never perishing meats, at the heavenly Table and Marriage Supper of the Lamb,
in the Kingdom of his Father. All the proud, huffing, self-exalting party of
Angels and Men, drive another Trade; are at their worldly Farming, and
Merchandise, laboring for, feeding on, and wholly delighting themselves in a
Life, a Belly and Meats, desires, and desirables, that will all perish and be
destroyed, in God's final wrath upon such wicked wilful abusers of all given
them, in the first-creation, against God and all his things, in the second.
But, all such Men and Angels, as submit to the death of the first, for the Life
of God in the second, will be admitted in their true Wedding Garment ( the
everclean Linen, the everlasting Righteousness of true Saint-ship) to the
Marriage-Supper; Rev. 19. 7-9.

Those Men, that gladly answer the Lord's Heavenly Call of them to the said
marriage Supper (out of the Life of their own nature, the Mystical Land of
their Nativity, and Fathers House, the Image of the earthy, or first Adam, in
order to receive the impressed Image, and Indeleble Character of the Heavenly,
1 Cor. 15. 49.) are the Mystical Poor, Maimed, Halt, and Blind (Luke 14. 21.)
that have bin content to have the right Eye (or best understanding and light of
their own nature) plucked out, cut off, and cast away from them; and so, their
right Hand, and Foot (or best Power of working and walking, in a sutableness to
that Light, or dictat's and ruling Power of that understanding) cut off. Their
Obediently Sacrificed, Slain, Crucified earthly nature is raised into the
Everlasting righteous Heavenly Life of Christ, God's and their Sacrificing
High Priest, in which they are fitted to enter into the Kingdom of God, and
drink Wine with Christ, for ever, therein. All, whose Palate and Appetites are
tuned, only, for Perishing Meats (first-Creation diet, Satan's and (...)'s
Morsel) do slight the true Manna, as Light, contemptible Bread, Typed by the
Rebellious Israelit's slighting and loathing the Litteral; Number. 21. 5. They are
directly of Satan's temper and palate; savor only the first-creation things of
Man (or Angel) not New Creation things of Christ and God; Mat. 16. 23. Neither
did the infinite Divine Father need a Creature-Son; nor that Son, a Wife, as
properly any gain or advantage to either. To be sure, pure Divinity is
infinitely blessed in it self, above all possibility of Addition or Diminution,
by any thing that ever Angels or Men can be, do, or say, to Eternity. And, as
for the advantages of the Spiritual Marriage-Union with his Creature-Son, they
do all redound to his Mystical Spouses, Elect Angels and Men. For the
accomplishing of God's designs of love to his Creatures, his infinito Wisdom
saw it meet, his Son should have a certain number of them (though comparatively
with them that Perish, in the broad way, few, yet, an Innumerable Multitude
Rev. 7. 9.) as an Aggregate Body, or one Mystical Woman and Spouse, in general,
who lies warm in the (...) of the Heavenly Creature-Son: as he, in the bosom
of the infinite Divine Father. But, besides this General, has Christ a Select
number out of the Elect, which make up the peculiar Spouse and Bride, the
Lamb's Wife; Rev. 21. 9. But, natural Man and Angel, choosing to abide single
and alone, in their own nature, not only vastly distant from; but in
unchangable Enmity to both Divine-Father, and Creature-Son, will find themselves
in a cold, starvling condition, for ever, in Eternal Death, destitute of all
comforting warmth, under the Tormenting, Scorching heat of God's fiery
Indignation upon them, for ever. On the other hand, Saints have the heat and
Comforting warmth of their Divine Lord and Creature-Husband, as Situated under
the direct, strong, and clear Beamings forth of the Divine and New Creature
Suns of infinite, and Everlasting Righteousness, upon them, as the highest
Satisfaction imaginable, to them, for evermore. By personal Union with the
Creature-Son, that is in personal Union with the Divine Father, come they fully
to enjoy the unsearchable Riches of their Husband's Glorious person, his
conjunctive Divine and Creature-Glories, with everlasting safety, and Comfort,
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Through the Transcendent cherishing
influence and warmth of the Divine and everlasting Creature-Sun, in Christ's
person, will they bring forth the fruits of his spirit, offer up the Spiritual
Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ, for
evermore. There Is no durable warmth, or Comfort from Christ, to be had, in a
first-Covenant Marriage-Union with him. He will die or depart from them, as to
that fading warmth, as known by them, only, after the Flesh; and rendering them,
for a season, beautiful and fruitful in their own nature, will, and way. So, if
not Married to him, in spirit; or in that Spiritual Life, into which raised out
of the death of our nature, we shall find cold comfort at last; yea, none; yea,
and unutterably Tormenting heat, or flaming Vengeance upon us, for ever.

Verse. XII. And, if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
threefold Cord is not quickly broken.
The Saint is in personal, in Marriage-Union with Christ, in his irresistibly
Mighty, Invincible Creature-spirit, that is in like Union with Infinite,
Almighty Divinity. This threefold Cord who can break? Who is sufficient for
these things? So much as to declare the Transcendent Security and Privileges
of Saints? They are above all language; yea, wonder. If Christ, if God be on
their side, who can be against them, and prosper? How can they be less then
more then Conquerors? Romans 8. 31. 37. Saints, the third and lowest. Link of
this Chain, or (...), are, in effect, in the same security with the higher and
highest. Christ and God. Who shall separate them from the Love of Christ, v.
35? Or, from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? 35. 39. They
are secured from all Enemies, without or within, in Christ's Gospel Spirit,
that is greater then he that is in the World, the Devil; 1 Jo. 4. 4. The Gates of
Hell, all the secret Counsels and Strength of Enemies; the Powers of darkness,
with all their Mystery of Iniquity, shall not prevail against them. They can
discover all their secret Counsels and Projects against God's Spiritual Israel;
as Elisha, the King of Syria's, against Litteral. And, they can trample all
their Power, under their feet, being by God, delivered up into their hands, as
the Syrian Army into Elisha's, to lead them blindfold, whither he pleased, and
to do what he listed, with them. Mad are the evil Angelical Principalities and
Powers of darkness, at those who can discover all their Devices, Wiles,
Designs, and Projects, for destroying Men; as also are their Apostles and
Ministers, when they find the Falsities of their whole accursed other Gospel,
detected. It Is the self-same case with both and all of them. They are all of a
knot. The small number of Christ's awak'ned Spiritual Gospellers must look to
be Charactred by them all, as the most Proud, Presumptuous, Insolent,
Censorious Contradicters and Blasphemers of all good Men, all Goodness, and
saving truth, in the whole World. This is Man's (Wise, enlight'ned,
first-Covenant Man's) Censure, in Harmony with Satan's, concerning the truly
Meek, and Humble, Poor, Needy, broken-Spirited Seed, Sheep, and Flock of
Christ, contented, with Paul, to become Fools, Weak and Despicable, as to all,
their Enemies put value upon. 1 Cor. 3. 18. and 4. 10. Enemies, not being able
to deal with them, at Spiritual Weapons (or to Resist and bear up against the
Spirit and Wisdom by which they speak) ( Act. 6. 10.) have recourse, and betake
themselves to other Weapons, Humane Laws, and outward Belluine Force, to
silence, suppress, and destroy them, as the (...) Jews served Steven (Act. 7.
57-60.) and as the King of Syria would have served Elisha, if he could. True
Saints, as on the strongest and surest side (though the tide seem to run so
strong against them, that there is no stemming it; all visible and invisible
Powers of this World, coming with a swift and full Torrent upon them, to run
them down) have this to say (by what the Spiritual Man or true Prophet and Seer
in them, sees) their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies themselves being
Judges; Deuteronomy. 32. 51. Be the present awak'ned Spiritual (...) of Christ, in any
Generation, never so few; yea, if there be but one single Jeremy, amongst the
only professing people of God in the whole world, and all against him, even
there, King, Princes, Priests, and People, he will be too hard for them all. More
and greater still are they that are with and for him, then against him. They
shall (...), but not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says the Lord,
to deliver thee. Sure, he, or they, that have God on their side, will have the
best on it, though all the World be against them, as indeed they always are. All
Inhabitants of the Earth, and Sea, (...) in their own earthly Life of nature,
corrupt or (...); Inhabitants of the Mystical foaming Sea and Land; All worldly
force, by Sea and Land, is full against the Saints of the most High, dwellers
in Heaven, that have their affections and Hearts set on things above, their
Conversation in Heaven, while Bodies still on Earth. The Saints Rock is the
New Creature, Gospel Spirit, the new name or Life of Christ, into which they
run, and are safe from all that pusse at them, and swell in an implacable mind
of enmity, against them. What Spirit then, is the Enemies Rock? The Devil's. He
has made choice of (and set up for himself and followers, in) all the sading
Glory, Wisdom, Strength, and excellency of the first-Creation; all the Life and
Power of Humane and Angelical nature, as six'd in unchangable Enmity, and used
in a perpetual War, against God, Christ, Blessed, Angels, and Saints, so long
as they can (by God's Permission, for most Wise and Holy ends, known to
himself) hold it, and make a Vain Tumultuous (...) against them. The Saints
Rock will be found, at winding up of all, to be too hard for all their Inhumane
Enemies Rocks, viz. all evil Angelical Principalities and Powers. Their Rock
will dash (...) these Rocks, to (...). Their Mountain or Kingdom, with Christ,
will be established in the top of their Mystical Angelical Mountains, and
exalted above all their Humane Hills, or visible worldly Principalities, and
Powers. When wicked Men shall flee to their Angelical Confederates and Masters
( higher, Subtler, and Stronger then they, in their first-Creation make and
nature, and so, the Supreme first-creation Mystical Rocks and Mountains) to
shelter, hide, or Protect them, from the Wrath of the Lamb, the Saints Rock;
all will not do. They Will not be able to bear up, stand, or keep upon their Feet,
before the Lamb, when the great day of his great Wrath is come. Rev. 6. 15-17.
All such Rocks and Mountains, with all runners to them, for safety; all will to
wrack, under the irresistible Power and Wrath of the Saints Rock, upon them
all, Mountains and Hills; or, Angels and Men. Then, all Proud evil Angelical
helpers, with all their Proud, helped self-exalting Subjects, amongst Men, must
all stoop, bow, and lie down under his and his Saints Feet, for ever. Christ
will not withdraw his anger, but cause it to rest on them all, for ever, as a
Fire never to be quenched; and therefore, thus it will be with them, look as
big, and be as confident as they will, now; Job. 9. 13. Kings of the Earth,
both Humane and Angelical, in their earthly first-Creation make and life;
again, humane or visible Kings of the said Earth, and that, of two sorts, in
corrupt and Righteous earthly nature and life, Heathens and a professing
first-Covenant People, who are all ready to lay their Heads together, and join
Heart and Hand, against true Saints; all these Litteral and Mystical Kings can
agree, and consult at one Table, how they may, both and all, rid their hands
of, and wear out the Saints of the most high, by changing times and laws,
perverting good, or establishing evil ones, and so, mischief, by a Law; Dan.
11. 27. and, 7. 25. These Crafty Consulters shall all be at a loss, when Christ
comes to set up his and his Saints Kingdom in the World, or upon the earth. His
and his Saints Mountain or Kingdom, set up, on the top, or over the heads of
all their Mountainous, worldly Rocks and Powers, will crush them all to pieces,
yea, grind them to Powder. When he takes to himself his great Power, and
Reign's, will this most certainly be. And, then will he have the Universal
Praises, Hosannah's, Hallelujah's, and most joyful Acclamations of all that
dwell in Heaven, all his Saints, whom he will bring (and cause to Reign) (...) him
(Jude 14.) as we find; Rev. 11. 17. But, even now, during Christ's and his
Saints suffering season, under Man's and Satan's domineering Reign, he suffer's
neither of these visible or invisible Powers, without, to do any thing to his
Saints, but what is exactly conducible to their true good, the destruction of
their Flesh, or slaying all Enemies within them, the Foes of their own House,
the desires, thoughts, affections and lusts of their natural Man (Life and all,
at best) which Fight and War against God and the true interest of their own
Souls. These combined Enemies, Devils and Men, are the wicked, Christ uses, as
his Hand and Sword (Psalm. 17. 13, 14.) against the natural Man of his Saints,
in a pure serviceableness to their everlasting advantage, in all their most
malicious designings and practicings against them, with intent to destroy them,
for ever. The Prince of this World, strik's at Gospel-Life and Spirit, in
Saints, nor he nor his Instruments can ever hit or touch. They hit only their
own party in them, flesh and Blood (or their natural Man, in the full
comprehensiveness thereof, corrupt or righteous) on the perfect destruction
whereof (under the Cross, by their own obedient consent and submitting thereto)
are they filled with his Spirit and Life, in the irresistible Power whereof,
they will break all their Heads, and trample them under their Feet. This is the
pass, they bring their matters to, in all their despite to Saints, and the
Spirit of Grace, they are of. A most comfortable consideration, in all their
Sufferings! This is abundantly evident, in Job's case. All he had, in the
righteous Life and Wisdom of his own nature, was, by the Lord, put into Satan's
Hand, or Power; Job. 1. 12. And, to it he goes, bestirring himself, with all his
Malice and Power, to destroy him. What was the Result? Job's Arriving, by way
of Death and Resurrection to his spirit, at that all-powerful spiritual Life,
in which, to break the Serpent's Head; the latter end better then his
beginning. Flesh (or the natural Man, at best) till Crucified and subdued,
Hurries even true Saints, with an Impetuous, Violent Torrent of Desire or Lust,
after Satan's Perishing Meats; and so, into many Rebellious Practices against
God, Christ, and their own spiritual Mind; To. 7. 15. 23. Solomon had a larger
sad experience of this, then Paul. But, though this one (even the natural
Spirit of the Saint, in its own Life, lust, will, and way) often prevail against
him, even against his spiritual mind, or man, two shall withstand him; even
this rebellious flesh, or natural man. What two? Who are these? The Fountain
Spirit of Christ, in himself, and the quick'ned up Seed thereof (or Spiritual
Man) in the Saint. The Rebellious natural Spirit, Satan's Party in the Saint,
and he at the back of it (to encourage and strengthen it, with all variety of
Arguments, Motives, Reasons, and Uses, against its own Savior and Salvation)
shall both fall down together, under the prevailing Power of the Spiritual Man,
Christ's Party in the Saint, and he at the back of it, making up the blessed
two, here. These will weaken Satan's Party in the Saint, and, at length, quite
extinguish all the Life, and abolish all the Power thereof; laying it in the
Dust. Then, the whole Man shall be filled with (and actuated by) his Spirit of
Life, there is no dealing or meddling, for Satan, with. Perfect Conformity to
Christ's Death and Resurrection, is all; compleat's the Saints work, and
deliverance from all Enemies, without and within. He that is thus dead, is freed
from Sin; To. 6. 7. Sin, or the guilty Sinner, the natural Spirit, is dead and
gone, as to its own sinning life of enmity. So comes a ceasing from Sin, for
ever; 1 Pet. 4. 1. The same mind in the Saint with Christ, for a complete, full
suffering in the flesh, extinguishes all Sinning, self-destroying Power, for
ever, in him. And this bring's the Saint's matters to the self-same pass with
Christ's, when he said; Now come's the Prince of this World, and has nothing
in me. Jo. 14. 30. Satan would have persuaded Christ himself, and that, by an
Apostle, to pity and spare his first-Covenant Law-Life, or righteous natural
self: But he utterly rejected these flattering Judas-Kisses, and Smooth words
of the Enemy, which are drawn Swords, to Wound and Kill Men, eternally. He took
not the Enemie's Counsel; but, clean contrary, brought his own Spiritual Sword
and Fire upon it; Crucified, offered it up, by a Holy Obedient death, in
Sacrifice to his Fathers Will. Saints must do likewise. They must hate that
Life in themselves, he Crucified in himself, or cannot be his Disciples. But,
under all plausible appearances of kindness (for Self-Preservation, and
Salvation) does Satan animate his Party in Man, the Disputer of this World, to
Dispute and Contend for his own everlasting Destruction, against all Christ's
Gospel-things and truths. By Man himself, does he carry on his work, smoothly
and fair, for the destroying him, for ever. Men are, generally, in their fallen
State of nature, Children of Wrath, dead in Trespasses and Sins, hateful to,
and hating God, and one another. So, are they half Devils, ready (as 'twere)
made to Satan's hand, by his own hand, or first blow upon humane nature, in our
first Parents. They are Enemies of God; Lovers and Friends of World and Devil,
in corrupt, or, in part, righteous nature. They are Litteral or Mystical
Adulterers and (...); Jam. 4. 4. Thus we see, Men want no more of being
complete Devils, as Christ asserted Judas to be ( Jo. 6. 70.) then of being
fixed and rendered unchangable in Enmity. They are born and live, as thus
forward, in the ready Rode and broad way, toward their everlasting
Destruction. And, to forward and encourage the restored righteous Party, in
this way, there want not for a World of false Christ's, and false Apostles, in
the Counterfeit guise, apparel, and dress of the true, fitted to deceive, if
possible, the very Elect. These evil Angelical Roaring Lions, in Christ's
Clothing; and (...) in the Clothing and appearance of Christ's true Apostles
and (...), will, in their Lying Spirit of Divination and false Prophecy,
warrant this, their very way to Salvation; Ezekiel. 13. 6. Here Is Man's dangerous
condition, on all hands, as to his grand concern. In this deplorable State
(these, almost, desperate Circumstances) all Men are in, does Christ, the true
WISDOM of God, publicly warn and cry out, aloud, to them all, to take heed of
being taken with this deceitful Doctrine of Men and Devils; their false,
accursed, other Gospel; and, that they listen to his contrary Counsel and
Instructions of Life, submit to his Reproofs of Death, on that Spirit of nature
that is (...); and so, receive, his Spirit of (...), that can never Sin, or be
deceived, err, or miscarry; but, (...) discern and own all his words of truth;
Prove. 1. 20-23. See then and consider, Oye Sons of Men, the different posture
ye are in, toward your Blessed Savior, and the Abaddon, Apollyon, Red Dragon,
and Destroyer. Christ comes to Cross and run down fallen nature, as to the
corrupt Lusts, and vile affections of Litteral Sodom. This done, and nature
recovered, and set afresh, upon its (...), in a rectified first-Creation
orderly state or mystical house; he comes again with Fire and Sword upon this,
to pull it down and destroy it, in order to the new spiritual Building and Life
of the Rock. Here Is all this unpleasing Cross-work, to nature, corrupt or
righteous, which must be submitted to, and obediently complied with, or no
Salvation. On the other hand, Satan that comes to destroy Men, finds them in a
ready posture, gladly to receive and entertain him and all his words, his
flattering Kisses and smooth Sayings in his accursed other Gospel; all, after
their own Hearts desire, and Palate. And, if he can but fix them in Enmity,
they are his own, for ever; direct Devils. Now, whom think you, like to be most
welcome to Man, the destroying Savior, or the saving destroyer? Christ, or the
Devil; the Angel or Messenger of Gods everlasting Covenant, or the Angel of the
Bottomless Pit? The whole World (or, earthly party of mankind, corrupt or
righteous) lies in Wickedness (1 Jo. 5. 19.) or, in the wicked one, the Devil;
liable to be used by him, against God, Christ, all awak'ned Spiritual Saints,
and Gospel Truths, as Paul, when eminent in the Law-Righteousness of Man, was.
Ready are all, save actually awak'n'd Spiritual Saints, to embrace his smooth
words of Counsel (which are drawn Swords, to kill them, saw they all) and to
be at his service, greedily receiving, teaching, and Hearing, the very doctrine
of Devils, without the least scruple, for Salvation. All the World wonder and
run after the Beast; Rev. 13. 3. His Ministers and Apostles are of the World
(or, worldly, earthy nature and Life, in the Image of the earthy, the Wisdom
and Righteousness of Man) so, teach only such worldly things, for Salvation;
speak of the World; and the World (all of the like earthy-temper and Spirit)
hear, follow, and Embrace their Doctrine. Down it goes, without any chewing,
pause, doubt, or suspicion. If this Doctrine wear threadbare; and lose its
color, he will clothe it with the appearance of Christ's Spiritual, true
Gospel-Doctrin. In this dress, he, with his Angels and Apostles, come, as
Spiritual Wickednesses, in Heavenly places or likenesses, to deceive, if
possible, the very Elect. But, all will not do. The said two, in and with the
Saint, can pluck off all their Vizor's, detect the Mummery of these Wolvs in
Sheeps-clothing; and, wherein they deal proudly and subtly, will be above
them, every way, at every turn. The new-Creature-Spirit of Christ, in himself
and Saints, is abundantly too Wise and hard for them all. And then, the
infinite Divine Spirit (the supreme strength of all, the Fountain-Contriver and
former of the other) makes up the Triple-League, or Threefold-Cord, which
secures the Saint, above all words or wonder. What think you now, of the
Saint's Furniture, To fight the Battles of the Lord against the mighty, evil
angelical, or humane Principalities and Powers of this World? May they not
safely say, as Elisha to his Servant, when besieged by the Syrian Army, in
Dothan, (...) that be with us, are more than they that be with them? 2 King. 6.
16. Our Rock, our Army, our Arms, are not as theirs, fleshly, weak, feeble, and
nothing worth, but Spiritual and mighty, in and through God, invincibly strong
and powerful, to beat, profligate, and cast them all down, with all their vain
imaginary strong holds, high Places, and self-exalting confidences therein; 2
Cor. 10. 4, 5.

The threefold Cord, here, not quickly, or easily (yea, utterly impossible,
ever to be) broken, may seem to import, first, the most high Union of divine
Father and Son, the (...) (...) and Form of God. In this Union, the Three that
are (impersonally as 'twere) One, in the divine Essence, are distinctly and
personally three and One, in the infinite and purely divine Form. And so are
they, from Eternity to Eternity, ineffably, the peculiar Object of their own
infinite understanding, in a transcendent sublimity, above all Creation; or
Creatures, when made. The divine form, or Son of God, is the Three that are
One, in a personal visibility or discernableuess, properly calculated and
suited, only, to him, whose understanding is infinite, Ps. 147. 5.

The second link in this threefold Chain or Cord, imported here, may be the
Union of divine and creature-nature, in Christ's person; the divine and supreme
creature-Form, or Image of God most high, the Infinite divine Father or Essence.

The third and lowest of the three Cords or Links in this golden Chain, is
found in the unchangable Union of Christ and Saints, in his
new-creature-spirit. They are personally united with him, as he with the
Father; are one with him, as he and the divine Father are one; Joh. 17. 21 --
23. Thus come all things to be the Saint's, as he is Christ's, and Christ
God's; 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. This, have Saints, in their lowest of these three
unions. By the Second, all the fullness of the Godhead dwell's bodily, in the
Man, Christ; Col. 2. 9. He is Possessed of all divine and creature-fullness, in
absolute perfection. These twofold fullnesses make up that unsearchable divine
and creature-riches of his person, Paul preached; Ephesians. 3. 8. All
creature-nature in Christ (all, below his infinite divinity) is called Man. Man
is a warranted Scripture-Title for all, below pure divinity, in Christ, and in
all Angels and Men, good and bad. Christ, thus, is the Man or Angel Gabriel,
that appeared to Daniel and Mary; Dan. 9. 21. Luke 1. 19. 26. Evil Angels are
Men of sin, with their Father, the Devil. So are all men, that are, by them,
fixed in enmity, with them. And Christ, with two of his holy Angels, were the
three Men that did eat of Abram's Calf, with butter and milk, under a Tree; and
warned him of the near approaching destruction of Sodom; Genesis 18. All rational,
intellectual creature-nature (natural or spiritual, in Creator or Creatures) is
comprehended in the Word MAN. Saints then (by their personal union with the Man
Christ, as Mystical members of that one Body he is Head to) are entitled to all
the divine and creature-riches of his most glorious and wonderful person. Such
riches therefore, do all true Gospel Ministers preach, declare, and offer,
under Christ, unto Men ( Ephesians. 3. 8.) to all Men, Jews, or Gentiles; Heathens,
or a first-covenant People of God.

Verse. XIII. Better is a poor and a wise Child, than an Old and foolish King,
who will no more be admonished (Heb. knows not to be admonished.
This poor wise Child, is the true Saint, as run down under the Cross, from a
rich, prosperous, fruitful state of his natural spirit, into poverty and
barrenness; from the fading beauty, visage, and glory thereof, in the restored
Life and Image of the Earthy, into a weak, despicable, and (in the sight and
judgment of the self-confident, flourishing first-covenant Saint, in holy
flesh) shameful condition; yea, in the marred visage, glory, life, and wisdom
of Man (all the other looks upon, or trusts in, for salvation) the very filth
of the World, and offscouring of all things. All this, Paul, when a
Gospel-Saint, rich, wise, strong, and honorable in the Lord (even in that
spiritual Life, which yet lies hid with Christ in God) seemed to the Law-Saint.
A, who but he, a non-such was he, when an eminent Law-Saint, in his own holy
flesh, or restored nature. But, when a true, Gospel-Saint, in Christ's Holy
Spirit, a mere no body, or worse, with them that still are where and what he
was; his righteous Brother Pharisees, and other Professors. Once, beyond them
all, at Holiness: now, (...) (...) of the World, the off scouring of all
things; 1 Cor. 4. 13. See you what the Judgment of Man's Wisdom, at best, is,
about persons or things, that belong to God? Or, will ye never see? Take heed
of that. If any had whereof to Glory (and rest on, for Salvation) in Holy
Flesh; Paul, more, when but there; Phil. 3. 4. Just Job's case, in the eye of
his three Friends, far Inferior to what he had been, in the Light, Wisdom, and
Righteousness of that Holy flesh-state of restored naturals. And thus is it,
universally, with all true Saints, when passing under the Cross, out of the
Holy-flesh Church or House on the Sand, into God's Holy-spirited Church upon
the Rock; from a Law, to a Gospel-Principle and State of Life. David's familiar
Friends and Companions in a first-Covenant House, People, or Church of God
(Intoxicated and Drunk with Satan's Charms, and Wine, there, in the
first-Covenant, so as to despise Christ's Kingdom-Wine in the second) on his
withdrawing and removal under the Cross (upon all that Life, Principle,
Doctrine, State, and things of Man) for Salvation, in, the second, they became
his forest Enemies. They lifted up the Heel (Heb. magnified themselves, above
and) against him; Psalm. 41. 9. Am I become your Enemy, says Paul, on this very
single account, because I tell you the truth? Preach a Gospel State, to you?
Gal. 4. 16. David, though a King, became a Song of those Mystical Drunkards
(Ps. 69. 12.) Drunk with Satan's first Creation-Wine, that gratified their
natural Palate, Belly, or Appetite; the Belly, that is but for such Meats, as
will perish with it; 1 Cor. 6. 13. They that sat in the Gate, spoke against
him. Was not the great Lord and Master, Christ himself, thus handled? Despised
and Rejected of Men, even his own People in the first-Covenant, for Witnessing
and Practicing the Doctrine of the second? Isai. 52. 14. and 53. 2, 3. Jo. 1.
11. Was not Job (the next signal instance, for suffering, to his Lord) thus
handled, on the self-same account, by his first-Covenant Friends, when brought
under the sharp Discipline of the Cross, in order to the second? They vexed;
(...) broke him in pieces, with reiterated, frequent, and continued (...)
Words. They made themselves (...) to him. (...) (...) themselves against him, in
pleading his Reproach, when God was Stripping him (by his Cross-work, on that
State) of the fading Glory (...) that State, and taking that Crown from his
Head (Job. 19. 2-19.) which he had long worn and enjoyed, as a first-Covenant
Prince or King in the Army (Job 29. 25.) of that sort of
Pseudo-Fift-Monarchist's. Thus was Poor Job destroyed, and gone, on every side;
forsaken and abandoned, on all hands, by God and Men, as to any more or farther
Comfort in that state he had king'd it, in, over his fellow-Mortals. His very
inward, Bosome-Friends abhorred him. And, was not Paul so handled by his
Friends, presently after his quitting their Law-Principle and House on the
Sand, for Christ's Gospel-Principle and House on the Rock? The next news we
hear of him, is he, signally, beyond other Gospel-Saints and Apostles,
Persecuted by Law-spirited Jews, at Damascus; Act. 9. 19-25. 2 Cor. 11. 32, 33.
What clear, plain, undeniable instances are here? Who would think, any sober
Man (whose obstinate will does not bribe off, Pervert, Obstruct, and deafen his
understanding) could withstand such undeniable demonstration, in this case? I
would. For, who believ's the report? Who takes any spiritual, Gospel-Testimony,
with whatever undeniable Demonstration, attended and Ratified? No Man, in the
single Wisdom of humane nature, at best, when made Wise, Strong, and Honorable
in Christ, but there; Jo. 3. 32. 1 Cor. 4. 10. The natural Man, even in
awak'ned Spiritual Saints, is ready and apt to wonder at this. But, retreating
to the Sanctuary-Light of their Spiritual Man, they see how matters go, and the
wonderment ceases. The Spiritual Man, the true Watchman, Prophet, and Seer of
God, is a Fool, Mad, a Snare, Hatred it self; Where? With whom? With a
first-Covenant People, and House of his God; Hos. 9. 7, 8. Was this alway's so?
Is it so, even now? ( Gal. 4. 29.) will it be so, to the end of this World and
Satan's Reign? E'ne cease wondering then, at it, O Saints of the most High.
What? Wonder at what has bin the constant course and Practice of Humane nature,
in all mankind, corrupt or righteous, Popish or Reformed, true Saints themselves
not excepted, till unwoman'd by the Cross, as to their mutable, fickle,
Womanish Spirit of nature, and made actual Partakers of Christ's manly Life, in
his Gospel Spirit of Grace, springing up from the quick'ned Incorruptible Seed
thereof? 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Be not dismayed, to see the Law-Church of God, your Brethren in the
first-covenant, Children, Spouses of Christ as a sleshly Bridegroom, in their
Holy Flesh, turning themselves into a Synagogue of Satan, and serving his
designs, in persecuting Christ's Gospel Church, in his Holy Spirit; sitting and
speaking Blasphemies, against them; Psalm. 50. 20, 21. Paul, when a
New Covenant, Gospel-Saint, was a Fool, weak, and despicable to Law-Saints, in
the renewed old, or first. These were still Wise, Strong, and Honorable in
Christ, after the flesh, as to both Inherent and Imputed Righteousness, from
him, Sanctifying and justifying them, according to the Tenor of that changable
first-Covenant Life and State. True Saints, when, with Paul, Job, and others,
they find all that, to be but a fading flower, altogether Vanity, or a
vanishing Shadow (however good in its kind, and beautiful in its day and
season) a Glory to be done away; away they sling it, as Dung, for Christ in his
Spiritual, Resurrection-Life, and Gospel-State. Paul also advises others to
become Fools, with him, as to the Law-Wisdom of Man, in the first-Covenant, for
the Gospel-Wisdom of God, in the second; 1 Cor. 3. 18. In short, Paul was a
Poor Wise Child, in Christ's newness of Life, or second Covenant, that had
(with the doting, first-Covenant, Law-spirited Corinthians) bin, for a season,
an old Foolish King, in the (...) of letter, his restored old first-Creation
spirit of nature: But, with this difference; not a fixed, knowing, wilful one,
that would no more be admonished. For, as discovered therein, what he amounted
to, and convincingly showed and offered a more excellent life and way;
immediately, he conferred not with Flesh and Blood (consulted not with, or
listened to the reasonings of the first-Covenant Wisdom of Man, in himself or
others) but, was Obedient to the Heavenly Vision. Trembling, and astonished, he
said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 6. Had he (after such
convincing discovery of his folly and Madness, in Persecuting the Gospel Spirit
and Truths of Christ, in his Saints) obstinately persisted therein, he had bin
absolutely unpardonable. But, he did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13. For, as soon
as he knew a better, a Gospel-Life, and more excellent way of obeying and
Worshipping God, he instantly yielded to God's terms, the death of his
Law-principled, Persecuting nature, as (...), for Christ's Gospel-Life. He
found the Corinthians, after all this, confident in that State, he was in, when
a Persecutor; Full, Rich, and Reigning as Kings; Wise, Strong and Honorable,
in first-Covenant Seize, from Christ himself, after the flesh. They were
brought out of the corrupt, into the righteous Life of theirnature; and so,
into some good degree of Conformity to the Life of Christ, that first Covenant
Life of the Law, under which he was Born of a Woman: But, were, in no degree of
Conformity to Christ, in the obedient death of that state, in Sacrifice to God.
So, if they finally refused Paul's Counsel, Example, and Admonitions, for
becoming Fools, Weak, Poor, and Despicable there (as he had done, in following
Christ's own example and Counsel) they proved themselves (with thousands of
others) in all Ages and Generations, the very Old, Foolish, doting Kings, here
meant; and Paul, with his true Gospel-Disciples and Followers, proved themselves
the Poor Wise Children of God, in a newness of Life; a Wisdom, a Glory, never
to be done away. He was content, with Christ, to have his Visage Marred, his
fading Law-Life and Glory, in the restored Image of the earthy, or first Adam,
done away, as the undispensible means, of receiving the Life and Image of the
Heavenly, or second Adam; 1 Cor. 15. 49. Job (with other first-Covenant Saints
or Holy Men, in their own restored nature) while in the dark, and (in great
measure, if not altogether) ignorant, for a season, as to the spiritual Life
and Glory that was to follow (and fall to his lot) was sorely afraid, all
along, in the flourish and fruitfulness of his own nature in first-Covenant
seize) of losing all, again; Job. 3. 25. That sort of Life, carries, in
its very fading nature, something of a convincing, self-evidencing
Demonstration, to the richest Possessour thereof, that it may be all lost
again, come to nothing; and so, stand him in no stead, as to Salvation, or any
safety, in a day of greatest necessity. The thing I greatly feared, is come
upon me. What thing? Mystical Wrinckles and Leannes brought upon his smooth,
fat, flourishing, rich and full natural spirit, or Man. And, these did bear
Witness to his Face, against him; Job 16. 8. For What? For his Foolish,
self-flattering thought, that the wisdom and glory of his own restored nature,
amounted to any thing of true happiness. By the Blasts of God's Temporary Wrath
(or dispensation of the Cross, upon it, and him therein) he found all,
withering and dying away. All that, in all that have it, is subject to Mystical
Rust, Moth-eating, corrupting, and becoming a Prey to Thieves; as Christ
himself warns, with advice to all, to look after that Heavenly Treasure, and
Life, that is liable to none of these things, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Such
first-Covenant, (...) Riches, wisdom and glory (in the Possession and Enjoyment
whereof, Men are apt to think they need nothing, as to true blessedness) is but
a state, in which they are Wretched, Miserable, Poor, Blind, and Naked; wanting
every thing that is durably, everlastingly, and unchangably good; Rev. 3. 17.
The Mystical Riches and Garments, Gold and Silver of Laodicean, first-Covenant
Saints, finally trusted in, will, by the Corrupted, Moth-eaten, Cankered, Rusty
state thereof, be sound at last day, witnessing against them, in them, to their
faces, as Fools and Madmen, for having wilfully trusted therein, against Gods
plentiful warning them, the experience of all Mankind, and their certain
knowledge, that they trusted in a lie, a mere Vanity, for Salvation. God, by his
Prophet, calls all the righteousnesses of Man, in a first-Covenant Life of
Enmity to him, and the second, a fading Leaf, an unclean Thing, a menstruous
Cloth, or silthy Rags; Isal. 64. 6. Enmity to God, that is filth of spirit, is
found in them, and all their righteous works. Trusting in this fading slower,
their own enlightened and enlivened nature, with all possible Ornaments and
Embellishments thereof (that God, by Christ, and all his Holy Prophets and
Apostles, since the World began, has warned them of the (...) of, for true
hapiness) will render all, that finally so do, undeniably guilty of inexcusable
folly. True Saints rejoice, and Glory with Paul, under the death-work of the
Cross, upon all that, which such wilful Mistakers, trust in, for Salvation;
Gal. 6. 14. That which Crucifies the World to Man, and him to the World, all
worldly Life or desire in Man, to all or any worldly desirables (and those to
him) is far from giving any true ground to the natural Man of the Saint, to
complain of, or murmr with Zipporah, in letter, against Moses) at Christ, as
a hard Master, a Bloody Husband unto them, by reason of the spiritual
Circumcision. For, this cuts off Holy Flesh (kills and offer's up righteous
nature, in Sacrifice to God) as that, which cannot enter (1 Cor. 15. 50.) but
lets and hinders Man's entrance into the Kingdom of God, or God's Kingdom's
entering into him, by his receiving Christ's Kingdom-spirit into him, so as to
have the Kingdom of Heaven within him; (...) Life, abiding in him. Christ tells
us, therefore, his Yoke is easy; and Burden, light. His Cross, or death-work on
nature, corrupt or righteous, in Publican or Pharisee, is so far, if rightly
considered and understood, from being a frightful and unsupportably Burdensome
and Embondaging a thing, that it is the only undispensable means and way of
taking away from Man, the unsupportable Burden of Sin and Punishment, which
otherwise, nature at best, will bring upon its own head, in a state of
everlasting Bondage and Death. It Is the only Curer of all Diseases in, the
remover of all Evils of Sin and Punishment, from Man, by the death of the
continually guilty Sinner, the natural Man or Spirit, corrupt or righteous; and
so, the bringer of the whole person of the Saint, into a Life and State of
Everlasting Rest and true Blessedness. All this, have we, from Christ's own
Mouth; Mat. 11. 28-30. Christ himself Marred the form of Godliness, the Image
of the earthy, his first-Covenant Law-Life, his fading Glory, Beauty and
Visage, when he had taken it, in our nature, even spotles Holy flesh. He had
more of it to Mar, and so, was it more Marred in him, then it can be Marred
in any other Man. And he Marred it, to some other ends and purposes, then it is
Marred in his Saints and followers. He answered for the Sins of Mankind, atoned
or appeased the Wrath of God, thereby, etc. None of these things are done, by
any obedient followers of his suffering-Steps. But, it is their duty, to submit
to the renting of the Vail of their (but in part) Holy flesh, as he did, of his
perfect Holy flesh, as the undispensable way of entering within the Vail, into
the true Holy of Holies, and so, of ever coming where he now is. Will such
death and loss, expose to Contradiction, Shame, and Contempt from Men; from
Wise, Holy, first-Covenant Saints? Such despised and rejected, contradicted,
and Blasphemed all Christ's Gospel, New Covenant Doctrine, and Crucified his
Person; Isai. 52. 14. 53. 3. Heb. 12. 2, (...). The new and living way (yea,
and the old and only way) by which, any ever could enter within the Vail, into
the true Holy of Holies, is that, which Christ Consecrated for us, by (...) his
fleshly Vail, or Holy flesh, his righteous natural state, that was a Vail, a
Wall of Partition, between even our fleshly nature, in his own person, and the
Holy of Holies. He therefore, did not the Will, spoke not the Words of that
understanding, in our fleshly nature, though pure, spotless, and perfect, in
its kind; but suffered (yea, in and by his Holy Spirit, put it to) death.

The changably righteous Law-spirit, in Christ himself, was not the infallible
Gospel-Preacher: but, his everlasting righteous Gospel Spirit, that Preached
death to the natural, Law-spirit, in himself and all others. He, herein, spoke
the words, did the works ( Joh. 14. 10.) and will of the Father that sent him (
Joh. 4. 34.) even in preaching death to, and kindling the mystical fire of his
heavenly spirit upon his own earthly, and crucifying his own natural, fleshly
understanding and will, though perfect in its kind. This is the work, his
Father sent him to do, which when finished, he prayed for his return, out of
the death of our crucified nature, into the Life and Glory of his Father; Joh.
17. 4, 5. The words of Christ's Gospel Spirit, are Spirit and Life ( Joh. 6.
63.) they all recommend unto Men, and tend to the persuading and counselling
them, to submit to the terms of having his everlasting righteous spiritual
Life, set up in them; to wit, the death of their natural state. Christ could do
nothing of himself (or in his fleshly Law-life and state) Joh. 5. 30. nothing,
that his Father sent him about. His errand and business was, to put it to
death. Passive obedience to his own Gospel-cross, Spiritual-sword, or
Circumcision-knife, was the high duty of his natural spirit and whole Man.
There Is no other way of coming to do all things well, in God's sight (which can
only be in his Gospel Spirit or principle of everlasting righteousness, and
active obedience) but, by the passive obedience and death of our Law-spirit, or
natural state, in which we can do nothing well, before God, nor ever enter into
his Kingdom. Christ, in his Gospel Spirit (the true principle of active
obedience to God, for ever) did and said, always, what was well-pleasing to to
his Father ( Joh. 8. 29.) as found in exact harmony with the very mind and will
of his infinite divine spirit. He despised the shame and contempt of those that
despised his Crucified natural man; Heb. 12. 2. And those that do not so, he
will despise, disown, reject, and be ashamed of, when he comes in the Glory of
his Father, with the holy Angels; Mark 8. 38. Christ's Doctrine was not his
own, but his that sent him. Whoever does receive, or despise and reject the
words of his Gospel Spirit, in himself or saints, receives or despises the
Father that sent him; and him, that sends them. The four Gospels abound with
words to this purpose; especially, John's.

First and second Covenant-Saints; poor wise children, in the second; and Old,
doting, foolish Kings, in the first, are in a perfectly cross constitution and
thought, about salvation; absolute sools to one another. The Cross on Man's
wisdom, is reckoned the starkest, arrantest folly and madness, imaginable, by
natural Man and Angel. But, one broken, contrite-spirited, crucified Saint, is
of more esteem with God, than millions of unbroken, uncrucified Men and Angels,
in all the excellencies, glories, wisdom, and righteousness of their
first-creation humane and angelical natures; Isai. 66. 1, 2. Man's day, or
light and Judgment, in first-covenant wisdom; and God's day of Judgment, in the
second, will be found in flat contradiction to each other, in this grand
concern of men, about Salvation. Whose Judgment, whose word will stand? His or
theirs? Think well on it, before too late. There Is no speaking, at present, to
the old self-deafned, doting, foolish King, by the poor wise Child. He scorns
and rejects (with a wry mouth, Rhetorical mockings, in utmost contempt) all his
words and warnings. His whole Gospel-doctrine of the cross, on all, the foolish
King rest's in, for Salvation, is rejected, as absolute foolishness, and
madness. 1 Cor. 1. 18 -- 23. and 4. 8. 10. Hos. 9. 7, 8.

These foolish, self-confident, first-covenant fifth-monarchists (that tugge it
out sometimes, with worldly Caesar's, for the civil sword; as that, by which, to
manage the reign of Christ, in this world) are but at the same work, the Jews
desired to have Christ have been at, by owning himself a King in his
first-covenant law-life, and righteousness of man, which he refused them in;
(...). 6. 15. Refusing to be a King, in the fading Law-principle of
first-covenant life and operation; and asserting his kingdom in the
Gospel Spirit of the second, they crucified their king; Joh. 19. 15. They, that
would have set up Christ for their King, in this world, against Caesar, say (to
rid their hands of him) we have no King but Caesar, in answer to Pilat's
question. This is the confusion and falsehood, found in man's shusfling wisdom,
on all accounts, at every turn, about and against his own Salvation. When God,
not only by words, but deeds, in his blasting dispensations, witnesses his
displeasure against them, and all their false confidences, not suffering them
to prosper in them ( (...). 2. 37.) still they are at the same point. When they
find mystical gray hairs, decays, and old age, convincing Harbingers and
Messengers of the approaching Death upon them (as to all that (...) Life and
Riches, they have trusted in) still, there they will hold, and hope for safety.
When God comes upon them, in his beginning Judgments on that State they trust
in, so as undeniably to evidence to them, that as six'd in, it is but the
Mystical Land of their Nativity, and Border of Wickedness; and they (therein)
the People, against which and whom, he has Indignation for ever (Mal. 1. 4.)
still, they obstinately rest, and trust for safety, therein. Here Is the case of
these old foolish Kings, that will not be brought to any happy, obedient chang
of mind, by any thing the Lord either says or does to them. They obstinately
persist in bringing forth Wild Grapes, Gall and Wormwood, from a bitter Root
of Enmity in them, against God. And, they will, still, needs pass for his only
Gospel-People and Saints, when a downright Synagogue of Satan, fixed in
unchangable Enmity and Rebellion, against him. This do they, to their litteral
Graves. And, to carry on the like destructive work on others, that they leave
behind them, as their Counsel-Legacy to them, in their dying words, they will
charg their hearers, the pretended Gospel-Churches of Christ, that they look
not after, regard, or receive any other Gospel, then (that accursed false one)
they have Preached to them; even the same, the Old Serpent Preached to Eve,
that Eternal Life is to be found in the Old or first-Creation State of nature,
and that they shall not die at all; and so, that all Preaching the Cross and
Death upon it, is a Blasphemous fiction, against the Law, and that Holy place
or State of Man. Thus the Jews accused Stephen; Act. 6. 13. The whole Gospel is
reckoned by them, Blasphemy against the Law. The whole current of Scripture (in
the Gospel-sense of all, run's for the Poor Wise Child: But, the whole current
of their false, other, Law-Gospel, and short sighted Interpretation of all
Scripture, run's clearly, for the old Foolish King, in exact Harmony with the
Old Serpent, that Bewitches Teachers and Hearers, through self-love to the
sading Life and Glory of their own nature, into a state of unchangable Enmity
to God, and Death to themselves, with him.

Oh, but say they, that which you call Satan's, and our accursed other Gospel,
is the very same, you call Christ's. You only come forth in an affected
singularity of words, but say all the same things, we do. We Preach and own the
Cross of Christ. Upon what? The corrupt Spirit of fallen nature, with the vile
affections and lusts thereof. But, what say you to the Cross on your
enlight'ned, restored, righteous nature, made Wise, Strong, and Honorable, in
Conformity to that Life of the Law, or Holy Flesh, Christ took, as Born of a
Virgin? Is this the Subject of the Cross of Christ? Are ye willing to part with
all this, in case ye had it to part with? To despise your own righteous
Law-Life, or Living Soul, for Christ's Gospel Spirit? Job. 9. 21. What else,
did Christ Crucify in himself, but this Living Soul? He had nothing of the vile
affection of corrupt nature, about him. And, as for the Cross, so they are for
(and they Preach) Regeneration, new Birth, new Creature, Grace, etc. Who but
they? But, what call they so? Reformed, enlivened, righteous nature. Thus,
while we all talk of, and apply Christ's Gospel-Words, to our several
Saintships (natural and spiritual, in first and second Covenant, our Holy Flesh
and God's Holy Spirit) all seems in a Confused Buzz and Jumble of words, to
simple, undiscerning People ( To. 16. 18.) yea, to Man's Wisdom, at best, to be
one and the same thing; Christ's and Satan's Gospel, all one. All manner of
good Words, fair Speeches, Scripture Language, in one as well as the other. While
this, in a manner, universally carries it, with Professors, all is their own.
Their teachers find little need of any troubling themselves, to defend Satan's
and their Mercenary, False, other Gospel, against Christ's true. But, if the
point and edge of Christ's Spiritual Gospel-Sword, the Living WORD of God, come
forth in such a sharp, distinguishing sound and way, that this first shuffle
will not serve their turn; then go Satan's Apostles and their followers, another
way to work. Blasphemers, Madmen; the Prophet's a Fool, the Spiritual Man is
Mad; This is their Language. So said the Holy Professing Jews, of Christ
himself ( Jo. 10. 20.) for his New Covenant, Gospel-Doctrin. I, but yet, while
few hear or regard Christ's Gospel, and, almost all the few, that do hear the
outward sound of its words, take nothing right (though they conceit they do,
and so Halt between God and Baal, Christ's true Gospel, and Satan's lie) all is
well. No need, think they, of any (...) against this new light. While things go
at this rate, that the God of this World, the Devil, can cast his Mist before
Professors eyes, or blind their minds, by a sound or noise of all the words of
Christ's Gospel, from the letter of Scripture, to carry on his contrary Gospel
(as all in all, that is nothing at all) what need his Ministers trouble
themselves, to encounter Christ's? While Christ's (...) next to (...) hearers,
and yet fewer understanders, e'ne let it alone, (...) Satan, say his Apostles.
No need of taking notice of it, or souling our singers about it, in wilful
Contradicting and Blaspheming it. Thus is it, yet. But, if an awak'ned
Multitude, under the latter Rain of the Spirit (as under the former, in
Primitive Gospel Times) should listen to and look after the very Christ, the
very Gospel, with a seeing eye, a right hearing and distinguishing car, so as
to know, clearly, the voice of the true Shepherd in himself and Saints (in its
distinction from, and direct Opposition to the Voice or Doctrine of Strangers,
Satan and his Apostles, or Gospel Ministers) this (when it happen's) will cause
some Tumultuous, out-ragious doings, you will find. Some valuable number of
Followers and Receivers of Christ's Blessed Gospel, will give such disturbance
to their cursed one, as will nettle the Teachers and Hearers thereof, and put
them into the temper, Paul once was of, so as to be continually Breathing out
'l (...) and Slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord (Act. 9. 1) the
Asserters and Followers of his Gospel. Will ye hear a comfortable word, yet?
While any do this, as ignorantly and innocently as Paul did (in Zeal for his
Law-Life, or first-Covenant principle of action) why may we not hope, that
they, as Paul, may (through greater Mercy, then they are yet aware of) be
turned by Christ, into signal Preachers and owners of Christ's Gospel? But
then, with Paul, they must look presently for Persecution, even from those they
were joynt-Persecuters, with. Sure, this is an encouragement, worth noting, and
may serve to wipe off the Injurious Imputations of Censoriousness, Satan's
self-confident Gospellers do so brand Christ's, with. Multitudes of Professors,
enamout'd wholly with Satan's, will most carefully take heed of coming near the
sound of one word of Christ's Gospel, lest they should be Perverted, to their
own Salvation, and delivered from the Wrath to come. But, there are a second
sort (a far smaller number, yet) of Christ-haters, that can afford, sometimes,
to hear the sound of true Gospel-words, but take no heed how they hear them.
So, do they, little or nothing, perceive, or regard any distinction between the
Voice of the true Shepherd, and that of Strangers; Christ's and Satan's Gospel.
May we not reckon these shuffling Halters between God and Baal, in a more
dangerous condition, then the former? They Will boast of their Wisdom, and
Charitable Opinion they have of (almost) every body, any teachers, that take
and own the letter of Christ's Gospel, and talk against Profanes, or the like.
These glory in their shame. Oh, thank God, say they, we have a liberty to hear
any body. What Is all this? A Liberty to be Mad, and Rebel against God, that
has convincingly evidenced to them the true Shepherd's Voice, Words, or Doctrine
(in and from himself and Saints) from all variety of Strangers Voices, or
Doctrine. They Will please themselves to talk much of bottom; that they hope, at
bottom, and as to the main, all may be well, though at top, ouvert Action,
Practice, Choice, and their whole course, be of a dangerous Complexion, and
that, against acknowledged Conviction of Christ's Gospel Truths, and a kind of
general owning, and worded-kindness for them, and the Assertors thereof, in a
Corner. But they follow after, and sit under such Teachers and Doctrin's, as
are, in all extremity, contrary thereunto, as Hell to Heaven (sure, Doctrins
of Devils are so, to Christ's) and this, when the Doctrine of Christ's Gospel,
lies before them, and is fairly offered to them, in the Words of God's Wisdom,
which the Holy Ghost teaches. A most dangerous boasted Libertinism! God defend
me from such embondaging, destructive Liberty. For, it is sorely doubtful,
whoever halt thus between God and Baal (as to own God's Words with their Mouth
only, and Baal's in their Heart) that, at bottom, they down right hate God's,
and love Baal's Gospel; like that, not only, best; but, only. What less can be
feared, when their halting, brings them, at length, wholly to avoid God's
offered Gospel, and positively own (so far as wholly choosing to sit under
Satan's, is an owning) a directly contrary Gospel? Yea, contrary, in all
extremity; that Devils themselves shall be saved, at longrun. Might this
generally take place, all other Doctrin's of Devils might be spared. If they
can get Men to swallow down this, what need any other, or any care, or
troubling our selves about Religion, or Salvation, at all? We shall all be
saved, say Devils, and you shall all be saved. We Will warrant you, ye shall fare
as well as we do. I believe that. This Persuasion is the largest inlet to
Rantism, that ever was devised, be Practice what it will, from a little present
self-interest. How powerful and prevalent is felf-destroying selflove? The
general and uniform Doctrine of Devils, is, what the old Serpent Preached to
Eve, that Eternal Life is to be found in the first-Creation State of Man and
Angel; so, no need of a second, or second Covenant Principle of Life, in flat
contradiction to Heb. 8. 7. Men, in all variety of Church-form or way, all
sorts of Pretensions toward God, Christ, Gospel, and Salvation, within the
compass of first-Covenant Principles, are all of a Batch, all as one Man,
against the true, New Covenant Gospel of Christ, to a tittle. All spiritual
Light, for discerning of Christ's from Baal's Gospel, does but highly aggravate
their Sin, in rejecting Christ's for Baal's. The Devil and his Angels had
fuller Light, cleerer discerning of Christ's Gospel-Life, at first, then even
Adam in his Innocence, and of the necessity of parting with their
first-Covenant Law-Life, for it, as their unspeakable advantage, for the
gaining Eternal Life, and scaping Eternal death; yet chose, as we find, their
own eternal Ruin. All Men, that hate Christ's Gospel-Life, fixedly,
unchangably, do the same thing; make the same evil choice, and will come to the
same end; Pro. 8. 36. All Men, since the fall, are (in light) below Adam before
the fall, that was below Angels before their fall, who yet made such choice as
proved their irrecoverable Destruction. Consider this, well. And then, since
the fall, is there positive Enmity in Man's whole nature, and so in all
Mankind, to the Gospel-Life of Christ, and all right words thereof; which was
neither in Angel or Man, before their fall. Bare Light or knowledge then, by the
best mere Enlightening Spiritual Gifts, is so far from doing our work for
Salvation, that through Obstinate, Wilful, Knowing Rebellion against it, does
it lay Men under far deeper and sorer Condemnation, then if they had never had
such Light, or heard of Christ's Gospel, at all; Heb. 10. 26-29. 2 Pet. 2. 21.
It Is, indeed, the direct, full, unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, if
finally persisted in. Nature, in it self, corrupt or righteous, is as a nether
Millstone, to Christ's Gospel; an Infidel, as to all the Doctrine thereof. What?
Wise, Strong, and Honorable in Christ, Infidels, Unbelievers, as to Christ's
Gospel? They, or Paul, choose you whether; 1 Cor. 4. 10. But, let such take
their course; the poor wise Child sees, where both he and they are. He know's
that Christ the Righteous Judge of all, has pronounced and declared, already,
beforehand, the poor wise Children, blessed, to their unspeakable Joy; whom,
they labor, by their Lies, to make sad, as reckoning and calling them
Blasphemers and Mad People.

And, as for the wicked rich ones, the Old foolish Kings, in a state Christ
pronounces woe to, they streng then their hands, and confidences (against all
the warnings, counsels and power of God himself) promising, assuring, and
warranting them eternal Life; Ezekiel. 13. 6. 22. See Christ's contrary Judgment,
on both sides; Mat. 5. 3-12. Luke 6. 20 -- 26. Men's presumptuous,
self-confident Kinging it, in their own renewed law-nature, in a wilful despite
to God's Gospel Spirit of Grace, renders them a spiritual Sodom, and Synagogue
of Satan. Though they impudently say, they are Jews, or the very Gospel Church
and Spouse of Christ ( Rev. 3. 9.) They lie; or, at least, deceive themselves
with most false imaginations, and delusive dreams. They need every thing,
conducible to true blessedness. The highest and utmost folly of these Old,
doting Kings, is, they will not hear of their madness; not be told on it. They Will no
more be admonished. They deafen their Ear, and wilfully turn away their
understandings from any such true openings of Scripture, as open that Kingdom
of Heaven, they set themselves to shut up against themselves and others. Yea, if
any word, of a seeming tendency toward the Kingdom, or spiritual, Gospel-sense
of any Scripture, drop from themselves, unawares, in their ministry, or
sickbed, they will carefully call it back, or limit it into a compliance or
harmony with all their other false words. They Will, by no means, leave any
jealousies behind them, in their hearers, as to the truth of their reputed
Gospel ministry and doctrine. Thus go matters, all a long their lives, and at
their deaths. So, their hearers applaud their doctrine, praise their sayings,
and follow them to those chambers of darkness and death, where none of them
ever see light. This get's man in honor (or in the fading Glory of his own
restored nature, form of Godliness, Image of the earthy, not dull considering,
or willing to understand, how little it amounts unto) by fixing there, in
unchangable enmity to God, and the power of Godliness, in the Image of the
heavenly. See, for all this; Psalm. 49. 12-20. The old foolish King, in all
Generations, is at this desperate work; reckon's and call's Christ and his poor
wise children, mad; and says, they have a Devil; Jo. 10. 20. Hos. 9. 7, 8.
But, such Kings are the fools and madmen, beyond words, in refusing all
spiritual admonition and counsel, as to the unspeakable gain of parting with
that fading law-life (they trust in) for Christ's everlasting Gospel-life and
riches. These foolish Kings are in a Toil. The more they struggle, bestirr
themselves, and lay about them, to heap up their deceitful riches, and
strengthen their false confidences therein, the more are they ensnared in the
works of their own hands; more and more entangled, caught, and held fast by
Satan, in that fading life, he know's will prove eternal death to them, with
himself. They strive for Salvation, in direct enmity to God, and that spirit of
grace, in which it ever can be found. This is the sad condition (these, the
deplorable circumstances) of these old foolish Kings. And all this, under the
undeniable experience of the withering and decay's of all, rested in, by them,
for Salvation. Here Is the case of Teachers and Hearers, at this day, under the
blastings of God's displeasure upon them all; and upon all, they trust in. Such
a course, finally persisted in, will render them despicable Creatures, to God,
Christ, Spiritual Saints, and Angels, for evermore. But, room still is left for
a hopefulness of seven thousand, yea, seventy times seven thousand Spiritual
Saints, yet involved in the Universal Heresy of the sleshly Professor or
Carnal-Gospeller, amongst us. Nothing will do it, with others; neither Words nor
Blows. Such a fixed (...) Israel, Kinging it in the flourish of their own
restored nature, are (...) by Edom; Mal. 1. 4. Though they know and say, we are
(...) (under the blasts of Gods displeasure, a clear case) but, we will return
and build the desolate places; we will yet build (upon our sandy foundation)
and rest confident still, in our desolate, impoverished, blasted life of
nature. Build, if ye will, while ye will, says (...); I Will throw down all,
again, as fast as ye build; as a Land, a (...), or state of unchangable (...),
that I have indignation, forever, against. Obadiah gives us a full and larg
account of this mystical Edom-spirit in an earthly-minded generation of Angels
and Men, represented by litteral Esau, or Edom. God sends his ambassador,
Obadiah, to declare their offense, and proclaim war against them, for it; v.
1-3. They say in their hearts, who shall bring me down to the ground? This,
they Presumptuosly say, in the very day of God's Controversy with them, and
Judgments upon them; even when they feel that Power of his, they know there is
no bearing up against, or standing before. Yet, they say, who shall bring us
down from those Clefts of the Rock, those Mystical high and strong places, we
have made (and got for our) Habitation? This high, Rocky Habitation does import
that high and Heavenly place or appearance of Christ's truly Rocky New Creation
Life and Glory, they (most wickedly) transform themselves into the likeness and
resemblance of, to fight against, even against the true Rock of safety and
everlasting Salvation, which the poor wise children trust in, run into, and are
safe, for evermore. The old foolish Kings, get into these counterfeit Heavenly
places or Gospel-appearances, Satan's prepared strongest holds for them; and
there (as fondly imagining themselves out of the reach of Gods Wrath or Power)
do they boldly bid defiance to him and his Spiritof Grace; as if they should
say, let God do his worst. We fear him not. For, Who can bring us down, from
our high and strong place? They have made their Eagles-Nest so high, that they
reckon themselves secure from the Power of evil; any Punishment from God. Habac.
2. 9. Thus accoutred and fortified for self-defence, do they most proudly,
daringly, and Presumptuously send their challenge, against the Almighty Divine
and irresistibly mighty New Creation Power of Christ and God, as if higher and
stronger then both; and so, in no danger of being brought down, by either. Who
shall bring us down? Here Is their confidence in their Mystical first-Creation
Rocks and Mountains, evil Angels, their proud helpers, who must all stoop under
Christ's all-powerful Revenging hand (helpers and helped) which when actually
upon them, they will still persist obstinately in their Presumption, saying of
themselves, I am God, before him that slay's them; but says God, thou shall be
seen and found to be but a Man, and no God, in, or under the hand of him that
slays thee; Ezekiel. 28. 9. They say, Who shall bring me down? I will, says God;
Obad. 4. Though thou exalt thy self, as the Eagle-ey'd Spiritual Saint, as if
Wiser then Daniel ( Ezekiel. 28. 3.) and though thou set thy Nest among the Stars
(as if equal to my Holy Angels) thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord.
Thus will they, by ouvert Acts, give the utmost evidence of their most
desperately wicked Hearts; by which, fully to ripen themselves for the final
Triumphs of Gods Justice, upon them all. Though hand join in hand, Men with
Angels, in this desperate Confederacy and Combination, against God most high,
for the practice of the utmost Spiritual wickedness against him, they shall not
escape unpunished. He is infinitely above them, in all their proud dealings
against him; and, will do, as he sees meet, to them all. They pretend to all
the safety, Strength, and Wisdom of Spiritual Saints, and Angels. All this will
not do their work; but, ripen them for God's strange and wonderful work, in
Judgment, upon them all. The things of this Esau-party of Angels and Men, shall
be searched out, and their hidden things sought up (v. 6.) their hidden Works
of darkness, not only hidden under the form of Godliness and Righteousness of
natural Man or Angel, but under the disguise, and counterfeit resemblance of
the very Power of Godliness and Righteousness of God. All will not secure their
Mystery of Iniquity from God's infinite divine, and all-searching,
all-discovering, infallible New Creature understanding. All their
first-Creation Vanities and Deceits, under whatever Artificial Gildings and
Glittering appearances, will be discovered, blasted, and destroyed, by him they
have to do with. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God.
They Will, too late, find it so. All the disguise and deceit, used by them, has
bin, to manage their design, for offering Violence to their Brother Jacob, God's
poor wise children, true Spiritual Saints. For this, Shame shall cover them,
and they shall be cut off, for (...); v. 10. Cruelty, and Persecuting Enmity to
them, Christ takes as done to himself. Why Persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4, 5.
Mat. 25. 45. No kindness, from the old foolish Kings, is to be expected by
Christ's little ones, his poor wise children. The season, for Jacob's absolute
deliverance, will be the season of Esau's absolute destruction; Obad. 21. When
the Kingdom shall be the Lord's, Saviors (even Christ, with his Angels and
Saints) shall come upon Mount Sion, to judge the Mount of Esau. Then shall it
appear, whose Rock or (...) is strongest, or greatest. Their Rock will dash all
Enemies Rocks, in pieces; their Mountain or Kingdom, crush and sink all the
Enemies Mountains or Kingdoms, under-Foot; and be set on the top of them, over
all. Spiritual Saints, out of all Nations, shall flow unto it (Isai. 2. 2.) as
their invincible strength and safety, against (above, and from) all the Powers
of darkness, and Gates of Hell, itself. For, on this Mount Zion shall be
deliverance, and the House of Jacob and Joseph shall be a fire, and a flame;
and, the House of Esau for Stubble, to be devoured by them. Will any doubt or
question this? The Mouth of the Lord (the Mouth or New Creature Wisdom, the
Living Word or Supreme Prophet of God, Christ himself) has spoken it; Obad.
17, 18. The fire and flame of Jacob and Joseph, signify the irresistibly
burning and bright-shining Light of Christ's New Creation, Gospel-Life and
Spirit, in true Saints, at that day of Judgment, that shall undeniably evidence
the unpardonable wickedness of their implacable Enemies, and irresistibly burn
and consume all their Glory and Power, for ever. So shall the whole Babylonish
party of incorrigibly wicked Angels and Men (as fitted fuel for the said
Mystical fire and flame) sink, and never rise more; as is figured in God's
denounced Judgment, on Litteral Babylon; Jer. 51. 64. They shall be punished
from the presence of the Lord, and Glory of his new- Creation-Power, in
himself, in his Saints, and in his Mighty Angels; 2 These. 1. 7-9. This get the
old foolish Kings, by their obstinate return to build up the desolate places,
or that State and Life, in themselves and others, God is blasting and pulling
down in them all, by his righteous Judgments upon them. This work, and design
of theirs, is the highest aggravation of their wickedness, under a
self-condemning Light within them, and the certain effects of God's evident
displeasure, upon them. God will render their final destruction, and the cause
of it, so manifest to themselves and all others, that they shall be seen by all,
to be justly called, the People, against whom he has Indignation, for ever.

And thus have we some account of the poor wise Child, and old foolish King,
here; and, what conclusion they will both come to, in Eternal Life or Death.

Verse. XIV. For, out of Prison he comes to Reign ( Heb. Out of the House of
Bondmen, or Bondage, he goes forth to Reign) Whereas also, he that is Born in
his Kingdom, becomes. Poor.
The true Saint (finding the Land of his Nativity, a narrow, strait'ned place;
the Life of his own nature, in the Image of the earthy, at best, to be but a
State of Enmity, Bondage, and death) come's out of this his own Mystical
Country, and Father Adam's House, or natural State, by a Holy death, to reign,
in another, Spiritual, more excellent Life. He find's his own Spirit of nature,
in whatever variety of condition, a State of Bondage, or House of Bondmen; a
Prison, a deep, dark Dungeon, a miery Pit of filth and corruption (filth of
flesh or spirit, litteral or Mystical Sodomy, or both) out of which, by the
death thereof, he find's it his unspeakable advantage, to Ascend, come, or be
brought forth, into a larg place, in a Life, above all death, to Reign; whereas
the old foolish King, who will no more be admonished (hear of the Cross, or
death-Doctrin of Christ's Gospel Spirit, on the restored Law-Life of his own,
wherein he sets up his Kingdom) becomes Poor. He is, even now, in this World,
by Christ, and awak'ned Saints, seen to be Miserable, Poor, Blind, and Naked,
as Happy, Rich, Cleer-sighted, and Well-cloathed, as he think's himself. He
will find this too true, at last, in eternal Poverty, Darkness, Nakedness, and
Death. Here are the exceeding different Conclusions, they come to; even the old
foolish King (in the birth of a first-Covenant Life, fixing himself there, in
unchangable Enmity to God and the second, the incorrigible first-Creation
sinner) and the poor wise Child, broken and undone, as to all the fading Life,
Riches, Wisdom, and Glory of his own nature, and so becoming a truly reigning
New Creation Saint, in the spirit of Grace, the reigning, Gospel-Principle.
That restored natural State, which the old foolish King sets up in, as his
Palace, the House of his Kingdom, to reign in; the poor wise child, find's to
be a Prison, and hasten's out of it, as a Spirit of Bondage and Enmity, into
the true Palace-Light and Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, whom the Son
mak's free indeed. Where the Spirit of the Lord becom's the principle of Life
and action, there is true liberty. Man's freedom or freewill, at best, is but a
Liberty in Word, Figure, Letter, Shadow; not in deed, and in truth. No true
freedom, sure, in a Spirit of Bondage, and Enmity to God; a Spirit, that is in
Union with World and Devil, as the spirit of nature is, in all mankind, corrupt
or righteous: Yea, so far as uncrucifi'd, even in the awak'ned Spiritual Saint,
himself; To. 7. and Gal. 5. 17. That renewed natural State, the old foolish
King make's his Palace, will prove his everlasting prison and dungeon of
darkness and death, in which he will be shut up for ever, as the evil Angels in
their narrow Angelical nature. All of them shall be dealt with, as unchangable
Enemies of God (and that Heavenly Sanctuary-Spirit, that is his true resting
place, and the everlasting habitation of blessed Angels and Saints) in Chains
of everlasting darkness, in which, reserved to the Judgment of the great day.
The unpardonable sin of Men and Angels, is the self-same; even a fixed Enmity
against the Holy Ghost, God's Gospel Spirit, or Heavenly Sanctuary,
convincingly showed and offered to them all. They were all Created perfect in
their own natures, Humane and Angelical ( Ezekiel. 28. 15.) and in Obedient
Subjection to the Gospel Spirit, in the Light of it. But, they soon hated that
Life, turned from the Light that showed it them; and this was their Apostasy.
All this, from an evil self-love to the fading Life, Wisdom, and Glory of their
own nature, which they chose to set up in, in a known contrariety to the
revealed mind of God, and unchangable Enmity to his Spirit of Grace, the very
Gospel-High-Priest of God, the true Melchisedec, by whose hand, they ought all
to have given up that selfish life, in Sacrifice to God. So, become they all,
Mystical Sodomit's; guilty of all the highest and most Criminal, Mystical,
Spiritual Wickednesses, Uncleanesses, and abominable Idolatries. God, in
Faithfulness, Favor, and Love to his Saints, Plagu's and Chasten's this
Rebellious Spirit of nature, this Carnal mind of Enmity, in them; while he
gives more then Heart can wish, to it, in-Enemies, to their final ruin; Heb.
12. 5-8. Psalm. 73. 7. 14. God's giving the old doting Kings, their Hearts
desire, and more, is a sore and heavy Judgment on them, though they take it for
a great favor, and Token of his Love to them. Desolation, and an utter
consuming of them with Terrors, the true Saint certainly foresees, to be the
eternal issue of all their Temporal flourish and Prosperity; v. 18, 19. All,
the old foolish King dotes on, the poor wise Child cast's away as Dung. So
foolish are the old Mystical Kings, and also litteral Heathen Kings of this
World, as to bandy together against the Lord and his anointed; as if hopeful to
prevail against the infinite Divine Lord, and his Anointed King Jesus, with his
Saints and Followers. Their design is, to break their Bands a sunder, and cast
away from them all their Cords of restraint upon them. He that sits in Heaven,
laugh's at all these foolish Kings. He will speak to them, in his Wrath, and
vex them in his sore displeasure. Ps. 2. 1-5. Have they an arm, like God? Can
they thunder with a Voice, like him? What madness, to think of prevailing in
this Rebellious Insurrection and Contest against the Almighty Divine, and
Irresistibly Mighty New Creation Power of Christ? These old foolish Humane
Kings, will all fare as their evil Angelical King, the King of all such Kings,
or Rebellious Children of Pride; Job 41. 34. They Will all (...) into the same
Condemnation with him, will all have their Portion in the same Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, the Tophet, prepared of old, for them all. They Will be all finally
stripped of all Power of resisting the Will of God, and forced to suffer the
same to be done upon them, in (...) Wrath. Then, with their everlasting
Poverty, will they have unutterable Shame and Confusion of Face. All, they
refused obediently to part with, will be forcibly torn from them, in final
Wrath. All their fading goodness or beauty, (...) Consume in their eternal
Grave, from their dwelling, their whole Mystical Houses, earthly Habitations,
or persons; all the goodness of that natural State, they chose for their
dwelling; Ps. 49. 14. There Is no middle State, for ever, between the poor wise
Child that will be eternally rich, in Heaven; and, the old rich foolish King,
that will be eternally poor, in Hell. The poor wise Child believ's, and
fallows the Faithful Sayings of Christ's Spiritual Law, or Gospel Spirit, the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus. He is content, willing; yea, glad to
suffer and die with Christ, as to his short Law-liv'd nature, that he may Reign
with him, in his long-lived Spirit of Grace; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. (...) we be
dead, and (...) with Christ, we shall live and reign with him: There Is for the
poor wise Child. If we deny him, he will also deny us: There Is for the old
foolish King. The (...), by death, com's out of his Prison-State, or natural
Spirit of Bondage, to Reign: The latter, King's it, like an old doting Fool, in
his Prison-Spirit of Bondage and Death. These old foolish Kings, the Mystical
Princes of this World, under the Devil, by God's Permission, have bin the
self-confident Persecutors and Murderers of Christ and his Spiritual Saints, in
all Ages. Cain, a first-Covenant Worshipper of God, began this work, on Abel, a
second. (...) winding up of all, true Abel-Saints will be the Fowls of Heaven,
that are to feed upon (or delight themselves (in a Union of Mind with God) in
the final Slaughter of) all such Mystical and Litteral Kings and People of the
Earth, as are found in unchangable Enmity to God and them. Rev. 19. 17-21.

Verse. XV. I considered all the living which walk under the Sun, with the
second Child that shall stand up in his stead.
Here Is Solomon's confirmation of what has bin said; his judgment upon the
whole matter, in sanctuary-light. In this, he considered all the living, under
the mystical first-creation-Sun, walking under the Conduct (or in the Light) of
the first-covenant spirit, as therein made alive again, in some degree, by the
Redeemer. By the unlawful use of this restored Life or Light of the Law, in
enmity to God and his Gospel Spirit of Grace, do they bring themselves into
everlasting poverty and nakedness. Their immortal spirit (as thus pleasing
themselves, by taking up their rest for salvation, in the restored natural
righteous Life thereof) he considers, with their whole man, in that state they
shall be caused to stand up in, for ever, in the stead of what they were, in
this mortal World and Body. This second Child, or state of Man in the
Resurrection, will, to the Old foolish King, be found a state of everlasting
darkness and death, in a Resurrection of damnation, under final and
unquenchable wrath. The full infliction of wrath is reserved for this second
Child, in the said Resurrection-state of the whole Man. This second Child, or
state of Man, is that, in which he must answer, by way of suffering, for all
the evil done by him, in his natural body or slate, on earth, through a willful
abuse of the first-covenant Life of the Law, in unchangable enmity to God and
the Gospel. This, comes the said old foolish King, to.

Verse. XVI. There is no end of all the People, even of all that have been
before them: they also that come after, shall not rejoice in him: surely this
also is vanity, and vexation of Spirit.
Solomon (having considered the present generation of old foolish kings, in his
own day, upon earth) tells us, the case was alway's the same, in former, and
will so be, in all aftertimes of this world. So, these two last Verses of this
Chapter, are a farther enlargment, as to the Character, and future condition of
the Old foolish King, to Eternity. As to the poor wise Child, he asserted him,
in general, to be better than the Old foolish King; verse. 13. Then, verse. 14.
gives his reason for it; because he comes out of his Prison to reign, with
Christ, in a state of eternal Life, absolute freedom, and true blessedness.
There Is enough for him; all that need be said of him. But the Old foolish King
(verse. 13.) declared in general (verse. 14.) amidst all his conceited riches, to
be poor; he farther signifies (verse. 15.) that he will so be found, to all
eternity. And then (verse. 16.) that this is the Case of all the like old
foolish Kings, in former generations, from the beginning of the World, and will
be found the Case of all of the like spirit, in after-Generations, to the
World's end.

To the first of these, he speaks in the former part of this Verse; There is no
end of all the People, even of all that have been before them. There Is no end
of their immortal beings, and exquisite sensibleness of their whole Persons,
Body, Soul, and Spirit, in a Resurrection-State of Damnation.
Annihilation-death they will ever desire, but never find. Such death will ever
flee from them. And Eternal Life they can never have. For, though in a general,
confused, random-guess at happiness, every one would be happy; that Life, in
which true happiness ever can be found, are, and will they be found in a Spirit
of unchangeable enmity to. Such life, then, can they never have; nor, such
death, as annihilation of their beings, or insensibleness in their beings,
amounts unto, however hotly pursued, desired, or sought by them. There Is no end
of their being, nor yet of their most exquisite sensiblenes therein, under the
tormenting wrath and fiery indignation of God, for ever. The immortality of
their whole being, in a resurrection of damnation, will hold them close to it,
under punishment, for ever, in hell, for the ill Use they made of their
immortal Spirits, and mortal first-covenant righteous life thereof, while in
their mortal Body's, upon earth. The second Child or whole man, body, Soul, and
Spirit (put together again in a resurrection-state of immortality, as to being)
is to answer for all, done in the mortal body, or natural state and life of
all; 2 Cor. 5. 10. and Ec. 12. 14. Thus will it be with the Old foolish King,
for ever, as to being. But, as to that Mortal, changable first-Covenant
righteous Life (which he pleased and flatt'red himself with, as an endless Life
of true blessedness) that will come to an end. He will find himself rid of all
the fading good, and comfort of that, which he would fain keep; and will be
kept up, for ever, in a most desolate wretched State of being, under wrath,
which he would fain be rid of. So, is he gone, every way. All he would not
have, he must have, and that, for ever: and all he would have, he will for ever
be deprived of, without the least relief (when Tormented in the flames of God's
Wrath) so much as by a drop of Water to cool his Tongue; Luke 16. 24.

The mortal first-Covenant Life of his immortal Spirit, Exspires and Vanishes;
dies away, and ceases, with the mortal Life of his Body. So, such wise, old
foolish Kings ( wise in Christ (1 Cor. 4. 10.) as to first-Covenant
seize, and fixing there, in Enmity to the second) will die, and perish
for ever, as the Fool, or Brutish Sinner of the Gentil's. Yea, worse will be
his final Doom, of the two. The righteous Mystical Sodomite (in the form of
Godliness, righteousness of Man, in his own restored nature, but Enmity to the
Power of it and righteousness of God, in his Gospel Life and Spirit of Grace,
which is filth of Spirit) will have worse on it, then the Litteral Sodomite, in
filth of flesh. His greater advance, and (...) advantages toward Salvation,
neglected, and abused, do highly aggravate his evil of Sin, and accordingly
will be his evil of punishment, for ever. After all Exaltation, with Capernaum,
in first-Covenant-Life, and second Covenant or Gospel Light, even up to Heaven
(so as (...) to see, and then obstinately refuse God's only appointed way of
entrance; the death of their earthly spirit of nature, for the life of his
Heavenly Spirit of Grace) will all such Mystical Sodomit's, be tumbled or
thrust down to Hell, where it shall be more tolerable for Litteral Sodom, then
for them; Mat. 11. 20-24. Luke 10. 12-15. Christ himself gives the reasons for
this difference in Punishment; v. 21. 23. and Luke 12. 47, 48. He that
(clearly) know's his Master's will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
Stripes: He that does not (so clearly) know it, shall be beaten with fewer.
For, to whom much is given, of him shall be much required; as the case is with
Men; to whom they have committed much, of him they will ask (or expect) the
more. Man, in the dark State of his corrupted nature, know's not his Master's
will, at that rate, as the old foolish King (in the restored Life of the first,
and light of the second Covenant) does. By abusing the Life of the first, in
Rebelliously keeping it up (and himself therein) against the second (when
discovered by its own light, to him, to be that which cannot be received by
him, but on his obedient surrender of the Life of the first) does he deserve a
sorer Punishment then the common Sinner against the Law; Heb. 10. 28, 29. For,
he Sinn's, more immediately and knowingly, against the Holy Ghost, or Gospel
Life of the Son of God in Heaven, even the Man Christ as risen from the dead,
into that Life, wherein he lives for evermore: The other, against the Son of
Man on Earth, or that Law-Life of nature (the highest Edition of the Law) which
Christ took, and was found in, as made Flesh; and, which he Crucified and
abolished out of our nature, in his own person, in order to bring it forth
again, in the new, Gospel-Edition of it, by a New Creation, in unchangable
Harmony with his Originally everlasting righteous, spiritual, New Creation,
Gospel-Life. So only, can (or ever could) first-Covenant Law-Life, come, in
him, or in us, to dwell, for ever, with New Covenant Gospel-Life, as Brethren
in Unity. This unchangable Union of the natural and spiritual Man, in Christ
and true Zion-Saints, is pleasant in God's sight, and of everlasting advantage
to Man; Psalm. 133. 1. For so, and so only (by the death of the natural, and
Resurrection of it, into the Life of the Spiritual Man in the Saint, and the
Spiritual Man in Christ's person) come the poor (but truly wise) Crucified,
dead Children, to live for ever, in unchangable Union and Harmony of Mind, with
the infinite Divine Spirit of God most high.

Christ enlighten's every Man that comes into the World; Jo. 1. 9. None then,
are absolutely in the dark; stark blind, wholly ignorant of his will. Even the
Gentil's, all Heathens, have the light or Law of nature within them, accusing
or excusing their thoughts, Words, and Actions, as found compliant with, or
contrary thereunto; To. 2. 15. God's rule, given in the Scriptur's of truth, in
reference to all Men, is this. If any be unfaithful, in, and to their little,
Dim, rational Candlelight, in some degree, set up a fresh, by the Redeemer,
in all men: If they do allow themselves in a constant course of Rebelling
against the same, without any remorse or chang of mind; they would not be true to
higher natural Light, in the actual Privileges of a first-Covenant Life; and
less yet, to the higher, Spiritual, New Covenant, Gospel Light, if not only
offered but actually received by them; Luke 16. 10, 11. He that is unjust in the
least, is (or will be) unjust also, in much. Those that are not faithful in the
unrighteous Mammon, the fading Light, or also Life, and inward Riches of their
own restored Nature (which yet is but a Spirit or State of Bondage to them, and
Enmity to God, at best; as in Paul, before Gospel-Conversion) who will commit
to their Trust, the true Riches? Those that do not rightly use any fading
Light, Wisdom, Life, Riches, in their own Spirit of Nature, by such active
Obedience as is performable therein and with, while that is God's Dispensation
to them; and then, by such passive Obedience, in despising, surrendering, and
giving all up, as Dung, with Paul, when God requires it, in order to receive
his more excellent, spiritual, heavenly Gospel-Life, in a Resurrection-state (
Phil. 3. 6-10.) how should they ever come at, or be possessed of the true
durable Riches, and everlasting Life? The only possible, undispensable way and
means for this, in the declared Methods of God's Wisdom, is the obediently,
surrend'red natural State, as to all the fading Life, Glory, Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Riches thereof; even the Death and Loss of all, in Sacrifice
to God, as Christ himself did, when he had taken our fleshly nature, in the
full Glory and unspotted Purity thereof. Eternal, Gospel-Life, is, by the
Wisdom of God, or Gospel Spirit of Christ, freely proclaimed and offered to all
men, Prove. 1. 20-23. and 8. 1-9.

The old foolish Kings, the highest and most criminal provoking Sinners, that
receive and abuse the Life of the first, and Light of the second Covenant, will
fare worst under final Wrath. All others; fixed common Sinners of the Gentil's,
litteral Sodom, will have bad enough on it, under their fewer wrathful Stripes,
or lesser Torments, in Eternal Death. But, the hottest fiery Indignation, and
Mystical Flames of Wrath, in the lowest Hell, will be, for ever, upon the old
foolish Kings. Sore, amazing Tidings for such self-confident, presumptuous
Sinners, as reckon their Plea good, for entrance into the Kingdom of God. Yet
thus it will be. For the mouth of the Lord himself has spoken it. Mat. 7.
21-23. and 11. 23, 24. Mar. 6. 11. Luke 10. 12. All first-Covenant Saints, in
Holy Flesh, that finally refuse the whole New Covenant Gospel-Testimony, the
Words of God's Holy Spirit, and Life thereof; this will most certainly be
theircase. Easier will it be for Litteral (...) (Profane, Brutisied Sinners, in
the corrupt Spirit of nature) then for them. It had bin better for them, never
to have known the way of everlasting truth and righteousness, then after they
have known the truth (or Gospel-Life of Christ, in its own Light and Beamings
forth upon them) to turn from the Holy (...) of God, therein, and wilfully
Rebel against it; 2 Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 10. 26, 27. Isai. 1. 20. Much sorer
Punishment belongs to fixed Sinners against the Holy Ghost, than (...) sinners
against the Son of Man, for ever; v. 29. Such recompense of both their errors
as is meet, will they all receive, both Litteral and Mystical Sodom, even the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire; To. 1. 27. Jude 7. None, fixed in Enmity to God, can
reasonably expect less then the unchangable Wrath of God, upon them. There
remain's to them all, one and the other, nothing but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment and Fiery Indignation, to devour them. All foolish Kings, that
choose to live and walk contrary to God, in a known Spirit of Enmity, and, at an
all-adventures with him ( Levit. 26. 21. 23) in their starting ( Ps. 78. 57)
unsteddy Spirit of nature (when offered his constant, right, steady
Gospel Spirit of Grace, that David Prayed for, Ps. 51. 10.) he will walk
contrary to them ( Levit. 26. 24.) in an unchangable dispensation of Wrath;
and, but at an all-adventures with them, while that first-Covenant Principle,
is his dispensation to them, and their active obedience required therein. When
they break with him, he will break with them. They shall know his Breach of
Promise, therein. They break the first-Covenant, by refusing Christ in the
second; Jer. 31. 32. They break it, by keeping up that Life he crucified; and
warn's them to depart out of, as not their rest, but sore destruction; Mic. 2.
10. It Is polluted with filth of spirit, though, in part, cleansed from filth of
flesh.

The evils, done by man, in his first state, and mortal body, upon earth, must
be answered for, by the whole man, as the second child that shall stand up for
ever, in his stead, in a resurrection of damnation. No old foolish King, or
other fixed sinner, at present, upon earth, before, or after, from the
beginning to the end of this World, shall ever find cause to rejoice in him,
that is, in this second Child, that shall stand up in every one of them, for
ever, in stead of the mortal life and state of their whole man, in this world.
They shall all, and every one of them, find all the essentials of their
personal constitution, Body, Soul, and Spirit, put together again in a
resurrection of damnation (and a most exquisite everlasting sensibleness of
all) to pay off the reckoning in the world to come, for all done in this mortal
world, and life of all, under final wrath, as vessels of dishonor and
everlasting contempt. Christ has besought them by his ambassadors of grace
(while it was called to day, with them, in this world) to listen to his voice,
submit to his terms (that himself obediently submitted to, in our nature) his
declared method and way of saving them: but they would not. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, says he (meaning the mystical earthly-Jerusalem party of men, under
law or gospel, Jews or Christian Gentiles, the old foolish kings, reigning in a
first covenant righteous life, or image of the earthy, before absolutely fixed
there, against the second, and image of the heavenly) How often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Behold, therefore, your House is left unto you,
desolate; Mat. 23. 37, 38. Luke 13. 34, 35. How often would I have gathered thee,
under the protecting shadow and cherishing influence of my divine and
creature-wings, my almighty divine, and irresistibly mighty new creation Power,
for your security and everlasting blessedness; and ye would not? Therefore is
your house, or immortal being ( that ye have consulted shame to, by your evil
coveting, choosing, and delighting in the fading perishing riches and glory
thereof, in preference to my durable and everlasting, when offered you; Hab: 2.
9) is left unto you desolate, in everlasting contempt; destitute of all good,
and in utmostmisery under the positive (...) of the wrath of God, for evermore.
But, Christ does not rise up, and shut the door of the kingdom upon any men (
Luke 13. 25) nor swear in his wrath, they shall never enter into his rest, till
he has waited to be gracious, and tried all ways and means for their good,
they can wish or desire; Isai. 5. 4.

There Is no end of all the people, no not of incorrigibly wicked Angels and Men
(fixed in their first-Creation Spirit of nature, against God and his
New Creature Spirit of Grace) either as to their beings, numbers, or (...). If
Christ's little Flock, from amongst Men, the few that are saved, be a
numberless Multitude ( Rev. 7. 9.) what must the many that Perish, be? Mat. 7.
13, 14. Endless Sufferings, will the old foolish Kings (after their
self-confident race in Holy Flesh, form of godliness, all along this World,
against the Power of it) find, the due recompense of their error; the just
fruit of their own doings; the most sad and dismal end, issue, and result of
all their sore labor and travel in their own nature, under the mystical
first-creation Sun-light, or first-covenant Spirit, fixed, by them, in enmity
to God and the (...); Prove. 1. 31. Isa. 3. 11. This will be found the Case of
this serpentine seed of first-covenant Professors, fixed in enmity to the
second, in all former generations, in the present, and in the succeeding
generations, that come after this, to the very end of this world, under Satan's
reign. They have been, are, and will be found in a universal contradiction to
the Gospel Truths, and Mysteries of Christ's Kingdom. They greedily suck and
drink in the old serpent's poisonous doctrin's of devils, and considently teach
the same, in a known unchangable enmity to God. And, this renders them,
serpents, devils, a generation of vipers, that cannot escape the damnation of
hell, the wrath to come; Mat. 23. 33. These old foolish Kings are the beloved
darlings of the old serpent, the king of all such kings, and self-exalting
children of pride ( Job. 41. 34.) who therefore fall into the same condemnation
with him, the same Tophet or place of torment; the same lake of mystical fire
and brimstone, for ever; Rev. 19. 20. Mat. 25. 41.

These old Kings, in the old or first-Creation State, are the choicest Subjects
and most creditable Instruments, to carry on the old Serpent's mischievous
designs and intendments, against all the Gospel-Doctrin of the Kingdom of
Christ, and all Gospel-Saints, from Abel, downwards; from the beginning to the
end of this World. They directly and knowingly choose rather to be Born of the
Devil's Spirit of unchangable Enmity to God, then of Christ's Gospel Spirit
(that is in unchangable Union with him) as the principle of their whole Life,
Desire, Thought, Word, and Action; of all their Preaching and Praying, shall I
say? Why not? Can they speak truly good things, out of the abundance of their
Heart, that is in Union with Satan, Established with his Perishing Meats (as
carried about, with his diverse and strange Doctrin's) not with God's Grace;
contrary to what is advised and required; Heb. 13. 9. Can such Mystical evil
Trees bring forth any good Fruit, to God? Will not all, they speak and do, be
continually evil? And, must they not suffer for all? Lie down in sorrow, under
Wrath, for ever? All they have rested on, and trusted in, for happiness, proves
(as they have been sufficiently warned) Vanity; and so, must needs leave them,
in eternal Vexation of spirit.

CHAP. V.
Verse. I. Keep thy Foot, when thou go to the House of God; and be more ready
to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of Fools: For, they consider not that they
do evil.
Here Is the Result and Use of all, declared in the foregoing Chapters, as to
the Vanity and vain Labor of Man, under the Light of the Mystical
first-Creation Sun, or Spirit of the Law, in and under which, Man and Angel
were, at first, Created; and Christ, Born; Gal. 4. 4. Paul draw's the same
useful Instruction, from the doctrine of the 11 former Chapters, to the Roman's
(Chap. 12. 1.) for quitting, or giving up the same earthly natural State (the
same thing with the Foot, here) when restored (or made, again, Holy Flesh, the
righteous natural Body) in Sacrifice to God, as our reasonable Service, and
true free will Offering, even the Offering up of our free will to good and evil,
that we may receive his free will to Good only, the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God, with which the Son makes free indeed, all that are Born of his
Gospel Spirit of overlasting righteousness and truth. First, then, consider
what this Foot is, or signifies; and secondly, what is the House of God, it is to
be kept out of, as not fit to enter.

1. This Foot (...) the whole Man, in a first-Covenant Life. The Heel, Satan is
permitted to bruise ( Genesis 3. 15.) is of the same extent, and comprehensive
significancy. And, so were the Shoes, Moses was Commanded to put from off his
Feet, where the ground was Holy; Exodus 3. 5. This Foot, or natural Spirit of
Man (corrupt or righteous, being found in Enmity to God, at best, as in Paul,
before his Gospel-Conversion) can bear no part in the right Worshipping of God,
which is wholly to be performed in Spirit and Truth, Christ's New Creature
Gospel Spirit of everlasting righteousness and truth. The infinite Divine
Spirit and Father, requires all Men and Angels to Worship him in the Son's
Gospel-Creature-Spirit of truth. How can Man please him, in duties of Worship,
or any other Performances toward him or Man, in his own Spirit of Enmity? Such
Enmity, as is no otherwise extinguishable, but by (...) death of nature, being
absolutely inseparable from the Life of it, at best. Christ's Gospel Spirit of
Love, in unchangable Union of Mind, and Will, Desire, and Thought, with God
(when it becom's the sole Principle of Life, Desire, Thought, and Action, in
Man) will perfectly and completely fulfill all Law, perform all duty to God and
Man, to God's well-pleasing, and the Performer's certain and everlasting
Salvation. Man is not to come, in his own Spirit of nature (however Wise,
Strong, Rich, and Honorable in Christ, by his first-Covenant-Communications to
him, as a fleshly Bridegroom, and (...) at his earthly Table) into the
New Creation Sanctuary of God, the everlasting Righteous Fountain Gospel Spirit
of Christ. The Courts of this Sanctuary, are too Holy Ground, for any thing
that is but changably good (as Man and Angels, before the fall) or also,
positively evil (as nature corrupt or righteous, in all Men, since the fall) to
tread on. For a Man, in a Spirit, that is a Root of Bitterness, bearing Gall and
Wormwood, Briars and Thorns, in a continued Enmity to God (every Imagination,
Purpose, Desire, and Thought thereof, being only evil, continually; the old
World's case, before the Flood, Genesis 6. 5.) to appear in the unchangably
righteous New Creation Sanctuary of God, what a strange, incongruous thing and
sight would it be? If any, filled and Clothed (by Satan's (...), and their own
consent or choice) with a Spirit of unchangable Enmity to God, do (as 'twere)
crowd in, and appear at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb and his Bride, in the
Kingdom of his Father, see what is like to become of him ( Mat. 22. 11, 12.)
Friend, will the King Jesus say, how came thou in hither, not having a
Wedding Garment? And, he was Speech-less; had nothing to say. Then, says the
King to his Servants (the Holy Angels of his Power, that excel, in strength,
all fixed first-Creation Enemies of God and the second) bind him Hand and Foot,
and cast him into outer Darkness, where shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth,
to all Eternity. Let the fixed first-Creation Sinner and Enemy of God, in his
form of Godliness, Righteousness of Man, do what he can, get where he will, he
is gone for ever. No Stranger was to come into the Litteral Sanctuary, under
the Law, the Type of this Spiritual, Gospel-Sanctuary-Spirit of God, in
Christ's Person, and in his Saints, the lively stones of the House, upon the
Rock, that Christ is the living head-corner Stone, and Foundation of. He
spirit's, influences and enliven's all the rest; hold's them fitly compacted
together, and firmly cimented, in his one Gospel Spirit of new-Creature-Life,
that is a Universal Bond of Love and Peace, to and with God, Christ, and one
other, for evermore. The Foot, Heel, or Shoe, that is to be kept back, laid
aside, or put off (that we may be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, and so, walk orderly, with a right Foot, according to the Gospel of the
Grace of God; or, on a new foot of account, in the single-ey'd discerning,
strength, and Power of Christ's Gospel Spirit) is that Flesh and Blood, which
cannot enter into and inherit the Kingdom of God (1 Cor. 15. 50.) or tread the
Courts of his Heavenly Sanctuary. Angels, in the purity of their
first-Creation-make and changable Life, were to cover their Faces, as not fit
to appear before God, to behold (or be beheld by) him, therein. And, says God
to the Jews, when ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your
hands, to tread my Courts? Isai. 1. 12. No right, acceptable Worshipping God,
or doing any thing else, but in the Gospel Spirit of Truth, that spirit of
Love, that is the complete fulfiller of the whole Law; even of all that God
requires of us. Sure, the natural spirit, at best, that is a spirit of Enmity to
God, and a bloody-minded Spirit against his true Saints, can do no such thing.
It Is hands are full of blood. It breathed out Threatenings and Slaughters
against the Disciples of the Lord, even in Paul, who had therein, lived,
according to his light, in all good conscience; ( Act. 23. 1. exerciseable in
the activity and restored Life thereof) as a strict, circumspect Opposer, and
Suppressor of the vile Affections and Lusts of his corrupt nature. This Foot,
then, is to be cut off, cast away, laid aside, by us, as not fit to perform any
part in the true Worshipping of God. Man is not to come alive into the House of
God, but be brought into it, by the High Priest, Christ himself, dead (as to
his own Law-Life and principle of active obedience) and quick'ned up into his
Gospel-Life and Principle of active obedience, wherein alone it is possible to
please God, or be saved. Passive obedience is the highest service, performable
in (or with) Angel's or Man's natural, first-Creation Life or Make. For, by
this, the guilty Sinner, the Belial-Party, the Enemy of God, is slain; and all
Power of Sinning, abolished, for ever; To. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 1. The obedient
death of the guilty and continually sinning natural Spirit, is more pleasing to
God, and profitable to Man, then any Obedience or Duty, performable (in its
kind) in the Life and Activity thereof. The House of Mourning or Death, as to
the first-Covenant Principle of Life, is better than the House of Feasting, in
the utmost Flourish, Prosperity, Wisdom, Glory, and Fruitfulness thereof, or
Joy therein. The death of the natural State, at best (from which, since the
fall, Enmity to God is inseparable) obediently yielded to, must needs be more
acceptable to God, then the Life thereof, or any thing performable therein.
From Love to God's Mercy (or the unspeakable gift of new Creation Life) to
submit to, yea, and join with God, in doing justly (or Executing his righteous
Judgment and Sentence of Death, on our fleshly, natural, law-state) in the
awak'ned Life and Power of his Gospel Spirit, in us; this is the Sum of all,
God requir's of us, as the terms and condition of our full entering into (and
striking) the new and everlasting Covenant with him, Established in all things,
and sure. This doing justly, in humbling our guilty natural Man or Spirit, the
Enemy of God, even to the death thereof; and, living wholly to him, in our
never-sinning Spiritual Man, or his never-sinning Spirit (1 To. 3. 9.) is all,
he requir's of us; Mic. 6. 8. Man must quit his own ( cieled, Hag. 1. 4.)
adorned House, or natural State, to enter into God's Spiritual House, or
New Creation Sanctuary. His own House, or nature, is not (ought not to be
reckoned) his dwelling place, or state of true rest, for him. Men will find all
their Labor to keep up that building, with the fading glory and riches
thereof, but a wearying themselves for very Vanity ( Hab. 2. 13) a disquieting
themselves in Vain, by heaping up Treasur's ( Ps. 39. 6.) for their own
destruction, in the day of wrath. This, will Man get, by coveting an evil
covetousness to his own House, or natural State, and setting his Nest on high,
as vainly puffed up in his self-confident fleshly mind, and thinking to secure
himself from the Power of evil, the Wrath of God; Hab. 2. 9. He says in his
Heart, Who shall bring me down to the Ground? Obad. 3. I will says the Lord;
v. 4. We must depart out of our own Country and Fathers House (the Life and
State of our own nature, at best, in but the restored Image of the earthy, or
first Adam; form of godliness, righteousness of Man, a glory, a wisdom, to be
Crucified, Defaced, Obliterated, and done away; a Visage, a Beauty, to be
Marred and Spoild) in order to enter into God's own Country ( the far
Country, the Man Christ is gone into, before us, to prepare Places or Mansions
of Glory, for us; Luke 19. 12. To. 14. 2, 3. We must depart from (or out of)
our own House (or nature, however Ciel'd, Adorned, Swept, Cleansed from the
filth of flesh, and Garnished with Spiritual Light, or best enlightening Gifts,
short of the more excellent Spiritual Life and way; 1 Cor. 12. 31. called Love;
1 Cor. 13.) in order to our right and worthy entering or going into God's
Spiritual Sanctuary, or House, to Worship. Our own Country, Father's House,
Image of the earthy, first-Covenant Life of our nature, righteousness of Man,
Spiritual Conviction-Light, etc. All these make up but the Foot (the whole Life
and State of nature, at best) that is to be cut off, and cast away, as loss and
dung, to enter in a Resurrection-Life, with the Man Christ, into his Father's
House, where are many Mansions. And so, come we to the second thing, here; the
House, Man is to keep his Foot from, or out of, when he goes into it.

2. This House is the Supreme, original new creature Spirit of Christ, the
Living Creature-Book, Word, or Wisdom of God, in which (...) (...) and Written
out the whole Counsel of his Divine Mind. And, the Man Christ is the Supreme
Prophet, Mouth, and Infallible Declarer thereof, to Angels and Men. Christ's
whole Creature-nature is the immediate Temple and Sanctuary of his own
Divinity, set up by his Divine Hand or Workmanship, from everlasting, in
Personal Union with the Divinity; Prove. 8. 22, 23. This was Typed out, by the
Litteral Sanctuary, under the Law. No Strangers, no, nor (...), while unclean,
might Approach, or enter into it. The polluted Heathen-Stranger, and the
unclean (...), in Mystery and Truth, signify the natural Man, corrupt or
righteous. This is the stranger and Fool, here meant, that (being altogether
ignorant of this new creation Sanctuary, of God's own pitching, not Man's; Heb.
8. 2.) is ready, with Paul, to think he does God service, in denying and
opposing this his own house, and himself, the Divine Inhabitant thereof, in
personal Union with it; as also, in Persecuting to the death, true Saints, that
own and assert such a House, as Partakers of, living, walking, and speaking in
the spirit of it. The New Creation Sanctuary-Spirit, the Creature-word, Wisdom,
or Hand of God, set up from everlasting by God's own very Divine hand, was the
immediate hand by which the whole old or first-Creation World was made ( Isai.
66. 1, 2.) Men, Angels, etc. which, therefore, are all to be rolled up and laid
aside, by God, as an old Garment ( Heb. 1. 10-12.) and in Harmony of Mind with
him, and obedience to him, are the life and all the best and most glittering
things thereof, to be laid aside, and parted with, by Angel and Man, to partake
of his Heavenly Sanctuary-Spirit, and Live with him in that place of his and
their true rest, for evermore. All the Heavenly, Eternal things of his
Sanctuary, seem Foolish, Idle Dreams, (which Men conspire to kill them, for,
Genesis 37. 19, 20.) and all right Words concerning them, Vain or Lying Words (as
Pharaoh called Moses his Messages from God) to the most enlight'ned natural
Man, who is wholly ignorant and in the dark, as to all Divine and Spiritual
Creature-things of Christ and God; 1 Cor. 2. 14. It Is a vain imagination, when
Man thinks to Pry into, and View the most Holy things of God's Spiritual
Sanctuary, in the highest Wisdom and best Light of his but restored natural
state. If he finally persist in such a Presumptuous mistake, he will meet with
a final Blasting upon him, to Eternal Death, figured by the fifty Thousand
Presumptuous Peepers into the Ark of the Lord, who were smitten by him, to a
Temporal death of their bodies; 2 Samuel 6. 19.) All the best things in the
first-Creation-make and life of Angel and Man, are of no nearer kin to God's
New Creation Sanctuary and Holy things thereof, then as figures and shadows of
them. The rational powers and things of man, are not more hid from the brute
beast; then the Spiritual things of-God, from the wisest and most rational man;
1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 14. It Is too painful, yea, it is impossible for man (Save in
sanctuary-life and light, Ps. 73. 16, 17) to discern the spiritual,
New Creation things of God's House; and, less yet, the deep things of his very
infinite Divinity. The truly Spiritual Man, Judges (or discern's and sees) all
things (1 Cor. 2. 15.) Divine, Spiritual, and natural. The highest
first-Covenant-Saint, in Holy Flesh, Righteousness of Man, is a Fool, a
Stranger, an unreasonable Man, a Profane Infidel, as to all Gospel-Things and
Truths. Such troublesome self-confidents, Paul desired to be delivered from (2
These. 3. 2. and 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15.) as most impertinent, irreconcilable
Babblers and Disputers against all those Gospel Truths, or Sanctuary-things,
they bid at, and pretend to the knowledge of. That contradicting Wisdom and very
Understanding, they use in the dispute, is to be abolished by the Cross, as the
Blasphemous Enemy of God, and all his Gospel Truths. Thus Paul found it in
himself, till Christ knocked down that earthly Wisdom, and caused him to turn
from that fleshly Mind, Understanding, or Principle of reasoning, in obedience
to his heavenly; Act. 9. 3-6. Gal. 1. 16. Christ himself, in the flesh, turned
away his foot or feet, his own fleshly or natural understanding and will, the
two Feet of the Living Soul (on which it walks abroad, to View, Desire and feed
upon worldly Vanities, Perishing Meats) refusing to think the thoughts, do the
will, or speak the words thereof, but the will and words of him that sent him,
by Crucifying that Will and Understanding, utterly Abolishing all the Life,
Desire, Thought, and Motion thereof. And, such death is the only Consecrated
Living way, into the New Creation Sanctuary-Life; Heb. 9. 12. and, 10. 19, 20.

The natural man, even in Christ's person, however perfect, was a prohibited
Stranger, amongst the rest, that might not enter into his own new creation
Sanctuary, House, or Temple, in the single, changable, first-covenant law-life,
in and under which, made. 'Twas impossible, even for him, as so, to enter. By
Death, he ascended into it, and set it open, to his followers in the like Death
of nature. Such obedient Death is the only way to eternal life. Never was there
any other way to it, for any Angel or Man. That law-life, that was but a
changable shadow, in him and in us, must pass (by the death of nature in both
and all) under the cross-work of the Gospel Spirit, that the life which is true
in him, may be true in us, also; 1 John 2. 8. and 5. 20. In Scripture sense,
all is true, in the new creation; all, shadow, in the old. True Life, Light,
Wisdom, Righteousness, is found in the new, only. All things eternal, things of
God, are there. All the Wisdom, Life, Light, Righteousness, Glory, things of
Man or Angel, in the old, are but shadows of the substantial things of God, in
the new. The changable, earthy Image of God, and righteous first-covenant Life
of the Law (Man was at first created and set up in) is but shadow of the
new creature life and Image of the heavenly, or second Adam. All, in the
former, are things of man, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness, of Man: all in the
latter, things of God, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness of God. A zeal for God's
heavenly, Spiritual things, must eat up our earthly, or natural. The fire of
his heavenly Sanctuary-Spirit, must consume our Earthly Life and state, eat up
all mortal desire and thought, root and all. By such destruction of our flesh,
or natural state, can we come to be Saved in that Spirit. We must put off the
old Man, the Image of the earthy, or can never put on the new, and Image of the
heavenly. The Earthly House and Life of this present tabernacle must be
dissolved, that we may have that Building of God, not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens; 2 Cor. 5. 1. Think any to enter into that House, any otherwise,
then Christ himself could? to go whole and unmaimed into it, in that Life or
natural state, he crucified? Gal. 3. 1. Nature, in all men, is an enemy to God,
and his Sanctuary-Spirit. Paul, in righteous nature, was (in union of mind with
the Devil) an enemy to the Spirit of Grace, to God, Christ, all Gospel-Saints
and truths; a stranger to all things divine and Spiritual.

God the Mediator, in his changable Angelical nature, from the beginning; and
humane, toward the latter end of this world, did cease, by a Holy death, from
all the works of both, in the activity of the changable principle of
first-covenant Life. Angels and Men must do (and suffer) likewise, or never
enter into his rest; Heb. 4. 4. 10. The mystical Sabbath-Law of the Cross, upon
the works and and working Spirit of nature, is expressed by turning away our
foot from the Lord's Sabbath, from delighting in our own will and way, (...)
our own Pleasure, and speaking our own Words; Isai. 58. 13, 14. This is the
very same Death-doctrine, and work of the Cross on the whole natural Spirit, at
best. The Obedient submitting thereto, is the keeping our foot from the Lord's
house, and turning it away from his Sabbath. Those that honor God herein, he
will put everlasting honor upon, lifting them up over the heads of all earthly
powers, humane or angelical, called the high places of the earth.

He will cause them to ride upon these high places, that have had their turns
to ride over their heads; Psalm. 66. 12. But those, that from a fond love to
their own vain life, despise the Lord's sanctuary life, shall be lightly
esteemed (1 Samuel 2. 30) yea, made vessels of dishonor, and everlasting
contempt. The Spiritual, Heavenly Original Gospel Light of Christ's Sabbath or
Sanctuary-Spirit, is the day the Lord has made, in which Saints will rejoice
and be glad, for evermore; Psa. 118. 24. This heavenly Sanctuary and Sabbath,
that is the Lords doing (his own immediate divine Workmanship, from everlasting;
Prove. 8. 22, 23.) is mavelous in our eyes. The earthly Wisdom of man, at
best, despises and wonders at this heavenly creature-wisdom of God. The
Orthodox humane builders of a first-covenant Church (which their Wisdom Judges,
asserts and warns, firm and safe, for Salvation) reject and refuse the
cornerstone of the second; and so, the whole new creation building on the rock,
the true church or house of God. Man's wisdom will not believe or receive the
words of God's, though plainly declared to it; Act. 13. 41. Abundance of
professing, wise, first-covenant Saints believe not any such thing as that
creature-Wisdom of God, in the Mediator, from everlasting, by which the Worlds
were made.

How can ye believe (says Christ to the professing Jews) who receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God, only? Joh. 5. 44. A
mercenary, self-seeking trade in the first-covenant, exceedingly indisposes,
and hinders any listening to one right word of the second. None so highly
Prejudiced and offended at the least Word of Christ's Gospel, in the second, as
the engaged ministers of Satan's, in the first. Such Gospel-Teachers are
themselves (...) or Unbelievers, as to every tittle of Christ's Gospel. No
first-coven (...) Saints ought to trust in themselves, that selfish, fleshly
life or natural state, however righteous; but, in God, that raises men from the
Dead, or out of the obedient Death of that, into his life and righteousness, in
the second; 2 Cor. 1. 9. They ought, with Paul, gladly to receive God's
Sentence of Death in themselves, or, on their Spirit, in the first, that they
may be raised into his life, in the second. And as none are to trust in
themselves in the first, so are no men there, sit to be trusted by Christ or
(...) Saints, being yet but in an unsteddy, starting Principle; Joh. 2. 23-25.
For, they know, in the alsearching Spiritual light of God, what is in man, all
men, in their highest restored Life, Light, (...), (...) (...). The best of
them is as a brier; the most upright, (...) than a thorn hedge; ( Mic. 7. 4.)
As found in enmity to God and all his Saints and Truths. Paul himself, while
but there, though eminent, breathed out slaughter against the disciples of the
Lord. What such temporary first-covenant believers came to, under Christ's own
personal ministry, when he came closs upon them, with the cross doctrine of the
second, upon all that; we find, Joh. 6. 66. A way they go: walk no more with
him: regard not him, or his doctrine. Let not the true followers of the Lamb,
whither soever he goes (not only into the Law-life of the first-covenant, but,
through the death of that, into the Gospel-life of the second, in which he
lives for evermore (Rev. 1. 18.) expect other doings, from such false,
hollow-hearted, apostatizing professors, who are presently upon the turning
point, to Satan, and drawing back to Perdition, when clossly plied and followed
with the true, full doctrine of the Gospel-Cross, on the Law-Life of nature, at
best, which they are willingly and therefore easily persuaded by the words of
Man's Wisdom, is a true Gospel-state of Salvation and Eternal Life. Such
drawers back, and those that go on to the saving of the Soul, grow daily
farther and farther asunder, more and more strange and contrary to each other,
in Thoughts, Words and Deeds. One is Marching on, with a swift Foot, toward
the Chambers of Eternal Death: The other (...) toward the Kingdom of God.
Their Bodies meet, and touch Elbows, still, in these daily increasing Distances
and Elongations of their minds, hearts, or spirits; till they find one another,
at Length, in fixed, irreconcilable distances and contrarieties of Mind, Will,
whole course, and way toward eternal life, or death. Apostat's from Gospel
Light, turn from the hot, fiery Doctrine of the Cross (when they find it touch
nature, at best, to the quick; at the very root; bringing a flaming sword upon
the very principle) into the cool shade of a worldly Church-doctrin, where
Satan's pleasing-Gospel is preached, nature (specially righteous, restored
nature) tickled and gratified with words, after its own heart. It Is the
language or thought and Desire of all natural Hearts, Prophesy to us smooth
things, Prophesy Deceits; Isai. 30. 10. We have heard enough, and too much, of
the right things of God's Seers and true Prophets. Their Doctrine is too hot for
us. We like it not. Let them that bring such strange and sad Tidings to our
Ears, sit and speak to themselves, or stools, if they will; which, indeed, may
be to near as much purpose, as to any good, such regardless hearers of
Gospel-words, have gotten. It Is a dreadful Season, in which it is rare to find
any that are in earnest about Salvation, or, at all, inquisitive after it. Who,
with the noble Bereans, search the Scriptures, about their eternal concerns?
Who regard, any more then Pagans, that Command of Christ, for seeking first or
chiefly the Kingdom and Righteousness of God ( Mat. 6. 33.) or, to lay up
Treasure for themselves, in Heaven? v. 20. Even the but Shadowy, Mystical
Laodicean Treasur's, heaped up in an earthly first-Covenant Life, are now, as
'twere, under God's Blasting and Professors negligence therein, almost in the
Dust, as Conclamated, Withered, Unregarded things. Profanes, and a regard of
(and inquisitiveness after) mere bodily concerns and Ornaments, steal away the
Heart; and, in a manner, all the time of Professors. How, too generally, are
they laying about them, wholly, to fetch in Provisions for the lowest and
basest fleshly Life and Lusts, of confounded, fallen nature, common with Brute
Beasts? But, if any, yet, are conscientious Walkers in first-Covenant
Principles, and reckon they have whereof to trust in the flesh, Holy flesh,
restored, righteous, cleansed nature; Paul, more ( Phil. 3. 4.) Christ, most.
But, Christ Crucified it in himself, and Paul rejoiced, or gloried to find him
Crucifying it in him, also ( Gal. 6. 14.) as the only way of delivering him
from that Body of Sin and Death, he before took to be a state of Eternal Life;
Romans 7. 24. 8. 2. The kindly death of nature, under the Cross, brought upon it,
in love from God (and submitted to, by Man, in Obedience to God) is the only
means and way of his deliverance from all evil, by the death of the guilty
Sinner; and of being furnished with and Possessed of all good, in God's
Gospel Spirit of everlasting righteousness, that never sin's; 1 Jo. 3. 9. All
Sabbath-keeping, and other Litteral Performances (in Man's Spirit of Enmity to
God, and his true Sabbath-Spirit, Sanctuary, and place of his rest, that he
delights in, when known, so to be) are, with their Persons, an Abomination to
God; and so, their Solemn Meeting on his Sabbath, that was his own Appointment
(what is ours?) Isai. 1. 13, 14. All their Incense, and Sacrifices (all our
Praying, Preaching, etc.) in a known Spirit of Enmity to God, are Mystical
Murder, Idolatry, Sacriledg, the highest and most criminal wickednesses, in
God's sight. Why? Hands full of Blood, a bloody mind of Persecuting Enmity,
against his Gospel Saints and Truth's, spoil's all. I Will therefore hide mine
Eyes from you, and not hear your Prayers. Ye are a Mystical, most Criminal
Sodom and Gomorrha, to me. v. 10-15. and Isai. 66. 3. Ye do all in your own
self-chosen way, after your own Heart, in your own spirit; not mine, but in
perfect contrariety thereunto. None of you hear's and answer's (...) Heavenly
Call, in true Wisdom's Words, or Preachings. I Will, therefore, not hear or
answer your Prayers and pretended Callings upon me; v. 4. If you will not hear my
cry to you; (...) not hear yours, to me; says the Lord of Hosts; Zec. 7. 13.
Is man, in Enmity to the whole Mind, Counsel, true Sabbath, and Sanctuary of
God, like to be a faithful and able Minister of his Gospel Truths? Yet, who
else is heard, or regarded? Who, but the Woman, or private, natural spirit,
that is Enmity to God, and all his right Words of Counsel and Instruction for
Eternal Life?

Be more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools. Man, in the best
wisdom, the most righteous life and activity of his own Spirit, offer's but the
sacrifice of fools, in God's judgment, however highly he esteem the sacrifice,
or himself, for it. He does not rightly know what he does, what he is, whither
he goes, whom he (...) (...) ospel things and truths, the whole Counsel of God,
the (...) and only way of salvation, the methods of God's wisdom, in order
thereunto; all the law's, ordinances, statut's and judgments of his new
creation-sanctuary, described in the nine last chapters of Ezekiel; all these
things lie quite out of his sight. How can Man (in his own best Wisdom, that is
foolishness to God's; in his own Spirit, that, at best, is enmity to God's)
perform, do any thing, or offer up any sacrifice, acceptable to God; any, but
the sacrifice of fools? These fools consider not (will not consider) that they
do evil. Stiff-necked are they, in their own self-confident understandings,
which are not only blear-eyed, and dimm-sighted, but stark blind and wholly
ignorant of all Gospel-things and truths; yet, on they will, turning their deaf
ear to (or, setting their mouth against the heavens; Ps. 73. 9.) all heavenly,
Gospel-doctrin and instruction. They Will listen to nothing that may induce them
to consider the great mischief they are doing to themselves and others, by
preaching, promising, and warranting peace with God, in a spirit of direct
enmity to him ( Ezekiel. 13. 6. 10.) and decrying, might and main, that which is
the only way of salvation (and the only spirit, in which any can be saved) with
all the words thereof. This desperate work are these blind leaders, with their
self-confident followers, at; all, reckoning they are doing very pleasing and
acceptable service to God; Act. 26. 9. Having nothing of Christ's very
Gospel Spirit, or doctrine, in their Church, do they, with great indignation and
scorn cast all that are wholly for the very Christ, and his very Gospel, out of
their church ( Isai. 66. 5. Ps. 50. 20) yes, and out of the world too, when
they can, as not fit to live any longer, in it; Act. 22. 22. All this, do these
Gospel-Wolvs in Sheep's Clothing, reckon, to be a doing God service ( Jo. 16.
2.) in a (blind) zeal for him, and his law, against every word of his Gospel (
Romans 10. 2, 3) for the first-covenant life of the law, in their own restored
spirit of nature, against the second-covenant life of the Gospel, in his own
spirit of grace. So, think they do God service, when they join with the Devil,
to do despite to the spirit, of grace ( Heb. 10. 29) casting all the words
thereof, behind their backs, and all contempt they can, on all such words, and
all the speakers and right hearers of them, as the worst of blasphemies, and
blasphemers. What was Readiness Sin in letter and mystery too, is their's in
mystery. They must be brought to acknowledge, with Saul, that what the wisdom of
God (and the words or commands thereof) require to be destroyed; their foolish
wisdom, in the words thereof, preaches, keeps up, and warrants current, for
salvation. The Spirit of nature in Man (recovered and restored, by Christ, out
of the fall, into the life, wisdom, and ruling power thereof, over all
inferior, sensual, brutish power of life and operation, in him) amounts to no
more, in mystery and truth, then the Amalekite King, Agag, and best of the
cattle. The refuse of the cattle, the vile affections, the disorderly and
unruly lusts of the corrupt state of nature, they have subdued (yet not fully)
but, the King, and best of the Cattle (the rational and sensual powers,
reduced, to good order, in the ruling authority of the former, and due
subjection of the latter) these, they judge fit to be spared. And what are
these, both king and subjects? All, but still the Amalekite spirit of nature;
and Man, therein, the direct enemy of God, and all his Gospel-Saints and
truths. Was not Paul, in and with all these, fighting against God, when he
thought his had bin fighting for him? With Saul, will all such self-confident
justifiers of themselves, be condemned out of their own mouth; even amid'st
their self-justifying plea, against the Lord's and his true spiritual Prophet's
charge, drawn up against them; as Samuel's, against Saul. They Will be found
partial in God's Law. The refuse things, the vile affections of their polluted
nature, they are content, should be subdued, in obedience to it. But, the
choicer things thereof, nature at best, in the Glory, Wisdom and righteousness
thereof; that all this must go up, in sacrifice, by a just and holy death to
God (being an unholy life, or state of enmity to God, however, in a sense,
holy, as cleansed from filth of flesh) though convinced, God's Wisdom requir's
this, also, do they, with Saul, under a self-condemning light, refuse to obey,
etc. and yet stoutly assert, with him, that they have obeyed the voice of the
Lord. All this, find we, 1 Samuel 15. 18-23. This get men by setting up their own
Wisdom and Spirit, as judge or interpreter of the Oracles, dictat's, or words of
God's, in a known contrariety to the spiritual meaning and intendment of all.
In their restored, righteous, inlight'ned nature, that is God's required
Gospel-sacrifice (sigured out by all clean law-sacrifices in the old Testament)
do they, presumptuously, with Saul and King (...), intrude or thrust themselves
into the priests office, 1 Samuel 13. 8-14. 2 Chronicles. 26. 16-21. In their own
Foolish Wisdom, and Spirit of Enmity to God and all the Words of his Wisdom, do
they pretend to the Office of Christ's Priestly Gospel Spirit of Infallible
Truth and Everlasting Righteousness, as the only true declarers of the Will and
Words of God, that rightly take not his meaning in any of his Words, nor ever
can understand them.

This Presumptuous course, persisted and fixed in, will render the contagious
over-spreading Leprosy, the Sin of Enmity to God, filth of Spirit (that is no
otherwise curable, then by the complete and full death of nature) absolutely
incurable, and mortal; as the case was with the Litteral Leprosy on Uzzia's
Body, to his dying day; though said, for a season, to have done that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, in his long Reign of two and fifty Years; 2
King. 15. 2, 3. The true Priestly Gospel Spirit of Christ, offered up our
nature in himself, at best, in Sacrifice to God. When Samuel Reproved Saul, for
Sacrificing; his answer was; The Philistines were ready to come upon me, to
Gilgal, and I had not made Supplication to the Lord; so, I forced my self, and
Offered a Burnt-Offring. These (...) Pleas and Apologies of nature, go for
nothing, when thoroughly searched by the Spirit of Christ, in his seers. Thou
have done foolishly, says Samuel, and shall lose thy Kingdom, Life and all,
for it, by those Philistin's, through the fear of whom, thou did Offer this
Sacrifice of Fools. And, what befell Adam and all his Posterity, with King
Uzziah, for Presumptuously setting or keeping up his Law-State (or changable
first-Covenant righteous Life of his own nature, as therein the fit Priest, to
perform all well-pleasing active obedience to God) in Preference and Opposition
to the Gospel Spirit, presented and offered to him, in the Tree of Life,
wherein alone it is possible to please God, and do all things well, without any
possibility of failer or Miscarriage? What came of this willful mistake and
Heresy of Adam? A Universal Leprosy, and contagious Disease (of Sin and Enmity
to God, and death in such Sin) upon all mankind; Romans 5. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 22. The
very sin, by which Adam brought this sore Mystical Leprosy, upon the spirit of
humane nature, in all mankind, in the beginning of this World, do many
Professors in the ending of it, reckon, had bin his duty; even, to keep up the
righteous life he was created in, from death and loss. This is directly
contrary to God's Command to first and second Adam, which the first Rebelled
against, and second obeyed; Jo. 10. 18. What was offered Adam, in the Tree of
Life? Nothing? All things; the one thing necessary, comprehending all things
conducible to man's true blessedness. Nor Man nor Angel had this Life, in their
first-Creationmake and State. What they (both and all) had, was not Eternal
Life; but a Mortal, Perishing Vanity; a fading Flower. It Is Eternal Life, says
Satan, ye shall not die at all. Hold fast your own.

He had Rebelliously so done, in his Angelical nature, which turned that which
was but changably good, into unchangable evil; a mutably good Angel, the work
of God's hand, into an incorrigibly wicked Devil, the work of Satan's own hand,
which he would also bring all Men and Angels to, if possible, in a fixed,
unchangable Enmity to their Maker. The setting up ourselves in a righteous
first-Covenant Life, aganst God and the Spirit of the second, is the highest
sort of Rebellion, as the Sin of Witchcraft; such Stubbornes as is, indeed,
the highest and most criminal Idolatry; 1 Samuel 15. 23. Paul found the
Corinthian and Galatian Professors of the Gospel, in danger of this most
criminal Witchcraft, to wit, of being beguiled by the Old Serpent, as Eve
(...) (2 Cor. 11. 2, 3.) and fetched back again, from Christ's unchangably Holy
Gospel Spirit of Life (exhibited to, convincingly showed and offered them, in
his Ministry) to a confident taking up in their own changably Holy Flesh, or
natural Law-Spirit of Enmity and death, for Salvation. This, after they had
begun in the Spirit, running well, for a season, in obedience to Gospel Light;
Gal. 3. 1-3. and 5. 7, 8. Who hindered you, or, did drive you back, that ye
should not obey Christ's Gospel Spirit of Truth? Who, but the Devil? We find in
both Old and New- Testament-Saul, that the confident resting in a
first-Covenant-Life, for Salvation, renders Men mortal haters of all the right
words of the second, and fierce Persecuters of all that bring such unwelcome
Tidings to their Ears, as the Doctrine of the Cross seems to the Wisdom of
righteous Man, though indeed the only Words or Doctrine, whereby any can be
saved; the Power of God, unto Salvation; 1 Cor. 1. 18. Saul, in the Old
Testament or First-Covenant Spirit, Persecuted David, singly and merely, as
found in the new Name and Spirit of the second, in which, he saw the Lord to be
with him; 1 Samuel 18. 12. For this very thing, was he afraid of him, and
resolved to kill him, though his Son in Law.

So, old Testament legal-spirited Saul, in the New Testament, till he became a
Gospel-spirited Paul, and preacher of the Gospel, was the fiercest opposer of
it, breathing out threatings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord,
for it; Act. 9. 1. Old Testament Readiness unpardonable, presumptuous sin against
the Holy Ghost; his unchangable murdering mind of enmity against David, for its
sake, was the great transgression, David earnestly prayed to be delivered from,
in his own person; Psalm. 19. 13. God sets up, first, that that is natural; and
afterward, that that is spiritual, in the Saint. All that stick fast in the
natural state and life of man, are against the spiritual state and life of God.
Those are figured by the Elder; these, by the younger brother; in Cain and
Abel, (...) and Isaac, Jacob and Esau. He that is born after the flesh (by the
knowledge of Christ, after the flesh, as a mystical parent and bridegroom to
him, in a restored, fruitful, first-covenant righteous life) persecut's him
that is born of the same Christ, after the spirit, in the second; and so,
brought forth in (or raised up into) that life, into which Christ himself is
risen from the dead; Romans 7. 1-4. Thus, was it alway's. And, so is it, now;
Gal. 4. 29. These two births in Christ; the former, making men wise, strong,
and honorable in the first covenant; the latter, wise, strong, and honorable in
the second, we find; Jo. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 48. 10. The rich, full, first-covenant
Corinthians, reigning as Kings, there, were the former; to whom, Paul, in the
latter, seemed a fool, weak, and despicable. But Paul, in the latter, knew them
to be fools, weak, and despicable, in all the Wisdom, strength, and fading
Glory of the former. Paul himself had experienced both, in an eminency; had
been eminent, in holy flesh, and, therein, the eminent'st Ring-leading
Persecuter of them that were born of Christ's Holy Gospel Spirit. And, when
Eminent in Christ's Gospel Spirit, was he persecuted by those that were fixed,
or unfix'd (as himself, before Gospel-conversion, Act. 9. 1.) In Holy flesh,
enemies of the Gospel, and Cross of Christ. Even those that will prove true
Saints, while but in the first-covenant, persecute the second, and consider
not, or think they do evil; but indeed, good and acceptable Service to God;
Joh. 16. 2. Act. 26. 9. Solomon's advice to them, here, is, that they be more
ready to hear the voice of the Spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints, then to
speak in their own; to hear the words of the true public new creation manly
Spirit of Grace, in the second Adam and his Spiritual descendants or posterity,
then to speak in their own private, changable, womanish Spirit of nature, or
the first Adam.

We should be swift to hear the true spiritual shepherd's voice, rather then
forward (or, at all) to speak in the highest Wisdom of our own Spirit, that is
the stranger, and indeed, the very woman, Christ prohibits any speaking at all,
in his true Gospel Church. Paul, on Christ's manly, astonishing voice from
heaven to him, turned from his own womanish understanding, conferred not with
flesh and blood; nature, at best, in himself or others; Gal. 1. 16. None more
prejudiced against, or more unfit to hear Christ's Gospel-Doctrin, in the
Church on the Rock, then the self-confident Speakers and Preachers of Satan's,
in the House upon the Sand. Satan's false Prophets and Ministers, that see
Vanity, and divine Lies, are most unfit of all Men, to be so much as Members in
the Gospel Church of Christ, the Assembly of his People; Ezekiel. 13. 9.

V. II. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter
any thing before God: for, God is in heaven; and thou, upon earth: therefore,
let thy words be few.
In this farther advice, Solomon confirm's (and open's his meaning, in) the
former. The mouth, we are not to be rash with (nor suffer our heart to utter
any thing before God, by) is the mystical mouth, or tongue of the natural
Spirit, Comprehensively signifying all its variety of expressing it self, in
outward action and a sound of words, as also the inward agitation of mind, in
thought and desire. The latter is called by Philosophers, (...), the thought or
inward word of the mind or spirit of Man, within himself; the other, (...), the
outward expression of it, to other Men. The Mystical Tongue of the natural
spirit (in this comprehensive sense of the Word, Mouth, or Tongue, we are not
to be rash with, nor hasty to utter any thing (or word) before God, by) is
abundantly more untamable, and unreclaimable, in its exorbitances, then the
figurative, Litteral Tongue. And, of this mystical extent and significancy,
abovesaid, is Tongue to be understood, Jam. 3. 8. The Tongue can no Man tame,
it is an unruly evil, full of deadly Poison. (...) kind of Beasts, (...),
Fishes, and Serpents or Creeping things, in Air, Earth, and Water, have bin
tamed by Man. But, the Tongue (his own Spirit, in the unruly Life, Motion, and
Various (...) of it) can no Man tame. This is beyond Man's Power or Skill. And,
more so, when beside all the Evil and Enmity to God, found in its fallen
earthly state of nature (and fiery Zeal (of love to, and) for the defense of
its own Life, Will, and Way; Specially, when restored, and cleansed from filth
of flesh) it is also, set on fire of Hell. This may seem to import its being
brought, by Satan's farther workman-ship, into a fixed state of Flaming Zeal
and Love, for, and to it self, with him, in unchangable Enmity to God and his
Spirit of Grace. This full account of the Tongue (the same with the Mouth,
here) have we, with the Litteral Figure, that little Member that boasts great
things; and, with its little fire, or heat, in the beginning of a contention,
kindles a great matter, increases into a huge flame, and tumult, so as
frequently to bring two persons or more (before, in Union) into a final
separation, and an irreconcilable parting-blow, to their dying Hours. Thus is
the Tongue (in Letter and Mystery, put together) a fire, a World of Iniquity,
defiling the whole Body, or Man, and setting on fire the course of nature; and
all this, beyond Retrieve or Remedy, when it is once set on fire of Hell. Any
Man then, that is reduced by the Cross of Christ, the only effectual and
powerful Bit, Bridle, and Helm, for ruling or bringing about his natural spirit
(more untamable, and unreducible to order, then any wild Horse, Mule ( Psalm.
32. 9.) or other Beast; more ungovernable then a Ship, in a Storm, or other
dangers) into due order, peace, quietness, and right demeanor toward God and
Man; any, or every such Man is a perfect Man, not offending in Word, but able
(on all accounts) to bridle and order his whole Body, or Man. All this, have
we; Jam. 3. 2-8. In many things, we offend all, says that Apostle; that is,
the natural Spirit, in its own will, course, and way (at best, worst, (...) any
intermediate condition) is a continual Offender, without any intermission, in
principle and all manner of operation or motion, desire, thought, word, or
action. The very Spirit it self is a Root of Bitterness, bearing Gall,
Wormwood, Briars and Thorns, in Enmity and Rebellion against God. Yea, in the
very awak'ned Spiritual Saint ((...) perfectly Crucified and Slain, Dead and
Buried in the mystical Grave of Christ) it is a continual contrary-minded
Warrier and Fighter against God, and the Saint's own spiritual mind; Gal. 5.
17. Romans 7. 22, 23. Thus have we, by Solomon, Paul, and James, a sad, strange,
but true description or Character of the temper and condition of the Spirit of
Man, within the compass of nature, or in the Sphere of its own activity,
corrupt or righteous. It (...) in wickedness, or in the wicked one; 1 Jo. 5.
19. Satan has a twofold party, in mankind, the corrupt, Profane Heathen; and a
mistaking righteous, Professing first-(...) People. Both are against Christ's
little Flock, Spiritual Saints, a third party in this World, (...) in Heaven.
We find the mention of all three; Psalm. 2. and Rev. 12. 12. Inhabitants of
Earth and Sea, a mystical earthly Jerusalem party of Professors, in all Ages;
and a prosane party (foaming out their own shame, casting up Mire and Dirt, as
a mystical (...) Sea) these are, all of them, against the dwellers in Heaven,
that have their Conversation (...) Heaven, affections fixed on things above.
Another wonder. Of Satan's two parties in the World, Professors, in
first-covenant Holiness, as gained by him, and made his Synagogue, in a fixed
Enmity to the Gospel, prove, all along, his most serviceable Instruments (as
the righteous Scribes and Pharisees, against Christ, and his whole
Gospel Ministry) his choicest Subjects; the strongest, frontier Garrisons in
his whole worldly Dominion, or Universal Monarchy; before, and all along the
four Universal Humane Monarchies, with the Roman or last whereof, his also is
to be Perioded. They are the signal with-standers of Gospel Light, and of all
Christ's true Gospel-Witnesses, in all times, whose Testimony is Tormenting to
all that dwell upon the Earth, or take up, with confidence, in but earthly,
restored natural Principles, for Salvation. These false Apostles, Messengers,
or Emissaries of Satan, that so generally amuse Men with his accursed other
Gospel, for Christ's true and blessed one, are his most useful Engineers, to
keep off the true Gospel and Preachers thereof, in the whole World. Why? What
if Christ's Messengers or Ambassadors should have a hearing? Why, they are the
only dangerous Invaders of Satan's Universal worldly Monarchy; discoverers of
all the intriqu's, wiles, and most subtle devices, by which he (...) on his
whole Mystery of Iniquity, manages all his affairs, for the maintaining his
ground, against any Encroachments, or Dawnings of the Kingdom or Spirit of
Christ. So long as he can keep out Christ's Gospel (as the most formidable
Blasphemy and Heresy, in the World) and make his Law-Gospel pass current with
the generallity of Professors, he reckon's himself well; and his matters, at a
very good pass. And, if he have thus prevailed wonderfully, all along this
World, even in the very day of Christ's and his Apostles Ministry, what is to be
expected in this latter day, the worst of times? He has alway's, in a manner,
engaged magistratical Humane Powers (as under his influence and steerage) on
his Gospel's-side, to assist against Christ's; help first-Covenant Brethren,
against the second; a worldly Church against a heavenly; Hypocritical Sinners
in Zion, against true Spiritual Zion-Saints, in their Controversies with them;
the Orthodox Doctrine of Man's Wisdom, on natur's behalf, against the (...), and
Gospel of Christ, as the common enemy of nature, in them all. Though these two
earthen Pot-sherds, a corrupt and righteous party, do sometimes dash one
another in pieces, they still find it their joint interest, to piece up again,
and lay their heads together, to consult at one Table, against the true Saints
of the most high. Righteous Law-Saul, that siercely fought Satan's Battle,
against the Lord and his Saints; when everlastingly righteous Gospel- Paul, he
became the most dangerous enemy to, and disturber of the peace of his worldly
Territories, or Universal Province, in the whole World. For, then he could
discover all his wiles, and Cabinet-Counsels; as Elisha, the King of Syria's.
And yet, the natural spirit, with its Mouth, Tongue, and whole expression,
inward or outward (in thought, desire, word, and deed, as to its own remainder
of Life, in its own activity, will, and way) was still on Satan's side; the
Belial-party, even in Paul; the Unbeliever, as to Gospel; the continually
guilty Sinner, the Fighter against God and his own true interest; To. 7. Gal.
5. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 11. But, it was weakn'd and battered by the Cross, he having
gladly received the sentence of death, upon it, within him; and rejoicing to
find death-work going on, a-main, upon it; yea, joining with Christ, in his
spiritual mind, to Crucify his fleshly, with the affections and lusts thereof;
Gal. 5. (...). This Belial-party, in the very Saint (2 Cor. 6. 15.) his natural
Spirit, or fleshly mind, not fully Crucified, is that Tongue, that is (...) to
be set on fire, by the influence of the Devil, and to be kindled or awakened
up, into strong, hot, fleshly desires and lusts, after his perishing Meats, or
worldly desireables. Whence else, could Solomon himself, after God's answer to
his pleasing request for true Wisdom (Spiritual and Heavenly) have bin fetched
back, and hurried, many Years after, into such a World of gross Uncleanness
and Idolatries? The natural spirit, in its own unsubdued motions and way's,
defiles even Saints themselves; and this is figured by the Tongue, a little
Member of the Body, but an unruly one, as used by the unruly Spirit and will of
Man. It Is a raging and enraged Expresser and Provoker of unruly Passions in our
selves and others. Whatever may be done with the Litteral, the Mystical Tongue
of Man's Spirit, can no Man tame, by any Curbing-Bit or Bridle, any device, or
means, to be found in the first-Creation World, or, nature. Yea, this Tongue
waxes more unruly, raging mad and blasphemous (of all things, against all
saving Gospel Truths) even in the flourish of Legal-Christianity, form of
Godliness, righteousness of Man, or Holy Flesh; Act. 26. 11. If no Man,
nothing, in first-Creation nature, can curb and tame this Mystical unruly
Tongue, it is implied, this can be effectually done, only by God himself, or his
appointed all-searching, all-powerful Spirit, Cross, or Spiritual Gospel-Sword
and Fire, Slaying and Offering up the Life of nature that is Enmity to God, in
Sacrifice, by Death, unto God. The obedient death of a Spirit, a Life, a State
of Enmity to God, is acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ, the High Priest,
Slayer, Offerer up, and Presenter thereof, unto God most high. The Cross of
Christ, is the Yoke, the Bit, the Bridle, put upon it, for like reason, as
Yokes and Bridles, on unruly Beasts, to make them obey their Masters and
Riders. The natural Spirit in the Saint, though cleansed and righteous, is,
since the fall, found in Enmity to God, and Union with World and Devil. So Paul
sound it; To. 7. Nature (corrupt or righteous) World, and Devil; or, the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil are all of a Knot, in a united interest against God,
Christ, all Gospel-Saints and Truths.

This unruly beast, in the Saint, greatly need's a taming-bit and bridle, to
fetch it about, and teach it obedience to Christ, its divine and Spiritual Lord
and Master. The demolishing, death-work of the cross, upon it, can only do
this. Satan was riding this mystical beast, the natural or legal Spirit in
Paul, toward Damascus, against the Gospel. Christ meets him, throw's off that
rider (for ever, and not only for a season, as from Balaam) strikes down the
beast, flat to the earth; the earthly, natural Spirit, as well as litteral body
of Paul. The latter was a figure of the former. Christ turned about his
understanding and heart, or will, into a full career of opposition to the
Devil's design and Kingdom. So he presently preached the Gospel, at Damascus,
whither he was coming, with full purpose and resolution, to persecute it.
Then, forthwith, the Devil and professing Jews, hunted and forced him out of
the City. But, let Satan Strike while he will, at Paul, and do his worst, in
rage, against him (whom, before he used as a serviceable instrument) when
Christ is the rider. The more deadly wounds he or his instruments do give any
thing in Paul, that can be wounded and slain, the more tame and obedient does
it grow, to his new rider and true master. Christ will render the most
malicious practices of all enemies against Paul (or any, in like case)
conducible to the bringing him to his own hand, which is the Saint's true good,
and great gain. The Wicked (Angels or men) that are his Sword, are used by
Christ as whipp's and scourges, to tame the unruly tongue, natural Spirit, or
rebellious fleshly mind in the Saint, that warr's against his Spirit, in
himself and Saints. The said wicked are (as 'twere) ridden also, or overruled
by Christ, the Saint's new rider ( Psalm. 17. 13, 14) used, as his Sword and
hand, to carry on his cross-work on what is to die in the Saint, the said
unrulytongue. The whole knot of evil angels and men, can do nothing to, or
against his Saints, but what is exactly conducible to their good, at every turn,
in every point. All Is on the right wheel, still, come what will or can, under
Christ's conduct, for the Saint's advantage. The due consideration of this,
will cause Saints to rejoice, with Paul, in the greatest tribulations (and
triumph over all enemies, amidst the thickest troop's of them, round about
them) having a fixed eye upon the glory that follows, which exeell's and
remain's, for ever. In stead of sinking, and growing weary under contradictions
and persecutions, he said, God forbid I should glory or rejoice in any thing,
save what is doing to me, by the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; let who will be
the instruments, for carrying on its demolishing, taming work, on my unruly
fleshly mind, and body of death. The full taming it, is the complete death of
it. The more thick, speedy and powerful death-blow's are given to it, the
better; the sooner will the happy work be done, and the Saint delivered from
his Spirit of bondage, the perpetually guilty Sinner; and so, from all evil of
sin or punishment. The natural Spirit, corrupt or righteous, is in a union of
mind, with the Devil, till this death-work of the cross upon it, be finished.
Be not, therefore, rash with thy mouth, tongue, language, or expression of thy
natural Spirit; nor let thy carnal mind or fleshly heart, that is in union with
the Devil, be hasty, forward, and consident, to utter any thing before God. Let
not that be the Speaker to Men, in Preaching; or to God, in Prayer, public or
private. It will do Satan's drudgery, carry on his designs, where or whenever
it is the speaker or actour. It will do all, in enmity to God, to his Spirit of
truth, and Saint's. Let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing (or word)
before God. This shows, Solomon mean's by mouth, in the first clause, the
expressing and doing of the will and mind of the natural heart or Spirit,
that is in enmity to God. The Saint ought to have a jealous eye over it, and
keep a continual watch against it; so as never to do the will, or fulfill the
lusts thereof; but oppose, fight against, and crucisie them. If we live and
walk in Christ's Steady Spirit of everlasting righteousness, thus we shall do;
Gal. 5. 16. and, 24, 25. All yielding Obedience to, or doing the will and lust
of the flesh, or carnal mind of enmity to God, is compliance with the Devil,
against the Gospel-will of Christ (in himself and us) and divine will of God.
The natural Spirit is the homebred traitor, wrapped up in a confederacy with
the Devil, in enmity to God; the Foe of our own House, or in our own persons,
by which, Satan seek's to mischieve and destroy us. It Is our great concern, to
watch against this foe, and keep it out of action, till perfectly abolished,
and cut off; and then, shall we never be troubled with it, more. The restored
Spirit of man, that has bin as a bosome-friend and guide, in the first-covenant
house of God (leading us out of the corrupt State of our nature, and opposing
the vile affections and lusts thereof, filth of flesh) turn's flat against the
new guide and leader, the Spirit of Christ, in himself and us, under the
conduct whereof, only, it is possible for us, to (...) into God's rest. This
familiar friend and wife, that lies in our bosom, lifts up the heel, and
turn's flat against the new governor (the Spiritual and sure guide to true
bessedness) as well as former familiar friends without doors, that remain
wholly in the first-covenant house, established by Satan in the righteousness
of man, and so, in unchangable enmity to God; Psalm. 41. 9. Trust not thy
bosome-friend, when indeed, turned into a bosom-enemy, the Foe, the worldly
disputant, the carnal-minded reasoner against, and opposer of Christ's
Gospel Spirit in us, our new guide. Confer not with her (Gal. 1. 16) Suffer her
not to Speak, or, open her mouth. And, keep the door of thy mouth, from her.
Let not the thoughts, words, prayers of thy Spiritual mind or man (that is to
seek, study, and join with Christ, to put her to death) be offered to her, in
way of conference, or treaty. For, She will be against all, to be sure. There Is
no treating with her, for peace, whose enmity to God is curable only by her
Death. She is for war, as long as one drop of mystical blood, or life is left
in her. She will fight against Spirit, to the last gasp. Trust her not, then;
Mica. 7. 5. I am for peace, says David's Spiritual Man, but if I open my mouth
to speak of peace, to my natural; that (with all the affections and lusts
thereof, that fight and war against my own soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11.) is alway's for
war; Psalm. 120. 7. The carnal mind, or natural Spirit, is the he, that hates
peace; that peace with God, which is no otherwise attainable, but by its Death;
The soul of the Spiritual Saint sojourn's in Mesech, dwells in the tents of
Kedar, with him that hates peace, the Foe of its own house, till utterly
abolished, dead and gone. v. 5, 6. If we follow our former old guide, in us,
against the lusts of our corrupted nature (when thus turned against the new and
sure Spiritual guide in us) we are so far forth, servants of sin and Satan,
Romans 6. 16. These two Spirits, natural and Spiritual, Man's and God's, first
and second-covenant principles of life, desire, thought, word, and action, in
Man (clearly stated and laid before him, in their vast differences, and
irreconcilable contrarieties (with the advantages and disadvantages of choosing
this or that, for the principle of our life and action; eternal life or death)
does not a wrong and most foolish choice, render a man undeniably and
unexcusably guilty of his own eternal ruin? Be not, then, rash with this mouth
of thy Spirit of enmity to God, nor hasty in that heart, to utter any thing
before God. For how is it possible to speak right words or things to God, or
men, in a (...) of (...) to God, whose mouth speaks all its words, in union
with the Devil? All, that after Spiritual Light and strong conviction (as to
all these things) afforded them, do still persist in speaking the words of
their hasty, forward Spirit of enmity to God (in preaching to men, or pretended
prayer to God) are abominable to God, in all. For, as their most aggravated
wickedness, madness and folly, do they deliver themselves up to the Devil, as
his sworn, bored Slaves and vassals, for ever. When, by way of death and (...),
Man's natural Spirit is transformed and baptized into a union with his
Spiritual mind or man (the Spirit of God in him) then, as a Seer of God, and
right obedient Servant to the true Prophet or Spiritual man, in him, it is a
meek, rightly tuned spirit, fitted to be a mouth, or door of utterance, for the
things of God, to his Spiritual man.

For God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth: therefore let thy words be few. God
resides or dwells in the all-searching Light of his new-'creation
Sanctuary-Spirit, that can discover the bottom intent of all hearts ( Heb. 4.
12, 13) that take up with Satan in his first-creation house or state, in
unchangable enmity to him and the second; his heavenly house or Spirit. When
thou prayest, then, enter into thy Closet, and shut thy Door (Mat. 6. 6.)
exclude thy own Earthly understanding, Mind, or Will, let them have nothing to
do, in, or with thee, in thy Prayers; keep secret from them, what thou pray'st,
and treatest about, with God, for thy Salvation. For, the Life of that, is to
be the Sacrifice, by which, to enter into the new and everlasting covenant with
God; Psalm. 50. 5. Keep the Door of thy mouth from this false bosome-Friend, and
guide. She will never consent to her own Death. And, in all true Saint's
preaching to men, and Prayer to God, is this very thing to be taught and
sought. This foe is to be excluded out of the cabinet-counsell of Christ and
the Saint, who jointly conclude the Death or utter abolition of all the Life
and motion thereof. If that therefore be admitted into our Closet of prayer,
and consulting with Christ, about it is own Death, so as to have a vote in the
case, it will pray, plead, and vote against it, alway's; and reckon Christ and
the Saints Spiritual Man, it is unreasonable enemies. It will reckon all the
prayers of the Spiritual man against it, cursing, and all his endeavors, in
union with Christ, to crucify it, murder. 'Twil cry out to the Devil, Oh!
Murder, murder; and call for assistance, against its and his enemies. All, that
it will agree to pray for, will be but an asking amiss, such things as may
gratify its own lusts, in enmity to God. It is the perpetual disputer,
wrangler, and quarreller against the only way of Salvation, under the Cross;
against its own Death, which is God's declared undispensable way, in the
appointed methods of his wisdom, for man's Salvation. This secret, faithfully
kept (according to Christ's counsel) by the Spiritual man of the Saint, from
his own natural; when the sacrificing Death-work on the natural, is over, and
finished, Christ will reward him openly (Mat. 6. 6.) at the manifestation of
the Sons of God, in the visibility of his (before) hidden Spiritual Life;
hidden (till Christ's second coming and manifestation in Spirit) in himself and
Saints. The Saint is deeply concerned to check his own hasty, rash, forward
Spirit, as a most dangerous foe, in his own house, or Person. God is in his
heavenly Spirit, thou in thy earthly, therefore let thy words be few; indeed,
none at all. If that foe be the speaker or chuser, all will go wrong. All its
prayers will run for (and be calculated to) its own interest, Life, and
livelihood; the belly and meats, the desires and desirables, that will all be
destroyed and perish. It will hate Christ the fountain of Life, and choose its
own eternal Death, in the causes of it, and ready way to it; Pro. 8. 36.

Verse. III. For, a Dream comes through the multitude of business; and a fool's
voice is known by a multitude of words.
Man, at best, in his own nature, is altogether vanity, walks in a vain show
(Heb. an Image) lead's but an Imaginary Life, in the Image of the Earthly, the
Law-Spirit of nature, shadow of the heavenly, the Gospel Spirit of Grace and
Truth. All man's concerns and labors, relating to such a Life; all his
disquietings of himself about it, must needs be in vain. The very life, to
which all relate, is very vanity. In all the noise, trouble, stir, and din, man
makes about himself, herein, can he never please God, or profit himself, as to
true blesedness. Vain are all his solicitudes in getting, heaping up, and
keeping such litteral or mystical riches of his own nature, as will all make
themselves wings and fly way, do what he can, when all is done. All such riches
are but a vanity, tossed to and fro, by them that love Death. (...) (...) but a
tumbling cast, in which men are tossed up and down, by providence, like balls
(as the Poet says) never at any certainty. Many, rich in outward, litteral
wealth, live to see all gone, and themselves run down into poverty. And so, as
to mystical; many, rich, for a season, in (...) treasures, and fruits of a
first-covenant righteous Life, roll back again with the Dog to the vomit, and
Sow to the mire of their old sins, brutish vilenesses, and so come again to be
as poor, and tattered there, as other beggarly, brutish sinners of the
Genti'l's. Yea, in a worse condition then they (if unfix'd there) because now
come to their latter end worse then that beginning, as born dead in trespasses
and sins; 2 Pet. 2. 20-22. For but these two sorts of (...) deceitful riches,
especially the mystical, do men turn their backs on Christ's true riches,
heavenly treasures, eternal Life, with the Young Man in the Gospel, not
regarding them, at all, any more then a bruit beast does. And this renders
man's whole Life and labor, in this World, from his Cradle to his Grave, a
very dream. In the multitude of his buisiness (cumbring himself as Martha, with
the many things of this World, that Satan is called Prince and God of) he
wholly neglects Mary's better choice of the one thing necessary, which
comprehends all things, relating to true blessedness, in the World to come. The
full sum of all, man labors but for some little particle of, the god of this
World offered Christ, and was refused; even all the Kingdoms of this World and
Glory of them, that is, all humane and angelical excellencies, sound in the
first creation; yea, and all these, by his transforming art, gilded over with
the nearest resemblance of all the things of God, the spiritual Life, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of God, in the second. What madness is it, for Men to trade
in, seed, and wholly dote upon, but such perishing vanities, or meats, Satan is
the known permitted Master and dispenser of? Mean while, all eternal things and
concerns, are as wholly neglected, despised, and hated; even that spirit of
Christ, that one thing (comprehending all things) necessary to salvation. This
Gospel Spirit of God, with all its words, the only right do-all and say-all, to
God's well-pleasing and Man's salvation, Man will not reckon worth his thought,
regard, looking after, or listening to. But, on he goes, in his dreamish Life
of Vanity, to try what work he can make on it, there, for true happiness, under
an absolute known impossibility of ever finding it. He sondly seeks for it, in
perishing vanities, which God reckon's things that are not; and, never (...)
things spiritual, heavenly, and (...), which God call's the only things that
are. Thus cross and contrary is the judgment, are the conceptions and words of
Man's wisdom, at best, to God's. Man will own nothing above his fading natural
things, first-creation vanities, but infinite divinity. He will not believe
there are any middle sort of things, of a spiritual everlasting righteous
new creation nature, between natural, and purely divine things. Thus, does Man
leave no room for his advance in creature-ship, above his natural
first-creation state of vanity, but only a being swallowed up, into infinite
divinity, wholly losing his creaturality, by annihilation: and so, indeed,
getting just nothing. Infinite Divinity will be where 'twas, and what it was,
from Eternity to Eternity, beyond and above all possibility of addition; and,
all Creatur's, Men and Angels, where they were, before Creation; a mere
absolute nullity, vanished Shadows.

If there be no other creature-state, but what they (both and all) received by
the first creation, what else imaginable, can become of them, but a reduction
of them all, into their primitive nothing? The towering, presumtuous thought of
being godded with God, is, at bottom, when well examined, a being downright
nothing'd; and no better. God will not only confute, but destroy all this
wisdom of man, in which he presumtuously, rambles about for happiness, in his
own will and way (against his makers known mind and counsel, about him)
pitching upon his own fading, natural creature things, in preference to, and
exclusion of God's heavenly, Spiritual Eternal creature-things, as not worthy
his regard, or minding. They deny, they decry them. They call them blasphemous
(...) (and therein do they blaspheme) devised fables only, to (...), diminish
and disparage their conceited natural things, perishing vanities, which they
reckon the only creature-things that are, in a perfect contrariety to the (...)
of God. By those very Spiritual Saints and things, man's Wisdom count's Fools
and foolishness, will God confound all their foolish-Wisdom and self-exalting
power. By these foolish Persons; and despised things, Man looks on as worse
then nothing, will God bring to naught things that (in man's Judgment) are; in
God's, not; 1 Cor. 1. 9. and v. 27, 28. who will be Judge, at last? God, and wise,
holy, first-covenant Saints, are of a directly contrary Judgment, in this great
case. Those that, with Paul, have Praise with God (are such as the Lord
commends) go for no body, worse than nothing, with them.

They that are mere dreamers, and please themselves with their dream ( Jer. 23.
25-32) or dreamish hapiness, call all Gospel Truths, a dream, (...), a delusion
of the Devil; and say to Gospel-Saints, as Joseph's brethren to him, behold
these dreamish-heirs, that pretend to the everlasting inheritance, in a Spirit
and doctrine, we hate; let us kill them all, and see what will become of them
and their dream's. Genesis 37. 18-20. They reckon their doctrine Wheat; and
Christ's, Chaff. But, he will say, what is your Chaff to my Wheat? The true
Spiritual circumcision-Saint, seems a fool, a mad Man, in the house of God,
or, to and amongst first-covenant brethren ( Hos. 9. 7, 8) yea, the filth of
the world, the offscouring of all things; 1 Cor. 4. 10. 13. 2 Cor. 10. 12.
Those, that rejoice in Christ Jesus, or in his Gospel Spirit, the Holy Ghost,
with joy unspeakable and Glorious, are despised and trampled on, by their
first-covenant brethren, whose confidence is wholly in their holy slesh, or
restored naturals. The first and second-covenant Saint, are properly the
natural and Spiritual man. The enlightened moral heathen, obedient to the
restored rational, first-covenant light, or law of nature, may be comprehended
under the title, natural man. But, the corrupt heathen, living and walking
wholly in the brutish lusts of his degenerate, fallen nature, is a beast. He
has not, what is properly, in a Scripture-sense, the life of a man, or any part
of it. That Death in Sin, threatened (and accomplished upon) Adam and all his
posterity, they delight in, rather then accept of deliverance out of it. But,
the enlightn'd, restored natural man, in the light, or also life of the
first-covenant, is of a distinct, contrary palate, desire, appetite, and
thought or judgment, from and to the Spiritual. All his regard, desire, love,
and delight, is for, after, and in worldly, perishing vanities, passant
shadows, dreams, that come from a multitude of business, that he vainly makes to
himself, about such empty, perishing nothings. So, will they themselves (even
these first-covenant kings, the mystical Princes of this world, such as (...)
Christ) come to naught, yea, worse then nothing, with all their trusted in
nothings. They Will be at a total loss, for ever, pining and starving in
everlasting poverty and nakedness, under the positive Inflictions and Burnings
of unchangable and unquenchable Wrath.

T. And a Fool's voice is known by a multitude of words; good words, fair
speeches, as the only Ministers of Christ's Gospel, deceiving the hearts of the
simple, or undiscerning; that cannot discern, or, at least, (...) own the
difference between Christ's and Satan's Gospel. All the while, are they
gratifying or serving their own palate, appetite, desire, or belly of their
natural Spirit, in the perishing Life, and with the perishing Meats, of a
first-Covenant State, as the true Salvation and blessedness of any. These
Wise-Fools, are the fiercest enemies of the very Christ, the very Gospel, of
all men. A multitude of Words and Books do they come forth, in. And, nothing
must pass for Orthodox, right or true Gospel-Doctrin, but what the wisdom of
Man, that is a flat enemy to all Christ's Gospel, sitting in its Magisterial
Chair of Infallibility, gives its ratifying nod, or Imprimatur, to. Be such,
what they will, they do and will yet pass for the only signal owners and
Trumpeters of Christ's everlasting Gospel; whereas indeed they are the most
careful shutters up of the Kingdom of Heaven, the most industrious decriers of
the very Christ, the very Gospel, or Spiritual sense of all Scripture, in the
World. This was the Pharisees case, in Christ's own time; Mat. 23. 13. The
first-covenant law-spirit or principle, fixed in enmity to the second, is the
(...)-same leaven with that of the Pharisees, under the outward dispensation of
the Gospel, as well as under the Law. They, for a pretense, made long Prayers,
compassed Sea and Land, left no means unattempted, no stone unturned, to
proselyte or fetch back any from Christ's Gospel Truth, to Satan's lie and
falsehood, his accursed other Gospel; and so, to make them twofold more the
Children of Hell then themselves, as sinning against cleerer discerning, greater
Light and Conviction, then they ever had, as to Gospel Truths. And, this done,
they Triumph, as having done God Service, in converting them from Christ's to
their (...), which Man's wisdom styles Orthodox. So, all run's smooth and fine.
(...) keep's silence, and they please themselves to imagine he is of their mind
and judgment, such a one as (...); Psalm. 50. 20, 21. But, he warn's them
beforehand, he will find a time to (...) them in pieces, so as none shall be
able to deliver them; (...). (...). And, as he (...) them, he comforts Saints,
abused by (...), with this (...), Pl. appear (...) your Joy, and they shall be
ashamed. These threat's (...) the one, and promises to the other, will be
accomplished, at one and the same time, Christ's second coming; (...). 66. 5.
If such (...) were used, to keep off people from (...) (...) himself, what may
the true Ministers of his (...), now, (...) from the like legal-spirited
Generation of (...) and Professors? The Pharisees said among themselves, (...)
(...) (...) (...) nothing? To wit, as to the gaining and keeping off the
people, from listening to his Ministry? (...), the World is (...) (...) (...);
Jo. 12. 19. Indeed, the World goes after (...) (1 Jo. 4. 5.) hear's and own's
them and their Doctrine. People, a (...) People, (...) after the Beast, admire
his Apostles, praise, reward, and follow them.

The deadly Wound, given mankind by the first Sin, being (...) in these
Teachers and (...) (by which they are recovered out of that Death in Trespasses
and Sins, they were born in) they reckon, all is their own. And, who but they?
Rev. 13. 3. With what a wry Mouth, and scornful Indignation did the Pharisees
take up theirs and the Chief Priest's Officers, who were sent to Apprehend
Christ, but did not? Never Man spoke like this Man, said the Officers. Are ye
also deceived? said the Pharisees. Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees (...) on
him? But this People that knows not the Law, are Cursed. None, but a sort of
ignorant, simple People, Women and unlearned Fishermen (So they reckoned Peter
and John, Act. 4. 13.) follow him, or regard his doctrine. At this rate, did the
signally enlight'ned ringleaders of the then only Professing People of God, in
the World, say of Christ and his Doctrine. What will convince? Are we blind
also? Said the Pharisees. Jesus said, if ye were blind, ye should have no Sin;
or would not be guilty of the unpardonable Sin, against Spiritual Light; and
so, the Holy Ghost: But ye say, we see: Therefore your Sin remain's, for ever,
upon you, that is, is unpardonable. Ye wilfully and knowingly Sin against my
Gospel Spirit of truth, the Holy Ghost; so, remain's to you nothing but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, for ever; Heb.
10. 26, 27. Ye are of your Father the Devil, Jo. 8. 44. Ye Serpents, ye
Generation of (...), how can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? Mat. 23. 33. This
is the language, on both hands, that passed between Christ and the enlight'ned
Professors and Teachers of that day. What will warn, or induce self-confidents,
to a suspicion of their rotten Principles, and Sandy Foundation? If any think
he has whereof to boast, there, Paul and other enlight'ned Pharisees of that
day, more. And, as confident was Paul, all was right with him, and he doing God
Service, in Persecuting the Gospel, as any now can be, in like case and
Principles. The case of blind Leaders and their blind followers, all of them
stark blind (or worse, wilfully blind, as shutting their eyes against, and
turning away their understandings from Christ's to Satan's Gospel) is the same
now, as then. And, the punishment of both and all, will be the same. They Will all
fall into the Ditch, the Bottomless Pit, the very Spirit of the Devil, the
unchangable enemy of God. They said of Christ, he has a Devil, and is Mad,
when convinced of his Doctrine, as the truth, they had nothing to say against,
but, in a way of railing, against a Witness for him, and against themselves, in
their own Consciences. The true followers of Christ, in all ages, have the same
lot and handling; are called Fools and Madmen, at a venture, in despite and
scorn, by those, whose own Consciences fly in their Faces, and condemn them,
for their folly and madness, therein. These are the Fools, whose Voice is known
by a multitude of Words. Brutified Sinners, at this day, Litteral Sodom, Egypt
and Babylon, destroy or make void the Law; Psalm. 119. 126. And then, a sort of
righteous mystical Sinners ( Spiritually called Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon, such
as Crucified Christ, Rev. 11. 8.) what in them lies, destroy the Gospel; make
void the Grace of God. Yet, in all this combined interest of Litteral and
Mystical Sodom, against the Gospel (and yet, clash amongst themselves, in their
practical pro and con, as to the Life righteousness, and Doctrine of the Law,
with their multitude of words, and many things, on all hands) remain's a
hopefulness, that Christ may find his seven Thousands, or seventy-times seven
thousand, amongst us, that have not wilfully, but ignorantly bowed the knee to
Baal, or followed and owned the first-Covenant-Doctrin of his Priests, and
righteousness of Man, for the Power of Godliness, the grace, and righteousness
of God, in the second.

Verse. IV. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, deferr not to pay it: For, he has
no pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have vowed.
His Father David did ( Ps. 66. 13, 14.) as required; Deuteronomy. 23. 21. 23. The Vow
and Engagement of Men, in the first-Covenant (on God's bringing them out of
Egypt, Bondage in the corrupt nature, death in Trespasses and Sins, contracted
by the first Sin of Man) is, faithfully to walk there, in suppressing the vile
affections and lusts of their degenerate nature, and to pay such Worship,
Service, and Obedience, as is performable to God, therein. So, do they live
unto God, in that state, for a season. This, do Men often fail in, and so,
break that Covenant with God, after entered into it; and forfeit all the
benefits and advantages thereof. For then, God breaks with them, the promises
of it being but conditional; Numb. 14. 34. Jer. 31. 32. Levit. 26. 15 25. Deuteronomy.
29. 30. and 31 Chapters. Man, in his first Covenant, Law-Principle (his
restored, enlight'ned spirit of nature) is alway's in danger of breaking this
Vow, Covenant, or undertake (by contract) with God. God therefore promises to
make another Covenant with them, in another Spirit, his unspeakable gift to
them; a steady, right, constant Spirit of everlasting righteousness ( Psalm. 51.
10.) the Gospel, new and everlasting Covenant-Principle of Life; Jer. 31. 31.
33. This, God engages to do, by quickening up the incorruptible Seed thereof,
into Life, motion, and prevailing activity, if they obediently submit to his
declared terms, in giving up their cleansed nature, to him, in Sacrifice, by a
holy Death. Their polluted nature was no meet sacrifice for him, neither is it
slain, but somewhat disabled only, by Law-Conversion; and, is continually
striving to fetch them back to their old Sins, with the Dog to the Vomit, often
prevailing, so as to recover its former Dominion over them, and ride in Triumph
again, with its uncontrolled vile affections and lusts. The first-Covenant,
natural, or Law-principle, failed of its duty, in the first Man, when at best;
and more liable, sure, is it, to fail, in but some gradual renewals thereof.
God therefore finds a fault, or defect in that first-Covenant-state of Life, as
to Man's steady, well-pleasing obedience to him, or true happiness to himself.
So, offers a second; Heb. 8. 6-13. This is the better (the new and everlasting)
Covenant. The Gospel Spirit of God, undertakes the performance of all obedience
in Men, when it becomes the principle of life, desire, thought and action, in
them; which can never sin, err, or miscarry; deceive, or be deceived. In this
New Covenant Spirit or Principle, God becomes their God, and they his people,
for ever. He will never depart from them, nor they, from him; Jer. 32. 38-41.
The undispensable condition, on man's part, for entering into the second
covenant with God, is the obedient giving up in Sacrifice to him, all the
fading life and things, received from his own hand, in the first. When
convinced of this twofold differing covenant-principle, with the methods of
God's Wisdom, and his requirings from them, as also with the unspeakable
advantages of quitting the first for the second, then are they bound to vow the
sacrifice of their Life in the former, and not to be slack in performing the
said vow. If we be not slack in that our part, for entering into the new or
second Covenant with God, he will not be slack concerning his promise; the
promise of the father, even the Spirit of the Son, will, by the Son, be set up
in our hearts, which is the Gospel-principle, the Apostles were commanded by
Christ, after his resurrection, to wait in their earthly-Jerusalem-state, for;
Act. 1. 4. and Luke 24. 49. Both these testimonies are given by the same hand;
Luke. Man is to part with all, called his own; his Life, Wisdom, Righteousness,
and all the things of man, in his first make; and then, God will give to him,
and set up in him, what he call's his own, by a sesecond; his Life, Wisdom,
Righteousness, the things of God. All the Life of Man's Spirit, with the free
will, and rational Powers thereof, must go, in Sacrifice to God, as our true
free will Offering and reasonable Service; Romans 12. 1. These things, clearly
seen, assented to, agreed on, and engaged for, on all hands (as to what man is
to suffer, and God to do, in order to man's being actually brought into the new
and everlasting covenant, with him) man's wilful Apostasy and flying off from
all, after, for a season, he has run well, in obedience to Gospel Light, and
suffered many things, toward the demolishing his law-life ( Gal. 5. 7. and 3.
4.) Spoils, loses, and forfeits all. Dislike to Ghrist's Gospel-life of truth,
from love to his own law-life; and so, a fixed enmity to God, and despite to
his Spirit of Grace, exclud's him all benesit of Christ's Sacrifice and
Intercession, for ever; (...). 10. 26, 27. 29. This is the unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost, or new creature Gospel Spirit of Christ. There Is no
plea, or excuse, left Man. Nothing to be looked for, by him, but the fiery
Indignation of God, to devour him, as the far sorer punishment for (...)
sinning against the Gospel Light of the Son of God, then Law-Light of the (...)
of Man.

T. For, he (...) no pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have vowed, without
delay. Deser not to pay it; that is, to perform thy part, vowed and engaged
for, by thee, in order to thy entering into the first or second Covenant with
God. For, the not paying it, will be found the greatest Folly and Madness, and
of most desperate and dangerous consequence, to thee. Hence does Solomon
farther say, by way of Information, in this case.

Verse. V. Better is it, that thou should not vow, then that thou should
vow, and not pay.
So, Deuteronomy. 23. 21-23. When thou vowest a vow unto God, thou shall not slack (or
delay) to pay it. But, if thou forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. Thou
shall perform thy free will Offering, as thou have vowed. Better not vow, then
vow and not pay. Better for men, never to have known the way of everlasting
righteousness and truth (2 Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 10. 26, 27.) then, after known, to
turn from the Holy Commandment, delivered to them. What Commandment? That,
which Christ received from his Father (and obeyed) even the yielding up our
nature, at best, in himself, to death; To. 10. 17, 18. God connives at Man, in
the day's of his ignorance and darkness, as to a Gospel-Life of everlasting
righteousness, whether in the vile state of polluted nature, dead in sin; or
moral Heathenism, in obedience to the Light or Law of rational nature; or in
the first-Covenant Believer, Professor, and Worshipper of God, under the
outward dispensation of (...) or Gospel, as Paul, when a Persecuter.

These (...) sorts of people, while wholly ignorant of Gospel, though they
reject, yea, oppose; yea, persecute it, to the death of the true Professors
thereof, it is no unpardonable Sin in them. We find this in Paul's case, who
was the highest of the three sorts of Sinners, abovementioned. He was an
injurious Blasphemer and Persecuter of Saints, for Gospel Truth; but because he
did all ignorantly, in unbelief, he obtained (...), was not an unpardonable
Sinner against the Holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit; 1 Timothy 1. 13. He soon became
more eminent in Gospel-Life and knowledge, then those he Persecuted: Yea, a
signal Teacher of them, and more abundant Labourer in the Gospel, then all the
other Apostles, who were in Christ before him. So, as, while a righteous
Law-Pharisee, if any had whereof to Glory, or trust in Holy Flesh, he more
(Phil. 3, 4) now, if any had whereof to glory in the Spirit, or
Resurrection-Life of Christ (that it is duty and absolute safety to trust in) he
more; 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. No Man is brought to an absolute Trial (till Christ,
the mystical Sun of everlasting righteousness dawn upon him, in the beaming
forth of Spiritual Light, by which to give undeniable notice of his Gospel-Life
and State, to him) for vowing or engaging the giving up the Life of his nature,
in Sacrifice to God. Neither Publican or Pharisee, the common Profane Sinner,
nor righteous first-covenant Jew or Gentile, is bound to vow, nor therefore to
perform the vow, as to that devoted thing (nature, in whatever variety of Life
or condition, will, in all, first or last, be found to be, even) devoted to
death, under the final Love or Wrath of God. Fixure in the Life of nature,
corrupt or righteous, which renders Men litteral or mystical Sodomit's, will be
found, against (at least) negative conviction and Testimony, that they ought
not so to do, being, by its own self-evidencing demonstration, a fading Flower,
a perishing Vanity. But, when Christ, by spiritual Conviction-Light, clearly
discover's (and graciously offer's) his Gospel-Life, to Men (in its own
self-evidencing excellency above their Law-Life) and, that they are bound to
give up their fading Law-Life, or natural state, in whatever condition (corrupt
or righteous) for it, then are they both bound to Vow the giving up this
devoted thing, to death; and to pay their Vow; yea, speedily, sorthwith, not be
slack; not delay, or defer the Payment. It Is better, never to have experienced
the righteousness of Man, in a renewed first-Covenant Life, then, after all,
either turn back to their old sins, in the corrupt Life of nature; or establish
themselves there, in unchangable enmity to the righteousness of God, in the
Gospel-Life of his Spirit of Grace. The sorest Punishment, for ever, in Hell;
the many (...) belong to such knowing not-doers of their Master's will. (...)
in such knowledge, and rebelling against all, will increase (...) everlasting
sorrow. Most aggravated wickednesses, will be recompensed with such aggravated
punishment and Tormont, for eever, as is meet. (...) Salvation is seen by Man,
at his door, when under the undispensable obligation to vow the death of
nature, in obedience to (...); and accordingly as he perform's or not persom's
this most deeply concerning vow, he has, or misses it. Refusing finally to vow,
or perform, when bound to both, is fixing in nature, in unchangable (...) to
God and his Spirit of Grace.

This break's all Covenant with God, first and second, the staff of (...),
comeliness ( Ezekiel. 16. 14.) or righteousness of man, in the first; and of Bands
(Zec. 11. 7-11.) or, such an unchangable band of Union, as they ought (...) to
have entered into, with God, in the second. All Is (...) and gone. They are, for
ever, excluded by God's Oath, or swearing in Wrath, they shall never enter into
his rest, in the second. And, for their unpardonable Sin, he will take from
them, all the fading beauty or goodness he had bestowed on them, in the (...).
So, all is gone. God's first-Covenant-gift, set up in unchangable enmity to his
convincingly showed and graciously offered second, is the unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost, comprehending all the most criminal Sins or
Abominations, Man can be guilty of; mystical, spiritual Adultery, idolatry,
Murder, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 15. 38. To. 2. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19-21.
The proud, reigning, (...), old first Covenant Kings, despise all these words,
to their own destruction. But, the poor of the Flock (Christ's little ones,
content to be impoverished, and run down into the barreness and death of their
own, however (...) and enlight'ned nature) understand, own, and obey all such
words of the Lord; (...). 11. 11. They are willing to be made Fools, weak, and
despicable, with Paul, in the (...) visage of a first-covenant State, Image of
the earthy, that they may be all glorious within, in the Image of the heavenly,
such as (...) (...) (...); (...), rich, strong, and honorable in God; in the
spiritual, Gospel-Life, (...) with Christ in God. All that finally (...) (...),
are the greatest Fools, as to their greatest, eternal concerns. All that (...),
boggle, and fly off, at the Gospel-Tydings of the Cross (and Death, thereby, to
be brought upon nature) resolving to maintain the sandy Foundation (and
untemper'd Walls of their earthly, worldly, first-Covenant Church-building) for
Salvation, are be witch'd by Satan, with their glittering Holy Flesh and things
of Man and Devil, into unchangable enmity to God's Holy Spirit, and all the
things of Christ and God.

This work, Satan is at, with first-covenant Professors, in holy (...); the
self-same, as with Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And, through God's most wise permission,
has he wonderfully prevailed, in all Ages and Generations (and not less, sure,
in this last and worst of times) to keep men short of the Grace of God; yea, to
fix them with himself in enmity to it, and so deprive them of all advantages or
benefits of both God's Covenants. Many that begin well, engage and set their
hand to God's Spiritual, mystical-Plow (the Cross of Christ, for running down
nature in them, toward the commanded Death, suffering many things that way)
their foot, in the same Gospel race of suffering, with the thorow-pac'd
resolved Gospel-Saint (that fallows the Lamb slain, whithersoever he goes,
even to the mystical Death and Grave of nature) many of these engaged Racers,
does Satan fetch back again, to himself; and sixes them with himself in first
creation-Life, and so in unchangable enmity to God, and the second; Gal 5. 7,
8. and 3. 1-4. When come to the borders of the heavenly Canaan, as Israel, of
the litteral, they hate it, and turn back to mystical, if not also litteral
Egypt, sixing in the righteous, or rolling back to the corrupt Spirit of
nature, and that as their professed Judgment, for Salvation, with Ranters.
After all high Spiritual enlightening (partaking of the Light of the holy Ghost
(and offered the Life thereof) and so tasting of that heavenly gift; the good
living word and wisdom of God; and Powers of the World to come) they Apostatize
or fall away, beyond all possibility of recovery, or renewal of them again,
unto repentance; Heb. 6. 4-6. The high Priest's, among the Jews, offered
litteral Sacrifices: Christ, the true high Priest comes to Preach Death to
nature, in their very Persons, as the true Gospel Sacrifice, they ought
obediently to give him, to offer up in the fire of his Eternal Spirit, as he
offered our nature at best, in himself, to God most high. For this, they
blasphemed, and crucified him. The fixed Shadowy Law-Priest's and their blind
followers, abhor the true Gospel-Priest, with all his Spiritual Seers and
Doctrine. Many shuffling devices and inventions, Devils Suggest and men find,
to shift off the Cross of Christ, wave all the unpleasing words or doctrine
thereof, which indeed is the only way to, and Door of entrance for any, into
the Kingdom of God. Through a fellowship with their Lord, in sorrows,
sufferings, and manifold tribulations, of and to their natural man, inward and
outward, do true Saints enter, with him, into his everlasting joy. All others
must lie down in everlasting Sorrow, eating the fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices, under final wrath. Had they owned God's reproofs
(given by the mouth of true Wisdom, his living word, to them, even the reproofs
of Death, to their nature) and followed his instructions for Life, they might
have dwelt safely, for ever; and have been quiet from all fear of evil; Prove.
1. 20-33. The Pisgah-Prospect into the new creation Life, or true Land of
promise (given to their natural understandings, by Spiritual irradiations or
Light) should have invited, moved, and drawn their wills, with cogent
arguments, to the most delightful embraces thereof, on any terms.

Man, convinced of the more excellent Gospel-Life and way (and setting hand and
foot to work, in prosecution of it, and toward attaining it) is actually under
the vow of surrendering nature, to Death. And this is upon record, in that
living cornerstone, the fountain Gospel Spirit, or living creature-Word,
Wisdom, or Book of God, in Christ's person.

This was figured by the Stone, Josua set up, under an Oak, by the sanctuary of
the Lord, that, in figure, heard the Spiritually enlightne'd Israel^^s vow,
promise, and engagement, over and over, for the true serving the Lord (in his
Spirit of truth, the principle of the new and everlasting covenant) accordingly
will witness for, or against them, as they firmly hold, or perfidiously fly
off, from the said engagement. As for me and my house, says Josua, we will
serve the Lord. So will we; answered the people, again, again, again, and again
( Jos. 24. 15. 18. 21. 24) yet, after all these good words, fair promises and
engagements, a world of them flew off, and came to worse then nothing. Christ,
the living Stone (sigur'd by that, Joshua set up) will witness against, and
deal with all such, according to their works and dealings toward him; v. 26,
27. Man must not dispute or deferr the performance of the said vow; but, with
Paul, should be forthwith obedient to the heavenly vision of the mind of God;
come roundly and readily off, with his holocaust, or whole burnt-offring of his
natural State. His eye must not pity, nor hand spare any thing in it, that God
requires to be destroyed, as Saul spared Agag, and best of the Cattle, in
letter and mystery; whereas Abram spared not his very Son Isaac, Nature at
best. Our true father Abraham, though tempted to it, by Satan, and his own
apostle Peter, spared not the true Isaac, our spotless nature in his own
person; but, offered it up, in the mystical fire of his eternal Spirit of
grace, unto God; accounting, with litteral Abram, that God was able to raise
him or it, up again, from the dead, into the everlasting righteous life of the
true Melchisedec, or sacrificing High Priest of God, and of our
Gospel-profession. Abram was a type of Christ's priestly, Gospel Spirit; Isaac,
of his natural, law-Spirit, offered up, by that Priest, in his own person. For
this obedience, God most high, blesses the said true Abram, Christ himself, in
and with the figure, promising him an innumerable multitude of Spiritual
Saints, the true seed, descendents, and posterity of the second Adam. Genesis 22.
16-18. The new covenant is a covenant of oath, by which the Lord ratifies his
mercies to all obedient enterers into it with him, for ever, by an oath; and
excludes all rebellious, wilful refusers of the terms of entering into it, with
an oath, also; Swearing in his wrath, they shall never enter into his rest;
Heb. 3. 11. 18. And ( Heb. 6. 13-18) we sind the new covenant promise to Abram,
established with an oath, and that oath it self, made or confirmed by two
immutable things, God's infinite divine, and his immutably righteous and
Glorious new creature self, or Spirit, the living word, and Eternal Wisdom of
God, in personal union with infinite divinity.

The terms of the first covenant, on Man's part, is to part with the vile
affections and lusts of the corrupt Spirit of nature: on God's, to set up the
restored righteous life thereof.

In the second, is man to give up the very righteous life, to God, in
sacrifice, as a perishing vanity, a fading flower, which was God's part to give
him, in the first; as the clean sacrifice, for entering into the second. Thus,
first, God gave Abram an Isaac, and then required the offering of him up. And
so, did Abraham, by that very thing, in mystery, enter the second, and was
justified for ever, before God; Jam. 2. 21. This gives him, and all his
Spiritual seed, complete victory over all enemies; so, as to (...) their Gates,
take away all strength and power from them; Genesis 22. 17, 18. They will, in the
(...) mighty power of (...) new creation Gospel Spirit, tread all (...) (...),
(...) (...) law-enemies, evil Angels and (...), under their (...). Nothing is
of greater advantage to the Saint, then the (...) (...) of his vow, relating,
to the new covenant, sor the (...) death of nature: nothing, of more dangerous
(...), then his deserring or delaying the performance of this vow. Nothing
gives greater advantage to the Devil, against him, then (...) delay sor
extinguishing his part in him, the natural State. The most (...), resiless,
Implacable enemy (that, in his mighty power and (...), roves up and down, as a
roaring Lion, to devour all he (...) light on) will not (...) to make his
utmost advantage of such delay. If he sind Saints lingering, and loath (with
Lot) to depart out of litteral or Mystical Sodom, or both (even the whole Life
and lust of nature, corrupt or (...)) he will labor, might and main, to turn
their lingrings, into a (...) and absolute establishment, there, and so, (...)
their hearts in them to do evil; six them with himself, there, in unchangable
enmity to God, and Death to themselves.

But, God is (...) to his Saints, and lay's hold on them, by his Angels, as on
lingering Lot, to hasten them out of both the said Sodom's; Genesis 19. 15, 16.
(...) great mercy in the Lord, and should be the earnest prayer of the Saint to
him, to hasten the execution of the guilty Sinner, the (...) party in him; and
so, his deliverance srom all evil, in enmity to God, or compliance with the
Devil. (...) uses his utmost power and skill, to cause a delay, in this case.
God gives his most saithful counsel and instruction to us, to hasten the
performance. To be sure, linger while we will, done it must be, first or last,
or we perish for ever. The sooner and speedier done, the better sor us. We
should not look on Christ, as Satan represents him, a hard Master, a bloody
Husband; but, a most faithful Creator and gracious Redeemer. What? (Suggest's
Satan to men) does Christ come with a sacrificing Knife, Fire and Sword,
speaking War and Death to a righteous Life of his own twice setting up, in vou?
first, by creation; and then, redemption? Never believe it. With God is no such
variableness or shadow of turning. He quoted Scripture, to Christ himself.
(...) unreasonable, says he, to think, God should pull down and destroy the
Work of his own hands. And, when he has thus steeled them with arguments, for
self-defence, and keeping up themselves in their own native Country, and
Father's House, the restored life of the first Adam, the image of the earthy,
as a most desirable land, or state; then falls he to work, the other way, to
bring a false and evil report on God's Country, the new creation land of
promise or state of life. This is the Far Country, the man Christ is gone
into, where he lives for evermore. This Far Country (even a heavenly, that God
engages, as his part, in the new Covenant, to bring men into, on their
obedient, speedy departure out of their own) does Satan bring an evil report,
upon. First, says he, you have but a report, a hearsay of it, you have no
certain knowledge or experience of it. And then, it is a Land that eats up the
Inhabitants thereof (as the spies, doing his errand therein, said of the
litteral, Numb. 13. 32) your destruction and very death it self, is the
propounded and declared terms, on which only ye can enter into the possession
of it. So, when brought by Christ's Spiritual Light, to the very borders of the
heavenly Canaan, by and with his evil apostles and spies (ministers of his
Gospel, that is no Gospel) are they easily persuaded and induced to start aside,
and fly off, as offended at both the promised land or life it self, they should
enter into; and also, at the loss oftheir own, with all their mystical riches
and large possessions, therein. So, in stead of speedily performing the
commanded and vowed sacrifice of their old nature, in order to enter into (and
take possession of) the said new land of promise, they peremptorily and
conclusively refuse the terms, and consult with Satan and one another, about a
return back, rather into Egypt (litteral, or mystical, corrupt or righteous
nature) and there fix and establish themselves, in their own nature, land, or
Country, in unchangable enmity to God's. This, the rebellious fleshly Israel
was at, in letter and figure. If holy flesh, a righteous natural State; and
strict, holy walking therein, will not do it for salvation, they will not be saved.
This desperate resolution is a crime of a dangerous, destructive complexion, of
an Ethiopian hiew. It Is the Leopards spot, never the spot of Gods Children,
Spiritual Saints. It Is the highest folly, imaginable. If they will never obediently
come out of their own land, the fading life of their own nature, they will never
enter his, even the life of his Spirit of Grace. If they will not suffer and die
with Christ, in the former; they will never live and reign with him, in the
latter. If they will not follow his suffering steps, they never come where he is.
They prefer the earthy life and Country of the Creature, to the heavenly life
of the Creator, Blessed for ever. The issue of (and for) this disobedience,
matters come to, is this. God will strip them of, and take from them, all the
fading good they are possessed of, in the mystical earthly Country, or land of
their own restored enlightened nature, as wilfully retained in a known
rebellion against him. The very same Mystical Sword (or New Creation Spirit of
Christ and God) will be drawn against them, in final wrath, to destroy them for
ever, which they so feared, startled at, and turned from, when offered to be
brought upon them, in love, to give them a kindly and right death-pass, into
the true land of promise. Had they willingly obeyed it, they had entered, and
eaten the good of the true land of promise. But having absolutely and
conclusively refused it, and rebelled against it, they will be devoured by the
same sword, or Spiritual cross upon them, for ever. The mouth of the Lord (the
living word of God, Christ himself) has spoken it. Isa. 1. 19, 20. Obediently
lose the fading life of nature, and enter. Rebelliously save, pity, spare your
own life, and ye lose all, for ever, in eternal death, under final wrath. This
is Christ's doctrine; Mat. 16. 25. And this, Christ presently delivered, on
Satan's contrary doctrine, by an Apostle, with the persuasive (and seeming
friendly) words of his wisdom. When he had spoken of his sufferings, Peter
rebuked him, and preached the self-same doctrine to him, the Old Serpent
preached to Eve, and by her, to Adam. Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not
be unto thee; that is, thou shall not suffer, or die, at all. This Spotless
righteous law-life, in holy flesh, is eternal life; no danger of death. The
Gospel-Riddle, uninterpretable by Man's Wisdom, is this; die must nature, or
all is lost; nature and grace too; all good, in first or second covenant,
changable or unchangable. And what succeeds? unchangable evil of sin and
punishment. The obedient death of nature, under the cross; the full, sevenfold
purifying of it in the fiery furnace thereof, from all dross, tin, and
reprobate silver, all filth of flesh and Spirit too, renders man clean every
whit; Jo. 13. 10. This delivers him for ever, from all captivities, bondages,
enemies, dangers, and death's, litteral and mystical Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon,
the life of nature, corrupt or righteous, both of which are a state of enmity
to God, and death to man, if fixed in. Thou shall never wash my feet, said
Peter; No? says Christ, then, thou will have no part in me. Oh then, not my
feet only, but hands, and head, said Peter; If feet be washed, it is enough,
says Christ, there need's no more, to make perfectly clean, every whit whole,
and spiritually sound. If the feet (the will and understanding, the two
mystical feet on which man walks, in his esteem, judgment, thought of, and
desire after things; if these) be Spiritual, Heavenly, Gospel-feet, the
discerning and desiring powers of the Gospel Spirit and principle, all will go
right. Heavenly things, never-perishing meats, will be wholly and only
esteemed, desired, and fed upon, in this bottom-principle. All will be right
a-top, in all Holy, Gospel-Conversation, when all is right at bottom. A Spirit
greater then he that is in the World, the Devil, in which it is impossible to
displease God (Sin, err, miscarry, deceive, or be deceived) must needs ever do
all things well, and man be truly blessed in the deeds thereof.

The extreme folly then of man, in not only deferring, but finally refusing to
pay his engaged, commanded vow, for giving up his whole nature, or Spirit (the
devoted thing) in sacrifice, by death, unto God, is unpardonable. And then, God
will be extreme (and that most justly) in marking all, done amiss by him, in
his self-chosen nature and life. He will call him to an account, for every
thing, done therein, from first to last. This great transgression, the
presumptuous unpardonable sin unto eternal death, will bring all other sin's at
its heels, to be answered for, as creditors come upon a man, for lesser debts,
when clapped up in prison, for a great one. And then will every Spiritual
conviction, offered men (in the day of their trial, and God's patience toward
them) be revived in them (and stare them in the face) to witness against them,
judge, and condemn them, in harmony with God himself. When man's trial is over,
and sentence of death irrevocably past upon him; God will not repent or change
from his dispensation of wrath, and man cannot repent or change from his
rebellious mind of enmity against God. Repentance will be hid from God's eyes,
and man's, on all hands. Unchangable enmity to God, lay's man under the
unchangable wrath of God; thrust's him out of all distance, as to any favor,
for ever, or benefit by Christ's sacrifice or intercession. Christ died not,
nor will intercede for the pardon of unchangable enmity to God and him. And God
will revive his formerly given Spiritual light, to testify for him, against
them, in their own consciences; the evidence whereof, can never be silenced,
extinguished, or denied by them. The irresistible testimony of it, will be a
perpetual condemner of them, and justifier of God, in his most wrathful
proceedings against them. This is the worm, never dies; witnessing the fire of
that wrath, to be undeniably just, which can never be quenched; Mark. 9. 44.
46. 48.

Verse. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to Sin; neither say thou
before the Angel (70. before God) that it was an error: wherefore should God
be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
The Spirit of man, at best, in its own life, is but flesh. The life, mind,
will, desire, thought, wisdom, righteousness, glory, all the things thereof,
are but sleshly, earthly, perishing vanities: Man, in all, altogether vanity;
is possessed of no goodness, but what is a fading flower; no beauty, no glory,
but what will be consumed and done away; Ps. 39. 5. and, 49. 14. Isa. 40. 6.
Man, in all this, is the slesh, his mouth should not cause to sin. Mouth, as
said, signifies all manner of expression of this slesh ((...) mind, or natural
Spirit) inward or outward, in desire, thought, word, or action. If the inmost
mouth, bottom desire and thought of man, be found approving of (and consenting
unto) the entering into a firm, unchangable union with the Devil (the striking
up an everlasting covenant with him) then does it cause his flesh (or natural
Spirit) to sin, unpardonably, against the Spirit of Grace, the Gospel Spirit,
or Holy Ghost, in which, convincingly showed, he ought to enter into (or
strike) a new and everlasting covenant with God. His knowing, wilful choice,
is, rather to comply with the Devil (in a fond self-destroying love to himself,
or his own life and nature) to be, by his most destructive workmanship,
Baptized into his spirit of unchangable enmity to God, then by Christ's
new creation workmanship, baptized into his Gospel Spirit of unchangable union
with God. What Is the meet recompense of such error? The same Tophet,
punishment, lake of mystical fire and brimstone (the litteral is but a Shadow
of) unquenchable wrath, fiery indignation, the vengeance of eternal fire. In
this and other variety of language, does the Holy Ghost or Spirit of truth, in
the Scriptur's of truth, clothe the joint everlasting torment and vexation of
both. For, such a covenant with the Devil, is a covenant of oath, a swearing
everlasting allegiance to him, and a taking also his oath of supreamacy, owning
him as the supreme ruler and infallible dictatour, in Church and State, in the
room of the holy ghost, or Christ in Spirit, and God most high, himself; 2
These. 2. 4. And so his bored Servants they are, for ever, whom they have sworn
to obey for ever, on all accounts; and own for their Supreme, Paramount-Ruler
and guide, so as to place themselves under his protection, wing, and conduct;
Romans 6. 16. They agree to Obey Sin and the Man of Sin, Satan, the unchangably
sinning Spirit of Eternal Darkness and Death. Can this be less then the sin
unto death, eternal death? They Will be sure of the portion, they have chosen.
They unchangably hate Christ's Gospel New Creature Spirit of everlasting
righteousness; choose and love a Spirit of unchangable enmity to it, and death
to themselves; Prove. 8. 36. Can they miss of what they love, and have chosen?
Rebellious Children are they. They take counsel; not of me says the Lord; but,
of the Devil. They cover with a covering; not of my Spirit, but the Devil's,
for their clothing and protection. They are willing to be dressed up in his
furniture and armor, to fight against God. All this, for this very end, that
they may add sin to sin; unchangable enmity to God, the unpardonable sin, to
the pardonable, changable state of enmity and death, they were born in. So,
come they to a latter end, worse than their beginning, by their own choice;
when offered a better end, then ever nature, in its beginning, at best, before
the fall, amounted to, in the the changable, spotless life thereof. They are
now, in a known, chosen confederacy with the Devil, for ever, against God,
Christ, all Gospel-Saints and truths. They have greedily drunk down the
poisoned wine of the very Spirit of the old Serpent. Their wine is the poison
of Dragons, the cruel venom of Asps; Deuteronomy. 32. 33. The poison of Asps is under
their lips; Romans 3. 13. They spit venom, breath out slaughter, against the
Saints of the most high. They are established by Satan; made men, fully after
his own heart; So, unchangable, irreconcilable, implacable enemies of all,
after God's own heart; as Saul, to David. In these two fixed states, after
God's or the Devil's own heart, will all men, in conclusion, be found, in
heaven or hell; everlasting joy, or sorrow; under the final favor, or
unquenchable wrath of God.

Neither say before the Angel, 'twas an error. This Angel is Christ, the
supreme Apostle, or Messenger of God's Covenant, the living Creature-word and
book of God, which is God ( Jo. 1. 1) So the Septuagint render it; neither say
before God, it was an error; and therefore, why should he be angry etc.? To
what porpose is it, for any to pretend ignorance (as having done all this, by a
mistake, and surprise) before this Angel, or word of God, that is of an
all-penetrating sight, so as infallibly to discern and discover the
bottom-thoughts and intents of all hearts? Heb. 4. 12, 13. He will undeniably
evidence, all this wickedness to have bin wilfully and knowingly done, against
his clear declarations of the mind of God to them, and most faithful warnings
of them, to the contrary; and of the unspeakable danger thereof. No good words,
fair speeches, plausible pretenses, whereby they have deceived their
fellow-creatur's, will signify any thing, toward their defense, or excuse,
before this infallible Angel's judgment seat. He will silence and stop every
mouth of iniquity, and fill all that have thus caused their flesh to sin,
thereby, with everlasting shame and confusion of face. Peter, in the Holy
Ghost, or that Spirit of this Angel, Christ, wherein he will judge the world,
detected the falsehood of Ananias and Saphira, and executed God's sentence of
death upon them, as having suffered Satan to fill their hearts; their
undeniable guilt; Act. 5. 1-10. Such Spots are not the Spots of God's Children.
They are never guilty of unpardonable Sins. And then, do those, guilty of such
errors, think to get any thing, by (...), why should God be angry and destroy
our works? Or, Solomon in the Spirit of God, asks them, why should God be angry
at thy voice (or mouth, that has agreed with Satan, to cause thy flesh or
whole man to sin, (...)) and so, destroy the Work of thine hands? But let this
Question be put by whom it will; the Works which have been wrought in a Spirit
of unchangable enmity to God, will be (...). If put, by the Holy Ghost, in
Solomon, it is by way of counsel, to (...) such madness in Men, whereby to
receive such a Spirit of unchangable enmity into them (for the principle of all
their Desires, Thoughts, and Works) as will most certainly expose them and all
such Works, to be burnt up and destroyed, for ever. They have done all such
wicked Works, and the leading wicked Work, to all the rest (in receiving the
Devil's Spirit of unchangable enmity, for their working Active Principle)
before the said Angel, or under his convincing Spiritual Light, and clear
discoveries of himself to them, in his Spiritual Life of Truth, wherein alone
they can be Saved. He will, at last, undeniably convince them, that they were
convinced and fairly warned of all these things, beforehand, in his gracious
exhibitings and offers of himself to them; doing all they could desire he
should do, for preventing such a self-ruining, wilful, unpardonable error.
All has been done by them, against the known commands of his Spiritual law. And
will they say, it was an error? a mistake, of mere ignorance? And so, think to
prevail with this Angel, to plead for their Pardon? Alas, Alas! He will make
them see it most Just, for him to intercede against them, as his and his
Father's incorrigible, wilful Enemies; and to say to his mighty Angels, slay
these mine Enemies before my face (Luke 19. 27.) that would not, I should Reign
over them, but the Devil. God, or this Angel, is most Justly angry at their
Voice, or Mouth, by which they have chosen (and declared their consent, for)
unchangable union with the Devil, rather then with him. And he will destroy all
the works of their Hands, that, in such union, they have done against him, in
whatever nearest resemblance of his Gospel Spirit and Truths (by the
transforming Arts and Skill of their Master-Workman) purposely to express their
utmost Malice against him, thereby.

Verse. VII. For, in the multitude of Dreams, and many Words, there are also
diverse Vanities: but, fear thou God.
This concluding Word on this subject, is a Character of the first-creation
Spirit or State, as chosen by men, in union of mind with the fallen Angels.
Solomon calls it many things and businesses, a multitude of Dreams; as v. 3. a
multitude of business, whence comes a Dream. The busy, boundless, wandering,
gadding Spirit of man, cumbers it self, as Martha, with a heap of
first-creation Vanities, that can give him no true satisfaction. All his
conceited happiness therein, is but a Dream. His many Words and Labors about
them, are but diverse Vanities, a variety of glittering nothings, things that
God says, are not; perishing, vanishing shadows. All labor of man, in his
first creation life of Vanity (all his Works, Fruits, Duties, performance, to
God or Man, therein) is Vanity. All inordinate love to, and (...) after, the
outward or inward, litteral or mystical Riches and Treasures of that State, in
the most fruitful Exercise of a first-covenant Life, is but that Love of Money,
Paul call's the Root of all (...). For, from this Love to his own Worldly Life
and Riches thereof, is man sound in direct enmity to God, and his
Gospel Spirit, and Riches, which alone can make any, truly Happy. So, all he
is, has, or does; all his Seize, Works, Fruits, Riches, Possessions,
rested in, will prove a most unhappy, destructive Dream; out of which, when he
awakes, he will find himself to have bin, all along, deceived with Imaginary
things, that have no durable reality in them. Christ convincingly shows men
this, now; and will hereafter, convince them, he has so showed it, and fairly
warned them thereby, of their danger. Let him then that Preaches up such a vain
State, with all the best things of man, therein, for happiness, tell it, but as
a Dream, not considently assert it to be a Gospel-State of Salvation, but a
Law-Dream; Jer. 23. 28. Man's Chaff, Dream, Vain Glory, Shadow, Life and Image
of the Earthy, fixed in (in unchangable enmity to God's Wheat, his Word,
Wisdom, Righteousness, durable Life, Riches, Food, and Clothing, in the Image
of the Heavenly) is certain damnation. What Is the Chaff to the Wheat? the Words
of Man's Wisdom, in his lying Spirit of divination (as to all Gospel things and
truths of God, into the Room whereof he thrusts the things of Man, and says,
the Lord says Ezekiel. 13. 6.) to the Words of my Wisdom, in my Gospel Spirit of
Truth? What are Man's Law-Dreams to my Gospel Truths? In stead of this
dangerous Trade and destructive practice, Solomon's advice is; Fear thou God.
This fearing God, and keeping his commandments, he declar's ( Eccles. 12. 13.)
to be the whole Duty of Man; the Conclusion, and sum of the whole matter, in
all Books, and Words of Right Instruction unto Life. Follow after, obey and
close with the Lord's own Counsels, Teachings, Leadings, convincing discoveries
of his mind, and Gracious Offer's of that Gospel Spirit that is in unchangable
union with his divine Spirit; and you will ever know and do his whole mind and
counsel, and Worship him in Spirit, and in Truth, to his wel-pleasing
acceptance and your Salvation. His Spirit is that Love, that is the fulfiller of
his whole Law; Romans 13. 10.

Verse. 8. If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent perverting of
Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter (Heb. will or
purpose) for he that is higher then the highest, regards; and there be higher
than they.
Here Is encouragement to right Fearers, true Believers and beloveds of God, that
have abandoned their own first-creation Life of vanity and enmity, for his
new creation Spirit of Truth and Love. In this, are they too hard for all
Enemies. For, the Almighty Divine, and irrisistibly mighty new creation Spirit
of Christ and God, are on their Side; as also, the Angels of his Power, who in
their Spiritual, new covenant Life of everlasting Righteousness and Truth,
transcendently excel, in strength, all first-creation Evil Angelical or
humane, invisible or visible Principalities and Powers, that are against the
Saints of the most high. Saints, then, are sufficiently furnished, under the
great Captain of their Salvation, to deal with, and be more then Conquerors
over all Enemies, all worldly Powers of Darkness, and Gates of Hell. Muster
they never so strong; Bluster, Storm, and Look as big as they can, Saints
Infallibly see and know where they shall have them, in conclusion, for ever;
even, under their feet, as the necks of the five Kings of Canaan were put under
the feet of Josua's Captains; Jos. 10. 24. Those Kings were a Type of all
first-Creation Powers, fixed in Opposition to the second. Spiritual Israelites
know how to demean themselves under all Oppressors, the great mystical Goliath,
the Devil, with his whole Army of Philistines, evil Angels and men. They have
so learnt Christ in their Spiritual man, which no Enemies can touch; that they
fear not them that can but kill the Body, or whole natural man, as to a
first-covenant, first-creation Life of vanity; and have no more that they can
do. They know their great Captain, Christ himself, turns all Injuries, done to
their Body, or natural man, to their great advantage, as hastening the Death of
what is to die in them; and so, completing their conformity with himself,
therein; the consequent whereof, will be a completing them in his
resurrection-Life, that is above all Enemies and Deaths. Their Way of ascending
into his all-conquering Spiritual Life, is the Death of their natural State.
They overcome by such Death of what can die, as found in a state, that can
never die, the certain result and issue of such a Holy obedient Death. This
way, the Captain of our Salvation overcame; Heb. 2. 10. And, his good and
faithful Soldiers must fight, as they have him for an example, and not look
for a final, absolute Conquest, any other Way, than he obtained it. Satan and
his Party seem to conquer, by killing the natural man or Body of Christ and
Saints; who finally conquer them all, by being so killed. They fight with
exceedingly differing Weapons; Enemies, with Weak and Carnal; Saints and their
Captain General, with Spiritual and Mighty, through God, for pulling down all
their Strong Holds, and laying them all in the Dust. Another Riddle. Enemies
fight against the Spirit of God, or Spiritual man, in Saints, but can hit or
touch only their natural, which their own Spiritual is fighting against, in
their own persons. So, though they have Perfectly contrary designs, Christ,
Saints, and all Enemies, what'ere they strike at, they all hit only flesh and
Blood, which cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, but lets or hinders the
Saint's fully entering, till it be fully destroyed. By suffering Devils and men,
seemingly to overcome him and his Saints, as bringing death on their natural
man, do Christ and they overcome them all, in their Spiritual, which is greater
then they: and which they can never touch; V. 14. 1 John 4. 4. and 5. 18.
Satan's Battles against (and seeming Conquests over) Saints ( the few that are
saved, Christ's little flock) are performed with a confused noise, and Garments
rolled in Blood. Christ's and Saints victory over them, is with burning and
fuel of Fire, by which the (...) of and by the Lord, will be the many that
perish; Isai. 9. 5. and 66. 16. Enemies kill Saint's Body's, but they will kill
their Spirits, Souls, and Bodies, for ever, in that Spirit they aimed at, to
kill, but could never touch. It will touch them, to purpose, at last. But, Who
are the Oppressors, here? What, the Oppression? Who, the Oppressed, in the
Province of this World, Satan's universal Monarchy, through a violent
perverting of Judgment and Justice? Much has been said (...) these queries, on
Verse. 1. of Chap. 4. Evil Angels and Men, are the invisible and visible
Principalities and Powers, that set themselves to oppress the Saints of the most
High ( the Poor and Needy, as to the Treasures of their inward natural Man,
their Spirit; and often, outward also) as the Signal Tormenters of such Dwellers
upon the Earth, or fixed Inhabitants of the Earthy, first-Creation State of
Nature, evil Angels and Men; disturbers of the Peace of their Joint worldly
Dominion, and tyranical Domination, therein. For, they declare all that worldly
Life and Strength, they trust in, for Happiness, to be but a Bubble, a Dream, a
fading Flower, insignificant as to true happiness; a fixed confidence, therein,
unchangable enmity to God, and certain Damnation to themselves. Can the Rulers
of this World, visible or invisible, bear such Doctrine, concerning that State,
they set up in, for Salvation? Though Devils more fully know the Truth thereof;
will men (under their strong delusions, pleasing themselves to think their sandy
Foundation'd Church-building, good, and their matters right with God, as
therein doing him service) let the true Saint's contrary, spiritual, true
Gospel-Doctrine, pass uncontrol'd, or the Preachers and Owners of such
Doctrine, unpunished? Never look for it. And, least of all, in these last, and
worst of Times; in which, the Scripture proclaim's, and warn's, this Oppression
will rise to a higher pitch, than in all former Ages of this World, under
Satan, the Prince and God, the Moloch, and Baal, or King and Lord thereof; King
of Kings, and of all the Children of Pride, all proud self-exalters, in this
World; as Christ, King of all Spiritual Kings, and meek subjected Children of
his Kingdom, in the next. Satan, the permitted God and Prince of this, when he
know's he has but a short time to Reign (his Kingdom drawing near a Period)
will more outragiously and Subtly then ever, lay about him, to hinder and
prevent the Dawnings, and commencing of Christ's; Rev. 12. 12. He will then
enrage his visible Powers in this World, against Saints, to the causing such a
time of Trouble to them, as never was, or shall be; Mat. 24. 21. As certain
Tokens of Satan's expiring Reign; and so, of the approaching of Christ's, the
Love and Practice of all sorts of Iniquity (litteral and mystical) will abound;
and of all sorts of goodness, decline and decay. By both these, will the Devil
most dext'rously serve his designs, as to all sorts of Oppression, by the
violent perverting of Judgment and Justice, toward the Poor of Christ's Flock,
stripped of all natural Power or Relief, visible or invisible. He will use a
profane Party, to destroy the common Rights and Properties of men, on civil
accounts. And he, will use first-Covenant, Law-Brethren, as by him turned into
gospel-wolv's (and yet dress'dup by him, in Sheeps-cloathing, Spiritual
appearances) to worry and hunt true Spiritual Gospel-Breth'ren, in the second,
to Death. But Saints are fore-warned of all this, as to what they are to
expect, in the worst of times; Mat. 24. 25. Joh. 16. 4. All Is by God's
permission, and under his overruling Power. They ought not therefore, to
marvel or be dismayed at the matter, or will and purpose of God, herein, which
is wholly for their Good. Be not dismayed; for, he, or they, that is (or, that
are) higher than the highest (the Holy Angels) do regard, see and take notice
of all, as Standers by and Lookers on, til fully empowered and comission'd to
come forth, in the effectual Preaching of the everlasting Gospel, to Saints;
and pouring forth the Vials of Wrath, on their Enemies. And, Christ and God,
yet unspeakably, infinitely higher than the Holy Angels, sit, as 'twere,
silent, but exactly regarding and observing the injurious demeanor of Enemies,
toward his Saints; together with Saints dutiful and quiet demeanor, under
such Injuries, and worst Occurrents.

The spiritual Gospel-life of Christ, in Elect Angels (yea and in Saints, too)
render's them as much higher then all evil first-creation Powers, Angels or
Men; as the Heavens, then the Earth. And, though the Good Angels come not
forth, in their immediately preparatory dispensation to Christ's second
coming, till peculiarly commissioned for such blessed work, in the last and
worst of times, when enemies are grown most rampant and confident; yet, mean
while (even all along this World) are they (and have they bin) sent by Christ,
as ministering spirits, keepers, and guardians to blessed Saints on earth, heirs
of salvation, surrounded with enemies, on all hands, in this scrambling,
confounded world of cunning Devils, and ignorant men; ignorant, as to all
Gospel, saving truths, abundance of them not knowing, or very little thinking
what they are doing, as even Paul once, Act. 26. 9. Luke 23. 34. Act. 13. 27.
They protected Eliah, from the king's 3 Captains and their fifties; Elisha, in
Dothan, from the Syrian Army; and Hezekiah etc. from the Assyrian Army, before
Jerusalem; as Isaiah prophesied, 2 Kings. 19. 20. 35. By the decrees of
Christ's spiritual Angelical Watchers over, and observers of all men, good and
bad (as Hesiod says) will the great Tree of all oppressing Worldly Monarchies,
be cut down, when ripe for the Sicle; Dan. 4. 17. Mat. 13. 39-42. Rev. 14. 19,
20. That Devils are not ignorant of Holy Angels Guardianship over Saints,
appears by Satan's quoting ( Psalm. 91. 11, 12) to Christ himself, Mat. 4. 6.
They keep Saints, also, as the natural man of Christ himself in flesh, from
being induced by tempting Devils (by the contrary workings of flesh and Blood
in themselves, or persecuting-work of enemies, without doors) to stumble or be
finally and unpardonably Offended at (and so, found offenders of) Christ, the
cornerstone and foundation of the new creation building on the Rock, as coming
on flesh and blood (or their natural man) with mystical fire, and a flaming
twoedged sword, to kill, slay, and offer it up, in sacrifice, to God. In the
close of this world, will they pour down the wrath of God, gradually, on the
several parts or branches of Satan's universal Empire, or worldly dominion,
till all be laid in the Dust, under Christ's, theirs, and his Saints feet; Rev.
16. Saints, waiting, in a lively hope, for this, ought to possess their Souls
in faith and patience, and not marvel or be dismayed (seeing clearly the mind,
will, purpose, and method of God's wisdom, in all) at the most daring,
presumptuous practicers of highest wickedness against God or them. They are
sure of advantage, by all they can do against them, now. And, they are sure of
having them under their feet, hereafter, for ever. What would they have, or can
they wish more, in this point? God is for them, who can be against them? They
must needs be more then conquerers. If this threefold Cord will hold
(conjunctive divine and new creature power, in Christ; the conjunctive,
personally united new creature power, in Christ and Elect Angels, and Saints
also, for their security against all worldly Powers) all is safe.

Verse. IX. Moreover, the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
served by the field.
The chief intendment of this litteral truth (which, hit upon, is properly and
truly, right interpretation) is, the fruits and products of man's nature, in
the renewed old; earthly, or first-creation state thereof, the Image of the
earthy. The profit of this, is for all; And, this is figured by the fruits,
profits, and products, of the litteral Earth, by which King and Subjects,
Rulers and Ruled, even all Mankind, are supported and maintained in their
bodily life. The fruits of the said mystical Earth, or righteous earthly Life
and state, afford a natural food and clothing to the immortal spirit, or inner
man of man, in his first-creation make and fashion of being. In this make and
life, is man to serve or obey God, as the fruits thereof serve or preserve him:
both, but for a season, till called out of this, man's own earthly life, make
and fashion of being, into God's Heavenly, which (with the fruits and meats
thereof) is everlasting. The Earthly state of man (or Angel) before the fall,
in a first-covenant law-life, was figuratively represented by the Tree of good
and evil, signifying the corruptibility thereof; and the danger, incident to
man (or Angel) by their own evil choice, and use of it. To prevent this evil,
both were strictly prohibited the feeding upon, terminating, delighting, and
establishing themselves therein, with a confidence to find true blessedness,
there, to their immortal beings. The so doing then, was rebellion against the
command of God, and turned their natures into a direct enmity to that more
excellent and durable creature-life of God, spiritual and heavenly, a
Gospel-state of everlasting righteousness and truth. And, the same miscarriage
and abuse of all, turned their earthly-state (life, or mystical field) into a
uselesness to themselves, so as to be of no true avail or profit to them: but
indeed, a prison-state of darkness and death, rendering their nature an accursed
earth, bringing forth nothing but Briars and Thorns, Gall and Wormwood, from a
root of bitterness or enmity to God. This brought the sinning Angels, on their
first sin, under an absolute unchangable Curse, and everlasting Burnings; and,
man's mystical Earth, or earthly life and state, it brought nigh unto Cursing,
as bearing Thorns and Briars, also; and, if he persist finally therein, against
all offered Grace and Mercy, his end will be also to be burned, in the same
Lake of mystical Fire and Brimstone, the unquenchable slames of God's wrath,
for evermore; Heb. 6. 8. Adam's first sin, left no profit in this mystical
field or earth of man's nature. All men, since, are born dead in trespasses and
sins. Their nature is a wast, howling, barren Wilderness, full of ravenous,
devouring wild Beasts, bestial thoughts; foolish, noisome lusts, that hurt,
wound, sink, and drown them in destruction and perdition; 1 Timothy 6. 9. The
King, or kingly, superior Angelical nature; and the subject, inferior humane
nature, by their fall, lost the right use and true profit of the mystical
earthly, first-creation field, life, or natural state. Both were brought to
feed on dust, or the perishing vanities of this World, or Worldly state, having
turned their Backs on God's never-perishing Life and Meats, figured in the Tree
of Life, and offered to them both and all. They forthwith forfeited and lost
the paradisical-state of their corruptibly perfect natural, in Subjection to
that Light that showed and offered them God's incorruptibly perfect spiritual
creature-Life, State, and Meats, which was their first habitation or state of
Innocence. Fallen Angels, as their greater punishment (for their greater and
more criminal first Sin, against higher and clearer Light than man) have the
Dust of their not only corruptible, but corrupted first-creation Field or
natural State, left them to feed on, and are permitted to use all their
Strength and advantages therein, against God and his Saints. But Man, as a
lesser punishment, was instantly deprived of all; both of the righteous Earthly
Life of his nature, and of the proper Food and clothing thereof. He is ever
since, born Naked, Dead, Helpless, and Loathsome; Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6. He has
nothing left, but a mere bestial, bodily Life, and the lowest part of the Dust
of this World, in common with Brutes, to feed upon; even the gratifying
contentments of bodily lust, only. He has nothing, proper to him as a man, left
him to feed on. But, he is pardonable, and recoverable into the righteous Life
of a Man, again, by the Redeemer. And, when actually recovered into, and set up
afresh, therein, if he, as wilfully, against conviction, abuse it again (in
sinning against, and rejecting God's more excellent new creature, Gospel-Life,
at first represented in the Tree of Life) he is gone for ever, as fallen
Angels, at first, were. Yet, is he left, for a season (after so irrecoverably
and unpardonably gone) to the self-confident exercise of his restored changable
righteous first-covenant Law-Life, and feeding on the meats and fruits thereof,
handed now to him from the Evil Angel, that is higher than he, in that fading
Life and Meats. And so, is he permitted by Christ, to have more than Heart can
Wish, (Psalm. 73. (...).) therein, to his dying hour; yea, and dye with great
(...) (...) and satisfaction, to Bystanders, that all is well with him. And,
thus goes the inferior humane Beast, into the Arms of the superior and more
subtle evil-angelical Beast of the first-creation World, whom he has taken to
be his God; Genesis 3. 1. 2 These. 2. 4. Man's second personal sinning after the
similitude of Adam's Transgression (in restored nature, against God's Spirit of
Grace, and Light thereof) brings him to the same point, with Devils, a fixure
or establishment in his own changably righteous nature, which is unchangable
enmity to God, and his everlasting righteous Gospel Spirit of Grace.

If men suspect the offe'rd serpents (...), as earthly, he will gild over his
earthly, natural excellencies, with the nearest resemblance of Christ's
Spiritual and heavenly, and then they will down for right heavenly,
never-perishing meat's, with all but, the very elect. And, he wants not for
apostles, from amongst men (transformed by him and themselves, into the likeness
of Christ's) the supreme Wolv's in sheeps clothing, to carry on his work;
making his Gospel-vanities pass for Christ's durable Gospel-riches,
everlasting life, and never-perishing meats. Thus does Satan sport himself with
those that sport themselves with his and their own deceivings. By such, makes he
his utmost batteries against the very elect, to deceive their souls; or if that
will not be, to destroy their bodies. All that have resolutely taken up with him,
to feed on dust (the perishing meats of the firstcreation) does he perfectly
deafen to the voice of all true Spiritual Charmers, Charm they never so Wisely.
Not a word of Christ's Gospel, or any of his never-perishing meats, will they
any more listen to, regard or look after, for ever, then stones. They are fixed
absolute infidels, as to all his things, truths, or doctrins. They are the
hottest, fiercest, zealous decriers of all such things, or words, in the whole
World. Paul was so, for a season, when a righteous first-covenant Saint; they,
for ever. But, to prevent man's self-destroying choice of his own selfish,
earthly, first-creation life, or righteous natural-State, with the perishing
food, ragged clothing, and fading riches thereof, in preference to Christ's
durable riches, neverperishing meats, and pure garments, clean linen, or
everlasting (...), in the second; Solomon farther declares;

Verse. X. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver: nor he
that loves abundance, with increase: this is also vanity.
The mystical silver here (that with all possible increase thereof, is vanity,
as well as the litteral figure) import's the heaped up Laodicean treasur's, in
the fruitful exercise of a first-covenant righteous life of vanity. Man, at
best, therein, is lighter then vanity, weigh's less (is worse) then nothing, in
the balance of Christ's new creation sanctuary; Psalm. 39. 5, 6. and, 62. 9.
Isa. 40. 17. He is a flat enemy to God and it; to all the heavenly life and
treasure thereof. Man's inordinate, preferring love to (and delight in) his own
righteous nature, and riches thereof, is an evil concupiscence, an evil
covetousness, destructive to his own mystical house, whole nature, or person (
Hab. 2. 9, 10) the highest, and most criminal idolatry; that love of money, in
the highest sense, that is the root of all evil, keeping up a murdering mind of
enmity against all doctrine, or persons, that come to seize and take it away,
as their unspeakable advantage, if obedient to the Cross of Christ, therein.
Man, wearies himself, tires, and sin's himself into eternal death, for very
vanity; v. 13. and Psalm. 39. 6. All, men seek and contend for, in their own
nature, will, and way, Paul found, in Gospel Light, dung and loss; Job, dust
and ashes; who both, once, thought themselves truly happy, there, in Gods sight,
as well as in their own. He that loves this mystical silver, or fading inward
riches of his own nature, shall not be satisfied with such silver, in the most
abundant increases thereof. There Is nothing in it, can truly answer the wants
of his immortal being: or, give the least degree of true happiness to him.
Nothing but new creature life, does this ( Gal. 6. 15) neither corrupt or
righteous Old-Creation life, signified by uncircumcision and circumcision,
which avail not any thing, in this case; as to eternal life.

Verse. XI. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
eyes.
Here Is the vanity of all perishing treasur's. The utmost increase of Laodicean
riches, in the most fruitful exercise of a first-creation life, or
first-covenant principle, makes but a heap of perishing vanities, when all is
done. The right parting with all, as dung, for Ghrist's heavenly treasure,
durable riches (acquirable only in his Gospel Spirit or new-covenant-principle
of everlasting righteousness) is the best, and only true improvement of all. In
this Exchange, does Man receive all the fading goodness and riches of his
law-life, with usury and great gain; even in Christ's Gospel-life, or Spirit.
Thus it is, with all thorow-followers of Christ's Counsel. Christ receives, in
this right improvement of his first-creation gifts, his own again with usury,
and man his own also, with transcendent advantage, in God's own Life, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Glory; all the everlasting things of God's Spirit of grace, for
the fading vanities, perishing next to nothings, in his own Spirit of nature;
the Life of the Creator, or new creature Spirit of Christ, the living WORD and
Wisdom of God, by which the Worlds were made. The final refusal of this chang,
is man's changing, selling, or parting with God's Gospel Spirit of Truth, for
Satan's and his own (...), his perishing vanity, his law-Spirit of nature. And
this is (...) serving, worshipping, and loving the Creature, even himself,
rather or more (yea, above and against) the Creator, who is blessed for ever.
Can such ill-chusers, expect less then to be Cursed for ever, and perish as
their own dung, that they prefer before the very Life, Righteousness, Wisdom,
and Glory of God, that is never to be done away? Paul threw away this mystical
dung, for the unsearchable divine and spiritual riches of Christ's Glorious
person; which, when he came to be a happy possessour of, he became also the
most Powerful Gospel-Preacher of; Ephesians. 3. 8. He that loves his own life, and
the riches or Mammon thereof, litteral or mystical, in preference to God's,
hates God's. Christ therefore requires the hating our own very life, at best,
in love to God's, or declar's, we cannot be his disciples; Luke 14. 26. For
thus did he. Not my will, but thine be done. Not my words, but thine be spoken;
The word's of thy Spirit, the Holy Ghost, that is in unchangable union of mind
with thy infinite divine Spirit, and, not the dictats of my natural wisdom or
understanding, the words of my Spirit. Job said, though righteous, he would not
know or own his own soul, but despise or destroy, crucify his very righteous
natural self or life, as dust and ashes, to God's: dung and loss ( Phil. 3. 7,
8) for God's; with Paul. All true Saints think, say, and do thus, first or
last. What amount all fading riches (treasured up by man, in the activity of
faulty, or defective first-covenant principle's) unto, by the most fruitful
exercise of the restored righteous life of his own nature, therein, when not
rich toward God, in his Spirit of grace, the second Covenant Gospel-Principle
of life, desire, thought, and action? Christ himself does thus resolve his own
most pertinent and concerning question, by way of instruction and warning to
men; Thou fool, that have heaped up vast perishing treasures, in thy own
enlightened, righteous nature; and art merry, confident, and at hearts-ease
therein, as if happy for many years, even for ever, as possessed of what will
never fail thee; this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, even this
righteous life of thy living soul, and then, if thou have not the everlasting
life of my quickening Spirit, and my durable riches therein, where art thou? and
whose shall all those things be, which thou have provided? none of thine, to be
sure, for ever. It Is the true Saint, only, receivs all the good of the
first-creation, transcendently advanced, in the second. All others, that
finally refuse the second, will be excluded from it, for ever; and, have all,
in the first, taken from them, too. Where are they then? They lose the riches,
laid up for the ease of their own soul, soul and all, for ever, in conclusion.
Here Is their Doom. Christ therefore denounces woe to such first-covenant rich
ones (reigning with confidence, as Kings, there, in their own righteous,
cleansed nature) as having received their consolation, their penny, the Praise
and reward of Men, in this World. They are to have no good in the next; Luke 6.
24. Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16. No entering there, for a rich Man, rich in the first
covenant life of his own nature, and confident therein, so as to reject the
true riches, of the second-covenant-life of God, in his spirit of grace, Mat.
19. 24. As to any thing of the new-creature-life and riches of God, are such,
with the Laodiceans, wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked; Rev. 3. 17.
They have nothing of that, about them. Yea, they loath, mortally hate all such
life, riches, and God most high, himself. They Will be needs Reigning as Kings, in
a Spirit, a life, Christ would not Reign in (when offered, Joh. 6. 15) Paul
could not, might not Reign in, 1 Cor. 4. 8. Such hate that Gospel Spirit,
Christ will Reign in, with all his Saints. The Rich and Full, in First-Covenant
Life and Treasur's, are confident therein, and laugh now, under the Applause,
Reward and Praise of Men, as were alway's the False Prophets; Luke 6. 24 -- 26.
How blanck will all such self-confident Laodiceans, look, that now reckon
themselves rich, full, increased with goods, and needing nothing, when forced to
find themselves in everlasting Poverty and nakedness, needing every thing,
that is ought? Litteral and mystical rich men, possessed of nothing but
perishing vanities, must needs fade away in both their ways, as the withering
grass, and falling flower thereof; Jam. 1. 11. God rejects both their false
confidences. They shall not Prosper in them; Jer. 2. 37. Amidst all the mirth
and jollity of both, are they bid howl and weep for the miseries that shall
come upon them; Jam. 5. 1. why? why, because both trust in lying vanities,
liable to rust, canker, moth-eating, thieves; in sum, to perish; yea,
infallibly certain so to do, from the intrinsic perishableness of the very
nature of them; v. 2, 3. And where are they both, then? This get they, by
listening to Satan's Man-pleasing counsel, and rejecting Christ's, who warns
men, in this great concern, to quit such, for his heavenly treasure and life,
exposed to none of these sad inconveniences; Mat. 6. 19. 20. When men heap up,
in, for, and to themselves, the said vain riches, perishing goods, so that such
goods increase, they are increased that eat them. The mystical truth of this
saying, is this. The inordinate lusts of man's boundless, rambling, roving
Spirit (from the immortality of its being) increase, as his riches increase.
So, he is never the nearer, yet, toward any full or final satisfaction. A
bottomless desire, an unsatiable appetite, growing still bigger and wider,
increasing as the heap increases (and their sinful dotage on, and love to the
heap, increasing with the heap) man grow's worse and worse, every way, as to
his case, toward God; or, any satisfaction to himself, in all such riches. The
sinful, false appetite of his immortal Spirit, after mortal riches, is the eye
that is never satisfied with seeing, or with riches; the ear, never (...) with
hearing. Ec. 1. 8. and, 4. 8. Men, after all the sad experience of man and
Angel, at first, will be trying over and over, again (generation after
generation) the self-same evil and unlawful use of first-creation vanities,
that, at first, gave, many Angels and all men, their fall. This,
notwithstanding all the faithful warnings of the Lord, also, against this
course, before and since the fall, as to the dreadful consequents thereof.
What peerless, unparalled folly, must this needs be? Yet, this course will
men steer; this way, will they take. Former Generations of professors have took
this way, followed such doctrine as has directed, and assured them of safety
therein; and their posterity, in the same first-covenant principles, now,
approve their sayings, applaud their doctrine, and follow their example; and so,
also, follow them into that state of eternal darkness and death, where they
shall never see light. Thus goes one generation after another, to the
generation of their fathers; to the same chambers of death, with them; Psalm.
49. 13. 19. They all feed on such things, only, as perish in the using; and,
will, as certainly perish, for for so feeding on them. And, mean while, before
the final stroke of wrath be upon them (to cut them off, for ever, and put a
full period to their false mirth) are they under an utter impossibility of ever
being satisfied with the greatest possible increases and heaps of such
perishing vanities. For, they Add, or afford nothing, no good to the Owners
thereof, saving the beholding of them with their Eyes. There Is no durable,
truly satisfying good in them, to man's Immortal Spirit. The mystical Stomach,
Thirst, Hunger, or Appetite and desire thereof, can never be satisfied,
quenched or answered, thereby; but, only cozened, whil'd off, and amused with
the self-pleasing entertainments of this World, in a Fools-Paradise of
vanities. The increasing vain desires, after such encreasingvain desirables,
frustrat's and deprives the Possessor, still, still, of any good or benefit by
them, save the beholding them with his Eyes, which are never satisfied with
seeing them. So is man, in a mere maze and labyrinth of self-tormenting
disquietment, in getting, heaping up, keeping, and, at last, inevitably losing
all, again; on which, he will be left in a Bed of sorrow, in Eternal Darkness,
Want, Nakedness and Death, under the inflictions of final Wrath, for such
madness and folly; of which, fairly and often warned, in his day, on Earth. All
his present joy, delight, laughter, pleasure, in seeing his heap of vanities,
is but delusive and destructive to him. All amounts but to an increase of
vanity, in desires and desirables; and what is man the better? Eccl. 6. 11. Yea,
how much still the worse? worse and worse. The true living Bread, the Waters of
(...), the never perishing Meat and Clothing, Christ's Gospel Spirit of
everlasting righteousness, brings with it, answer all man's wants, and make up
a true blessedness to him, for ever. True Saints increase with the increases of
God, in his never-perishing Life and Riches. They are Coheirs with Christ, of
God (Romans 8. 17.) feeding on (and enjoying) the very divine Glory, shining
forth upon them, in favor and love, for evermore.

Verse. XII. The sleep of a laboring Man is sweet, whether he eat little or
much: but the abundance (Arab. covetousness) of the Rich, will not suffer him
to sleep.
First, to the litteral sense. Man, in his civil Capacity and lawful Calling
in this World, diligently performing his Duty, and referring the issue and
success of his labors, to Providence (without any carking solicitud's, or
murmuring, repining thoughts, against God, when crossed in his expectations,
and disappointed of his hopes) has rest and quiet to himself, therein. Such a
one, however low in outward Riches, Solomon preferr's, as to outward worldly
Happiness, before the litteral covetous rich man, that (from excessive,
inordinate Love to such Wealth) robb's and deprives himself of all right
comfort therein. His solicitous, self-tormenting thoughtfulness, for getting
and keeping such Wealth; and then, fear of losing all, again (all which the
other is freed from) render him a very (...). His abundance of Riches fills his
Heart with abundance of trouble and disquiet (as well as his Coffers, with
Silver) which will not suffer him to rest or sleep. Through this vanity, under
the litteral first-creation Sun, Solomon saw such Riches, downright hurtful to
the Owners thereof, instead of being of any benefit or advantage to them.
Semblably, the inward Riches of man's Spirit (under the mystical first-creation
Sun; the enlightening, enlivening, fructifying influence of Christ, as a fleshly
Bridegroom, in his first-covenant Spirit, Single, upon man's nature) Laodicean
Treasures, heaped up and trusted in, and to, by man, for true Happiness,
produce the same restlesness and disquiet to him. Full of solicitud's is he, in
getting and keeping, and of Fears, about losing all, again; as the litteral
covetous rich man is. Is there not a cause for such Jealousies and Fears? All Is
but a vain show, in Holy Flesh, a first-covenant Spirit of bondage and fear,
about his known perishing vanities; refusing Christ's convincingly showed and
offered durable Riches and true Freedom, even the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, in his Gospel Spirit, or perfect Law of Liberty, to good only; and that
good, unchangable. That Is Freedom indeed; to purpose; Heb. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
Joh. 8. 32. 36. Jam. 1. 25. and 2. 12. The Truth (Christ's Gospel Spirit of
Truth) makes us Christ's true freemen, though, in letter, man's Servants; 1
Cor. 7. 22. And, the Master, that is free, in letter, if effectually called by
Christ into his heavenly Life of true freedom, is his Servant. Christ's
new covenant Law, or Gospel Spirit of Life, by its death-work on our old or
first-covenant law-Spirit of Sin, Bondage, Enmity, and Death, sets us free from
Sin and Death ( Romans 8. 2.) all vain Trouble, Bondage, and Fear. He that is so
dead, is freed from Sin (Romans 6. 7.) ceases, for ever, from it; 1 Pet. 4. 1.

Verse. XIII. There is a sore Evil, which I have seen under the Sun; namely,
Riches kept for the Owners thereof, to their hurt.
This, with the Verse before, and four following, jointly Character the folly
and misery of the litteral and mystical covetous rich Man; the former, as a
Type of the latter. One of them is filled with cares and solicitud's, about
making provision for his bodily ease; the other is as busy, about provisions
for his Soul's ease; Luke 12. 16-19. Both of them trade but in perishing
vanities. It Is but for perishing meats, that gratify the evil Lust's, the
Belly, Desire or Appetite of a mortal, perishable Life of Body and Soul, these
two sorts of foolish Laborers, Toil, and fill their Heads and Hearts, with
vain, self-tormenting cares and solicitud's. All Is but to compass and finger
the vain Delights of the Sons of men. Nothing of the never-perishing Life and
Meats of the Son of God, delights of the Sons of God, are admitted into their
regard. God is not in all, or any of their thoughts Psalm. 10. 4. Nothing of
God's, Christ's new creature Life, is sought after. They Will not come to him for
it, nor regard it, when he comes and offers it to them; Ioh. 5. 40. How often
would I have gathered you together, unto me, under my divine and
Creature-wings, in this Life, and ye would not? Mat. 23. 37. Ye are all for
your selves, your own Life; will have none of me, or mine. Then take your
course; ye shall never have mine, at all; never enter into my rest: So will be
left to your own desolate house, for ever; V. 38. The mystical rich man
delightfully contemplat's the Beauty, Fruitfulness, and Riches of his own
enlight'ned nature, and too often arrivesat this highest point of Spiritual
wickedness, as the result of his own wisdom, to strike up an
everlasting-covenant-union with the Devil. He agrees to receive, by his
transforming Hel-fire-Baptism, an advance of his own nature, out of a narrower
changably evil humane capacity, into a wider and unchangably evil angelical.
This, by suffering Satan to fill his Heart with his Spirit of unchangable
enmity to God. This is the making man's mystical House or Barns, greater (Luke
12. 18) the enlarging and heightning his natural capacity, by a kind of
mystical death (through Satan's false cross-work, or counterfeit mortification,
for the death of man's Spirit of nature) on his engagement by covenant, and
satisfying assurance, that he will raise and catch him up, out of that mystical
Grave, into his higher, wiser, stronger, more excellent and capacious angelical
nature. Thus, by bargain, does he touch man's Spirit, with the transforming,
alterative, assimilating touch of his, and translate him out of his narrower
humane, into his larger angelical capacity, of the first-creation sort. Man
rather chooses this heightning and enlargment, in his own way, and after his
own heart (in the first-creation state of nature, which renders him a man after
the Devil's own Heart, in unchangable enmity to God) then such destruction of
his fleshly nature (or whole natural state and life, at best) as leaves him no
hopes of ever finding himself in a single natural first-creation-life, more,
for ever; but, in a spiritual and heavenly, by a new creation, in the new and
everlasting covenant Gospel-principle, God's Spirit of Grace and Truth. The
assimilating, transformingwork of Christ's Spiritual Cross, or heavenly
fire-baptism upon man, would translate him (if obediently submitting thereto,
and compliant therewith) into the life of God's sacrificing Gospel High Priest
of our Profession, or of that very Spirit and fiery law of liberty (Deuteronomy. 33.
2. Jam. 1. 25) that puts his Law or lawless Spirit of bondage, enmity, and
Death, to Death; with engagement, by Covenant, to raise it into the everlasting
Life, and Glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Satan will Personate this very
high Priest of God, and God himself; 2 These. 2. 4. And, he will transform his
higher Angelical excellencies and capacity, into the likeness or nearest
possible resemblance of Christ's new creation Glories. This is the top-stone of
his mystery of iniquity; the strongest delusion, by which this most subtle old
Serpent, Dragon, and roaring Lion, deceives and devours men when and where God
permitt's, for his own most wise and holy ends. Think, what this choice of man,
under Gospel-conviction-Light, to join unchangably with the Devil, rather than
with God, deserves. In order to secure their beloved natur's head, from the
Gospel-Sword, and Fire of the Cross or Spirit of Christ, do men mount up into
superior first-creation strength, subtlety, and power, to oppose and fortify
themselves against Christ and God, that they may be delivered from the power of
evil, even from the wrath of God; Hab. 2. 9. This is man's design, in his evil
covetousness, to set his nest on high, amongst the evil angelical Rocks and
Mountains, with a vain hope, to fight and make good his ground and standing
there, against God himself. Most daring, foolish, presumptuous, self-destroying
wickedness! Thus comes the mystical House of man's swept, garnished nature, but
empty of the Gospel Spirit of Christ, that is greater than Satan (after all
cleansing from filth of flesh, and adorning with Spiritual, enlightening,
excellent Gifts) to be re-entred and repossessed by him, in a sevenfold more
dangerous manner, than before he was cast out of his changable corrupt state of
nature; that is, unchangably. This is cleans'd, righteous man's latter end,
worse than his beginning, in polluted nature, dead in trespasses (...) sins;
but, recoverable and curable, by the redeemer; Mat. 12. 43-45. In this
desperate and most deplorable condition, did Christ find and declare the
self-confident righteous. Scribs, Pharisees, and professing Jews (who asserted
themselves to be true Children of Abram; yea, and of God himself, as born of
God; Joh. 8. 39. 41.) to be of their Father the Devil, as born of him, and
walking, acting, and speaking in his very murdering, lying Spirit of
unchangable enmity to God, as the very principle of their life, desire, thought
and action; V. 44. Man's Body or natural state, given up to be burned (not in
the true Fire of that Gospel Spirit that is called Charity or Love (1 Cor. 13.
3.) but in the false Fire of Satan's Spirit of unchangable enmity to God)
profits him nothing; but indeed, becom's the highest, and utmost imaginable
disadvantage to him. It renders him a fixed Temple of the very Spirit of the
Devil; as the true Saint, of God's. This abundance of mystical first-creation
Riches, men singer, by advance into evil angelical excellencies, superior to
mere humane, will not suffer them to sleep, being for ever excluded God's Rest,
the new creation Spirit of Christ. They must lie down for ever, with their
Father, the Devil, and his Angels, under wrath, in eternal vexation of Spirit.
But, the mystical poor Labourer, that sets his hand to the Plow of the Cross,
to turn up the very Root or natural principle of all mystical first-creation
riches or fruits, will have sweet sleep, rest and peace with God, for evermore.
He cast's away, and willingly parts with all the riches, as dung (that the
other cumbers himself with) and all desires after them, or care and solicitud's
about them. Who has the better on it? the rich, Christ pronounces woe, to (Luke
6. 24.) or the poor in Spirit, whose is the Kingdom of Heaven? Mat. 5. 3. The
more speedily the fleshly Tree, with all the fruits and riches, produced in and
by it, is daily dying and withering away, under the Cross; at the farther
distance is the true Saint from the danger, the covetous rich naturalist is
involved (and in a perilous tendency toward an unalterable fixure) in, by not
submitting to God's sentence of Death upon nature at best (as Paul did, 2 Cor.
1. 9.) so, as to have it speedily executed, upon them. This exposes men to
Satan's fixing, or setting their Hearts in them, to do evil (Ec. 8. 11.) in
unchangable enmity to God, with him. So, all their heaped up riches are kept
(by, and) for the owners thereof, to their own hurt. Hurt? yes, to purpose,
their eternal ruin. He that incorrigibly loves (and dotes upon) such riches,
hates Christ and his true life and riches; so, loves Death; Prove. 8. 36. Had
the young man listened to Christ, and quitted the fading earthly life and riches
of his own nature, for his heavenly, he had found that eternal Life, he
inquired after. But, quitting Christ's faithful Command, and gracious Offer
(all, for his unspeakable advantage, if complied with) in case he finally
persisted therein, what, less than eternal Death, could befall him? Mat. 19.
16-22.

Verse. XIV. But, those riches perish by evil travel (Heb. in the evil use (or
employment) of them) and, he begets a Son, and there is nothing in his hand.
Litteral riches, got by evil travel (and, as ill used) are, by the just hand
of God, often taken away, again. Man set's himself, to build Castles in the Air,
or leave house and land to his Posterity, called after his own name; and all
comes to nothing. The Son begotten by him, and left behind him, bring's his
matters to such pass, that nothing remain's to him, or is left in his hand. As
for the deceased Father, he could carry nothing of such riches away with him.;
Psalm. 49. 17. Job. 21. 13. -21. What a dismal issue is here, of all vain
travel, relating to the outward pelf of this World? and, the same issue come
all the mystical rich man's labors, to, as has been above evidenced,
abundantly. He trades but in (a higher sort of) perishing vanities, with the
litteral. Both of them, as they came naked, in Body and Soul, into the World;
so do they march out of it, again, after a long travel, and trading in a scene
of perishing shadows; as fallows.

Verse. XV. As he came forth of his Mothers Womb, naked shall he return, to go
as he came; and, shall take nothing of his labor, which he may carry away in
his hand.
No comfort, or benefit, for ever, will remain to either of the said evil
Laborers and Abusers of litteral or mystical perishing worldly riches; Psalm.
39. 5, 6. and 49. 11-20. They carry nothing away, to stand them in any stead,
in a resurrection of damnation, for the second Child, that shall stand up in an
immortal being of Body, Soul, and Spirit, in lieu of their mortal Life of all,
in this World; Eccl. 4. 15.

Verse. XVI. And, this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go: and what profit has he that has labored for the Wind?
Man, wholly destitute of the Life, Riches, and Glory of the World to come,
labor's in Sin, Vanity, and Darkness, all along his day, in this. He has
nothing but a delusive, transient jollity in things that perish in the using.
Belly and Meats, Desires and Desirables; all, vanity. God will destroy one and
the other. All Is but a passant wind, he labors about. And all his false joy,
lead's directly to eternal sorrow, that he is to lie down in, under wrath.

Verse. XVII. All his days also he eats in darkness; and he has much sorrow,
and wrath with his sickness.
In this verse and the two former, have we a true description of man's doleful
state, after the largest possessions, litteral or mystical, that can fall to
his lot, in first-creation life. He huggs but a wind, phantome, shadow, or
self-pleasing Dream. All Is nothing; and, he comes to worse than nothing,
unspeakable misery and confusion, without the least relief, for ever, under
unquenchable wrath. Man is born in a naked condition of Body, and dead in Sin,
as to his Soul. When revived and Clothed again by Christ, as to some measure
of his restored lost Life and Righteousness, in the first-covenant; by keeping
up that, in enmity (to an everlasting Life and Righteousness, offered him by
Christ, in the second, and so, sinning after the similitude of Adam's first
transgression) he is worse than ever; his latter end worse than his beginning,
a state of unchangable, incurable evil, sorrow, nakedness, poverty, and death.
His whole man, after all possible revival, comsort, flourish, or fruitfulness
in the mortal first-covenant Life of his Spirit, or sensual Life of his Body,
goes destitute of all good or comfort, naked out of the World, as he came
into it. He takes nothing of the fading Glory of his revived Spirit (any more
than outward riches and comforts, relating to his Body) away with him, at the
death of the Body. All goes. In all points, on all accounts, he goes as he
came; stark naked; stripped of all comfort or goodness. All fruits and labors
of his Spirit and Body, go together; all vanish. They that obediently part with
all such fading Life, and but things of man, in their Spirit, before the death
of their Body, find their own again with usury, for ever, in the everlasting
Life, Wisdom, Righteousness and things of God, in the Gospel Spirit or
Principle of the new and everlasting Covenant. This is the unspeakable Gift of
God, offered all, on obedient surrender of their fading Life and things, in the
first-covenant, for his everlasting, in the second. They that refuse this
surrender (as most do) lose all good, in both Covenants, for ever; and fall
under the positive inflictions of wrath, for ever. This, for the evil use of
all their things and labors in the first, against God, and the second. When
charged for all, before the Judgment Seat of Christ, they will be found in a
silencing, self-condemning consciousness, as to all, charged with; will have
nothing to say. When their evil consciences are opened, all their mouths of
iniquity will be stopped. No disputing, pleading, apologizing, but e'ne take
their charge and sentence; and so, lie down for ever in sorrow, shame, and
confusion, under the wrath of their most righteous all-seeing Judge. Then will
they find nothing of all their evil travel, left in their hand. The wrath of
God will be upon them; and, the awak'ned spiritual convictions, afforded them,
in mercy, on earth, will be set up in them, for ever, in hell, as a never-dying,
ever-gnawing worm ( Mark. 9. 44. 46. 48) to torment them within, by the
perpetually forced sight of their madness and folly, on earth, against the
universal experience of all mankind, and all faithful warnings from God. All
their fading beauty will be consumed, in that Grave, from their dwelling (Psalm.
49. 14.) or that earthly state of their whole persons, which they have chosen
for their final habitation. They have rendered themselves fit fuel for the wrath
of God, eternally to flame forth, upon. When Christ awak's or comes forth in
his heavenly, he will despise or destroy their earthly Image (Psalm. 73. 20.) or
state; burn up all the fading Glory, perishing Life, Riches, Fruits, and meats
thereof, or works therein; 2 Pet. 3. 10. Their fleshly principle or root, with
the branch; tree, with the fruit, as Grass; at best, a fading flower, will
wither and perish for ever; Isai. 40. 6. These things and life, then, chosen by
them, when known to be so (and Christ's everlasting Life and Things, as
knowingly and wilfully rejected, when convincingly showed and fairly offered
them) will cause their unutterable confusion, for ever, in eternal darkness and
death. They Will have nothing but wrath to feed on, for ever, in a resurrection of
damnation. Much sorrow and wrath will they have in and with their sickness,
unexpressible wrath, rage, and madness within them (as the Septuagint render)
in their languishing, incurable sickness, or unchangable enmity to God, under
the final wrath of God. This will befall them, after all patience of God, and
favorable offers ( while 'twas called to day, with them, in this world) all
which, they abused and refused, to their sorer condemnation and punishment. So,
become they most desolate, for ever. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. Mat. 23. 37,
38. As vessels of dishonor, will they be forced to eat the fruit of their own
way, (...) be filled with the fruit of their own devices; the wrath of God;
Prove. 1. 31. 'Twill be sorely ill with them, when that just reward of their
hands shall be given them; Isai. 3. 11. Had they (...) to his Counsel, they
might have dwelt safely, for ever, and, have been quiet from fear of evil.
Prove. 1. 33. Their simple turning from his offers, and their prosperous
flourish in their own nature, will, and way, destroyed these incorrigible
Fools. V. 32.

Verse. XVIII. Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor, that he takes under
the Sun, all the days of his Life, which God gives him: for, it is his portion.
Having, in some former Verses, finished the Character of the incorrigibly
wicked, as to their dreadful condition, Solomon proceed's here, to declare the
blessed condition of all, that are of a perfectly contrary temper of Spirit, to
that of unchangable enmity, abovesaid; of another Spirit, with Caleb and
Joshuah, who wholly followed the Lord; Numb. 32. 12. It Is the Spirit of Faith,
only, the law of the Spirit of Life, and true Liberty, the Gospel Spirit of
Truth, in which the Lord can be rightly owned, fully followed, and acceptably
worshipped, in Spirit and Truth. Sure, none of these things can ever be done in
man's own spirit, will, and way, that, at best, is enmity to God. True Saints
bring forth all the fruits of their labors, unto God the Father, in this
Spirit of the Son, which makes them free indeed; in this newness of Life, and
Law of true Liberty, the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. And they reap the
benefit or fruit of all their such labors in the Lord, which never are in
vain; 1 Cor. 15. 58. All labors in our own Spirit of nature, uncircumsised or
circumcised, that is, corrupt or righteous, are in vain, as to eternal Life;
Gal. 6. 15. Nothing but the new creature, and its actions, are conducible, or
of any tendency toward that. There, God work's all our works for us; and we,
all our works, in him, as co-workers with God, in his own Spirit; Isai. 26. 12.
Joh. 3. 21. Without me, or my Gospel Spirit, (...) can do nothing in the way
toward true Life, says Christ to all; Joh. 15. 5. These Gospel-works of the
Spirit of Faith, in Abraham, justified him ( Jam. 22. 21) not law-works, in his
own Spirit of nature, or principle of the covenant of works; Romans 4. 2-6. By
the works of the Spirit of Grace, not nature, are we justified and saved; Ephesians.
2. 8, 9. One of the works, by which Abraham was justified, was the sacrificing
death-work upon his Spirit of nature, at best, typed by Isaac. And Abram,
therein, with Isaac, were both of them Types of Christ, as the Gospel
High Priest and Sacrifice. Works and reward, in man's dealing with God, on the
terms of the first-covenant, in his own spirit, will, and way, are of debt; in
the second, both and all, on all hands, are, of Grace; works and reward. True
Saints can say, not I live, walk, speak, work, but Christ, or his Gospel Spirit
lives and does all, in me; Gal. 2. 20. It Is his Spirit of Grace, in and by
which, they are what they are, do what they do, say what they say, 1 Cor. 15.
10. All, done in the participated creature-Spirit of the Son, exactly answers
the very divine mind and will of the Father. All Is after his own heart. By
eating and drinking at Christ's heavenly Table, feeding on his never-perishing
meats (Bread of Life, and Wine of his Kingdom, his divine and creature Glories)
do they enjoy the good of all their labors in the Lord. They eat their meat
with gladness and singleness of heart (Act. 2. 46.) with joy unspeakable and
glorious, in unchangable union with God; whereas others are feeding at the
Serpents Table, in a Spirit of darkness, death, and unchangable enmity to God,
with him. Avast difference. There Is a fixed, unpasable Gulf between these two
sorts of feeders, eaters and drinkers. The generation of God's Children, born
of his Spirit, to whom he has given his heavenly riches, and power to eat
thereof, do truly rejoice in all their labors, even while in their mortal
Body, on earth, under the litteral Sun; This is their happy Portion, and Gift
from God; as fallows.

Verse. XIX. Every man also, to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his Portion, and to rejoice in his
labor; This is the Gift of God.
The obedient Saint chooses not his Portion, in his own will, and life, to his
eternal ruin: but, is content, God should choose (as well as provide) his
Portion, for him. In a dutiful compliance with his Spiritual Law, he readily
parts with his own fading Life and riches, perishing vanities, for God's
everlasting; which is absolute Salvation. Others, rebelliously and knowingly,
choose, what he obediently parts with (as dung) for their final portion; which
lay's them under final wrath. Saints quit the best Life and Things of the
living Soul of the first (...), for the transcendently better Life and Things
of the quickening Spirit of the second; their earthy Image, for his heavenly. No
other way of bearing the Image of the heavenly, but a quitting the Earthy, as a
glory to be done away, for the Glory of the heavenly, which excell's and
remain's for ever; 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11. In this (...) of Life, and all the
labors, right works, and fruits thereof, do they eat with unspeakable gladness
of heart; and this is the Gift of God. The reason of this gladness, is given.

Verse. XX. For, he shall not much remember the days of his Life; because God
answers him in the joy of his heart.
The day's of the Saint's Life, in his own Spirit of vanity, and
unprofitableness to himself, as also enmity and sin against God, shall not be
remembered by God. So, he shall not be called to an account, for what he has
done in them. God pardon's, and puts all out of his Book of remembrance, on
man's delivering up the guilty Sinner (the Son of Bichri, spiritual King
David's Enemy; 2 Samuel 20. 21) his own Spirit, to Death, in order to be quickened
up into the Life of the Spirit of mystical King David, that can never sin. And
this, done by God, the Saint himself shall not much remember, so as to be
confounded with the review of his innumerable and unutterably aggravated
follies and abominations, in the Life and Day's of his vanity. All Is pardoned
and done away, Sins and Sinner; never to be remembered more, by God; Jer. 31.
33, 34. Heb. 8. 12. and, 10. 16, 17. In their newness of Life, they delight in
God; and God, in them. He answers them therefore, in the Joy of their Heart,
giving them all the desires thereof; Psalm. 37. 4. Their and his desires meet
and center in that one thing, necessary to their pleasing him, or being saved,
the new creation Spirit of Christ, his appointed and determined unspeakable
Gift to them, from Eternity.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. I. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common
among Men: ( Hebr. much upon man) What?
Verse. II. A Man, to whom God has given Riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he
wants nothing for his Soul, of all that he desires; yet, God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: This is vanity, and it is an
evil disease.
IN letter, a man furnished with all sorts of outward worldly desirables, heart
can wish, from the unlawful use and feeding on them, may be said not to eat
thereof, so as to receive any right comfort, in its kind; but, signal
disadvantage, thereby. Hence, are all such his goods, left a stranger, to feed
on, being to himself, so abused, nothing but vanity, and an evil disease. A
right, lawful, comfortable eating thereof, is the gift of God; Eccl. 5. 18, 19.
without this, is he in a worse condition than he that wants all, he enjoys; as
by the abuse thereof, more deeply guilty. Fading things give no true comfort or
satisfaction in their kind. The gift of God, added to them, distinct from such
things; this only can give right comfort, and the lawful use of them. It Is a
disease or infirmity inseparable from the nature of such things, singly of
themselves, to give any right comfort or advantage to man. Solomon had himself
large experience hereof, in the abuse of such vanities, given him by God, in
greater abundance, then to others: he wanted not, for any such outward Riches,
Wealth, and Honor (1 King. 3. 13.) and he did set himself, as much or more
than any, to try what satisfaction he could find, therein. Whatever his eyes
desired, he kept not from them. He withheld not his heart from any joy; Eccl.
2. 10. This trade in vanities, he long drove, after signal mercy of the highest
sort, afforded him, a principle of true wisdom which remained in him (ver. 9.)
unextinguishable, under all; though sorely interrupted, as to exercise, by such
mad, extravagant doings. On his return from such sensual delights, he declares,
all, vanity, in this recanting book. All such desires and desirables, belly and
meats, are vanity of vanities, shadows of a higher, mystical sort of vanities,
belly and meats, that (with these lower, brutish) are all to be destroyed, 1
Cor. 6. 13. And, where is man, then? The same evil disease, in mystery, is found
commonly among men, under the mystical first-creation Sun, the first covenant
Spirit (as to all their fruits and Laodicean riches heaped up, there) as in the
litteral Rich man, under that Sun that produces the litteral riches and fruits
of this Earth, we tread upon. The influence, rain, anointings, gifts,
enlightnings, and comforting warmth of Christ, (...) his single distributions
of first-covenant light and life ( as a fleshly Bridegroom and Comforter) makes
men first-covenant Saints, in holy, cleans'd flesh, or a righteous natural
State, freed, in degree, from the pollutions of their sormer polluted worldly
nature. This makes them (...), fruitful, rich, full, flourishing, wise, strong,
and honorable there, in holy flesh, by such knowledge and experience of Christ
after the flesh. Christ's mystical husbandry and husbandly influence upon them,
there, has these real effects upon them; brings them, a-fresh, into the (...)
of godliness, and real righteousness of man, in the image of the earthy or
first Adam, restored and put upon them, as a comeliness and beauty; all which,
yet, is but a (...) flower, a perishing (...), as at first, in Adam. And now
also, filth of spirit, or enmity to God's divine and new creature Gospel Spirit
of grace, is inseparable from this restored life of holy flesh. This disease
therefore is curable only by the obedient death and loss of all this, again,
for Christ's spiritual, Gospel, everlasting righteous new creation life, by
which to become one with him, there, as married to him in that life, into which
he is risen out of the Death of that Law-life of holy-flesh, in his own person,
Romans 7. 1-4. These first-covenant Brethren, Children, and Spouses of Christ, in
the first-covenant, finally refusing the terms of being Married to him in the
second, which is the death and loss of all their fading vanities) come to be
Married to the Devil, for ever; and so, of a changable spouse and people,
become not only no spouse, children, or people of God, but a very Synagogue of
Satan. (...) the mystery and power of Godliness, they are finally caught, and,
for ever, swallowed up, in Satan's mystery of (...). Such righteous
first-covenanters in Law-life (thus joining unchangably with the Devil, in an
everlasting Marriage-Union with him) hated all Christ's spiritual,
Gospel-Doctrine, and Crucified the Lord of Glory; put to a temporal Death, the
very Prince of everlasting life. These drive a more dangerous trade with their
vanities, then the litteral Rich man, with his. Paul, and all spiritual Saints
follow Christ's suffering steps, out of the Glory and Life, to be done away,
into the Glory that excell's, and Life that remain's, for ever. This is the
rendering any man, truly blessed. And this (in great variety of
Scripturelanguage, and Figurative, Parabolical instruction) is signified to
men, by the voice of the true Shepherd and wisdom of God; the words of his
heavenly, Gospel Spirit, in himself and Saints. But man (notwithstanding all
that can be said) pitches his foot, resolutely, in harmony with Satan, for
Salvation, in the but restored earthy first-covenant life of his own nature, in
his own will and way, after his own heart; which, in fine, render's him a man
after Satan's own heart. They so interpret all Scripture, by the words of their
own wisdom, and in their lying spirit of divination, as to warrant this, a
state of true and everlasting blessedness. This Doctrine, in all its variety, is
the Doctrine of Devils, and no better; the self same, the Serpent Preached to
Eve, and prevailed in; Genesis 3. 4. Ezekiel. 13. 6. So have ye Satan's and his
Apostles accursed other Gospel Ministry, in flat contrariety to every word of
Christ's. If ye follow it, ye must take what fallows, for ever; the wrath to
come, be as jocund and confident as ye will, now. This has been Satan's and
Man's delusive, cursed other Gospel, that is no. Gospel, from the beginning, and
will be, to the end of this world, under all variety of dispensation from God,
before and under written Law or Gospel, the Oracles of God in a sound of words,
which make up the Scriptures of Truth, the holy Bible or Book of God, a
transcript of the living Oracles of God, in the person of Christ, the living
creature-wisdom, word, and book of God's whole very Divine mind and counsels,
about the Salvation of his Creatures, Angels, and Men; and the supreme Prophet
and declarer thereof; Prove. 1. 20-23. and 8. 1-9. Man and Angel must die, as to
first-creation (...), at best, that is but vanity and a fading flower, says
(...) No such matter, says the Devil, and say his Gospel-ministries, in all
their tosses, variety of thought, and clashing language of their wisdoms; Ye
shall not die at all. No danger or death is incident to you, to be suspected or
feared by you, in your righteous cleans'd natural State. Here Is the universal
clash and contrariety of Satan's lying, and Christ's true Gospel; which will ye
choose, O simple ones?

Object. 1. The willingly deluded followers of Satan's, object against
Christ's, that it is but one and the same thing; whereas that, they call
Satan's, has great variety. Hear you, say they, or turn your books, while we
will, open them at any leaf, we find still one and the same thing, insisted on.
It Is all one, where we open, or what we read.

(...). What amounts this objection to? That Christ's Gospel-words are in exact
harmony thorow-out, and Man's and Satan's Babel-gospel has great confusion of
Language and contradicting words, proceeding from contrary Opinions, Thoughts,
or Apprehensions, larded with a world of fine stories, similies, and persuasive
words of man's eloquent wisdom. But all, uniformly against (and contrary to)
all Christ's (...) Gospel, to a Tittle. This variety tickles the itching Ear (2 Timothy 4. 3.) and gratifies that Palate in man, which, with Satan's, savour's only
the many natural things of Man or Angel, in the first creation, and not at all,
the one thing necessary, that is comprehensive of all the things of Christ and
God (communicable to Men) in the second.

Object. 2. We deny, say Satan's Gospellers, there is any creature-life or
spirit, distinct from what God set up men and Angels in, by the (...) creation,
above that, or between that and the infinite divine life (...) spirit. And this
is that, fill's all your Books, and is the substance of your pretended-gospel.
And, this higher creature life, you call the life of God, and the wisdom,
righteousness, and all the things of it; the wisdom, righteousness, and things
of God. What can you mean by all this, save the very (...) life, the eternal
righteousness and wisdom? And, we hold a swallowing up of creatur's beings and
wills, at last, into the Divine life and will of God.

Answ. What Is this, at bottom, but annihilation of Man and Angel? and then, God
is where and what he was, from Eternity; and nothing of the Creature (in any
sense or capacity) remain's at all.

Here Is the sum of the controversy, between hypocritical Sinners in Zion
(pretending to right saving Saintship, in renewed naturals, first-covenant
principles of the Law) and true Zion-Saints, in new creature, spiritual,
gospel-life. God himself will judge and determine this controversy, at Christ's
second appearing, in that very new creature spirit of life, true Saints assert
and own, the other (...) deny, detest, and hate, with all the words thereof. In
man's day, under Satan's reign, the hypocritical Sinner in Zion (that only
(...), and passes for the true Saint, and Heir of the Kingdom) carries it,
clear, universally, under the title, Orthodox. In God's day of judging, the
other (...) beforehand, they are sure to carry it. So, in faith, do they
patiently wait for his infallible decision. The Heavens, against which, the
other, confidently and daringly, set their mouth (Psalm. 73. 9) will declare his
righteousness; for God is judge himself, Psalm. 50. 6. Christ will undeniably
manifest, that the everlasting righteousness of God, communicable to Man or
Angel, is found only in his heavenly, new creature Gospel Spirit of grace, not
in our earthly spirit of nature. And, this is the very controversy, all along
this world, between the said hypocrites and true heirs. The year of recompenses
for these Controversies of Zion, will be the day or season of the Lords
vengeance on the whole earthly contending party, against the life and image of
the heavenly Adam, in the true Zion-Saint, Isa. 34. 8. and 63. 4. The Lord's
appearing for his true redeemed ones, will be ruin to all their obstinate,
rebellious opposers, fixed in the first-creation, with the Devil, in
unchangable enmity to him and the second, Mic. 6. 2. Hos. 4. 1. and 12. 2.
Everlasting shame, confusion, and silencing of the one, will be co-temporary
with the unspeakable joy of the other, on the final decision of this
controversy. The Enemies of Christ's gospel, have yet, another frivolous,
impertinent objection.

Object. 3. Why so many words? such large tautological speakings and writings
about one and the same thing, a pretended Gospel-life (in distinction from a
righteous Law-life) a mere fiction, a nullity? Cannot ye say, in a word, what
you would have, that we may be presently rid of any farther trouble with you?
open your Book, where we will, all is one and the same thing. In our gospel, we
have abundance of pretty knacks, to entertain us with; passages out of Poets
and History, many pleasant recreative things, and variety of opinions, which is
very delightful. We can hear one thing at one place, and another thing at
another meeting, and observe the various wit, eloquence, and fine language,
with similitudes, and the like, by which, each illustrates, and proves his
different judgment and way.

Answ. But all this while, do ye observe, how, in all this toss and variety of
persuasion and words, there is a deep silence as to any thing of Christ's
gospel-state of true Spiritual Saint-ship, save to oppose, contradict, or
blaspheme it? This objection of first-covenant Law-gospellers, against the
second, is, in effect, what the Athenian Philosophers said of Paul (Acts 17.
18.) What will (...) Babbler say? But, must we needs have all Christ's gospel,
in a word, that God has thought fit to use so many, about, from the beginning
of Genesis to the end of the Revelalation? This is the mad, rash, rebellious,
hasty spirit of man, about his Eternal concerns. But, if it be all, in millions
of words, but one and the same thing, why may not one word be enough, to
declare it? say ye so? And is not your accursed other Gospel, one and the same
thing, at bottom? Sand? Vanity? a fading flower? righteousness of man? What
need you use any more than one word, to declare your accursed Law-gospel, in?
All your rhetorical flashes of wit and eloquence, histories, and similitudes,
etc, What signify such embellishments of Art, in the case? Yet, about this
your one and the same thing, Satan's gospel, what a world of Books in
Libraries, Shops, and Houses? what a world of Preaching in thronged Auditories?
And, must Christ's gospel be crowded into such a strait place, such a little
narrow corner, as to have but one word, for it? A hard case. But indeed, Satan
would have it have never a word, would you, so, too? Ye come too near it. Is
one word like to do it, for Salvation? and must so many words be allowed, for
Damnation? Must there be many words, and those warily placed, to secure any
little parcel of litteral earthly possessions; and our Eternal inheritance be
allowed but one word? And this, when so many crafty Gamesters, Devils, and Men,
fill the world with Words and Books, to deceive? Open your Bible, where ye
will, and you will find the Gospel-life, Spirit, and Doctrine of Christ, most
harmoniously and uniformly signified to you, under abundance of figures,
similitudes, parables, etc. as you will find, if ever you come to know the true
mystical reach, meaning, and significancy thereof. All Is about the one thing
necessary to Eternal life, the gospel spirit of Christ. Will ye dare to accuse
God himself of tautology? teach the most High how to speak his own mind? will
ye call his often Repetitions of the same thing, in the same or various words,
vain Repetitions and Impertinencies? Let men, that are at this daring pass,
against Christ and God most high, cry tautology while they will, at Christ's
true Gospellers words and writings; who cares? Must Satan's gospel have such a
world of Words, Books, Preachings, and Christ's, but one word? what a hard case
is this, for the true Sons and Seers of God, amongst the deluded sottish sons
of Men, that (...) their own Ruin? Are ye so deeply in Love with Damnation, O
ye sons of Men, as to hear such plenty of what leads that way, and but one
transient word about true Salvation, and then deny that word too? whiff it away
with a breath, and a losty cast up nose of Pride? The wicked, through the pride
of his countenance ( Heb. loftiness of his nose, cast up, in pride and anger)
will not seek after God, but reject, all his words of counsel and instruction.
God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. The gospel spirit, life, truths,
and things of God; his wisdom, his righteousness, are not at all regarded by
him, or reckoned worth his consideration. Those that think the scaping Eternal
Damnation, or finding Eternal Salvation, a trivial, slight, impertinent thing,
let them reckon, and think thus, if there be no remedy. The Jews came round
about Christ, and said to him, how long do thou make us to doubt, or keep us
in suspense? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly; in a word. I told you,
says he, and ye believed not: Then, they took up stones, to stone him, as a
Blasphemer; Joh. 10. 24. 31. 33. Here Is the posture and temper of those
ravenous Wolv's, that are only for a word and away, as to Christ's gospel; but,
as much as you will, of Satan's. Instead of being humbly inquisitive after
Gospel Truths, in a readiness to comply with, own, and obey them, for their
good; all their questions, about Salvation, to Christ or his followers, are
calculated and designed only to catch at something from them, to accuse and
charge them for, right or wrong. This was Christ's own case, all along his
Ministry on Earth, among the Jewish Professors. When brought Prisoner before
the chief Priests and Council of the Jews; very inquisitive are they, for
Witness against him, to put him to Death, but none can they get, that will
serve their turn. Then, they seek to pick something out of his own mouth, to do
their work. For this, the High Priest ask's him; Art thou the Christ, the Son
of the Blessed? Tell us, in a word. Jesus said, I am. Oh! now we have him,
here is enough out of his own mouth, to condemn him; what need we any further
witnesses? ye have heard the Blasphemy, what think ye? Guilty of Death, say
they, as a cursed Jury of Rebels: All Is of a batch, Judges and Jury, against
Christ and his Followers. They all condemned him, as worthy of Death. They
never examine his Doctrine, but cry, tell us in a word, this or that, and lie
at catch for an answer; and then, in another word, condemn him for witnessing
an infallible truth; that is their next word. Then they spit on him, buffet,
mock him, and so on, to his Crucifixion and Death, Mark. 14. 61. 65. What may
the Servant expect, when the Lord was thus handled? So, Luke 22. 66-71. The
Elders, chief-Priests and Scribes lead him into their Council, and all of them
say to him, Art thou the Son of God? On his Answer, they say, What need of
further witness? For, we our selves have heard of his own mouth. He has said
enough, at the Bar, to take away his life, though we had nothing else against
him, before: What think ye? Think? bad enough, no doubt; all of a mind, the
whole rout of Wolves and Bears; guilty of Death, say all. Christ asserted
himself, the Son of God. Blasphemy, cry they; not considering whether true or
false. But, Satan, will such own, not only for the Son of God, but God most
high, himself. He will assert himself to be God, and the true new creation
Temple of God (2 (...). 2. 4.) in his transformed appearance thereof, and find
followers and owners enough, even amongst Professors, Chief Priests (Types of
Christ, by Office) Elders and People of the Jews, the only then professing
people in the world. Christ owned himself the Son of God, by way of Eminency,
above all other Sons of God, begotten and Born of his Spirit. Do any such, dare
to own themselves Sons or Children of God, in his new and everlasting
Covenant-Principle, his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth? Dare they speak the
words of that Spirit? Words, the Holy Ghost teaches? and, are these words
contrary to their's and Satan's accursed other Law-gospel? Down they go, at a
word, for Blasphemers. Guilty, my Lord, say the goodly Jurors, all of a Pack,
choose where you will. Professors notion of grace, is short. They look (...) it,
only, as an act of favor from God, as it is also; and a transcendent gracious
one. But, they consider not, or own it, as a distinct principle, root, and
spring of life, desire, thought, and action in man, from the natural
first-covenant, or first-creation Law-principle. A word to the wise. But, to
undiscerning fools (or worse, wilful Rebels against conviction) what words will
serve the turn, to recover them out of their folly and madness? Here Is the
great turning point, for Eternal Life or Death. Single nature, corrupt or
righteous, fixed in, is certain Damnation: Grace, Salvation. We are saved by
Grace, or in Grace, through Faith, or in the incorruptible new covenant
Gospel-Principles of everlasting Righteousness; not in or by Nature, which, at
best, is but a fading Flower, altogether Vanity; not of our selves (or any thing
performable by us) in our own Nature, the first-covenant Principle, Ephesians. 2. 8,
9. It Is the gift of God, the unspeakable gift of his Spirit of grace, in us, is
Salvation to us. Here Is a word, to those that are only for a word and away,
about Christ's Gospel-Doctrine for Salvation. All ye talk of, is but one thing,
say they, (...) therefore hear it, in one word. What need such a do, with so
many words about it? Pray, what is yours and Satan's Gospel (all that Man's and
Satan's wisdom jointly preach up, declare, and warrant to be Salvation, that
indeed will prove eternal Damnation to all final and resolute followers and
owners thereof) what is this but one thing, as abovesaid? That the righteousness
of Man, or Man, in his restored righteous life, according to the Law blameless,
is in a state of everlasting Salvation? Did not Paul, when all this, most
fiercely persecute Christ, and all his Gospel-Saints and Truths? And was he not
as fiercely persecuted by such, as soon as he became a Gospel-Saint? What would
ye have? where must one be, to get the least of Truth into your understandings
and hearts? What, but this one thing, the Righteousness of Man, is the
bottom-story of all your innumerable Books and Preachings, for Salvation? And
what do all such gingling words, such tinkling Cymbals amount unto? A confused
uncertain sound. And if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
himself to the Battle? What Battle? the Battle of the Lord against the Mighty.
What Mighty? Evil Angelical Principalities and Powers of this World. If the
righteous Life, Armor, Strength, and Wisdom of Man, be asserted fit to
undertake them in, all such Doctrine is a Lie. All these are but as straw and
rotten wood, ( Job 41. 27.) to the superior Wisdom and Strength of evil
Angels, the mystical Leviathan or Goliath, and his Philistine Army. All such
Doctrine, from top to bottom, in all variety of words and dress, by Eloquence,
Wit, Art and Method, Reasons, Uses, Motives, etc. all is an absolute downright
falsehood; Satan's Synagogue-Lie ( Rev. 3. 9.) his accursed other Gospel; the
Laodicean Delusion, v. 17. The Power of Godliness, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness,
things of God, all comprehended in his one Gospel Spirit of Grace, the
unspeakable Gift; these are the Gospel-onething, necessary to be found in Man,
for Salvation. Form of Godliness, Righteousness, Life, Wisdom, things of Man,
in his restored Law-spirit of Nature, the first-Covenant Principle; these make
your one Law-thing, you place Salvation in; clothing it only with the
Gospel-words and titles of God's one thing, to deceive. See ye now where we
both are, with our several one-things? And will ye allow God's one-thing, and
Christ's Gospel, but one word? and your one thing, or Satan's Gospel-principle
and state, Millions, in thronged auditories and crowd's of numberless Books and
Writings? Must God's one-thing be decried for Heresy, Blasphemy, and a
diabolical Fiction; and the Devil's, and your one-thing, be the only orthodox
sober Truth, or thing? Fools, when will ye be wise (Psalm. 94. 8.) and look
about you, as to your most important concern, which you, yet, leave at random,
and an all-adventures, in the hands of your trusty Trojans, your blind Leaders
of such blind followers, neither of whom know what they are doing, whither a
going, or whom they worship; all, in a manner, doing they know not what?

The Objections here made, have I often heard from the unanimous defenders of the
Doctrine of Devils; who with hearts believe or obey, and with their mouths make
confession of Satan's Gospel (calling it Christ's) unto damnation. Holy Men, a
first-Covenant People of God, blasphemed, said of Christ, he had a Devil, and
was mad; why hear ye him? Joh. 1. 11. and 10. 20. Do any wise, knowing,
righteous Men believe on him? Joh. 7. 48.

But, to return from this requisite digression. A Man, restored and made by
Christ, rich, (...), wise, strong, honorable, fat, fruitful and (...) in his
own nature, again (in the same kind of life, Adam was at first, set up in) has
(with the literal rich Man, in his case) no power to eat thereof; so as to
receive the comfort, that is to be found in the right use of his fading mystical
riches. The right using and eating them, to true advantage, is in the zeal of
God's House, ( Psalm. 69. 9.) the mystical fire of his Sanctuary-Spirit, to eat,
consume, devour, and burn all up, in Sacrifice to God; as Christ handled our
spotless nature in himself. If not eaten thus, in and by the true Priestly
Spirit of God (in an obedient, friendly union of mind with the Cross or Spirit
of Christ) the same Spirit or Gospel-sword will come as a stranger, yea, a
downright enemy, and devour, eat all up, and destroy the Rebel for ever; Isa.
1. 19, 20. Ps. 69. 9. Joh. 2. 17. The single Spirit of (...), in its highest
renewals, and most righteous restored life, since the fall, is a continual
sinner, and an enemy of God. The Gospel Spirit of Grace, that is, on its death,
to succeed, and become the sole and single principle of life and operation in
the Saint, never sins. The true Saint, therein, joins with Christ, to destroy
the former, that he may live for ever with him, in the latter. Such suffering
and dying, is God's appointed method for living and reigning with him, for
evermore; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. A right death of Nature, is a ceasing and a being
freed from Sin for ever; 1 Pet. 4. 1. Romans 6. 7. They that feed on perishing,
lying vanities, and gratify that fleshly belly, or desire and life that is to be
destroyed, will be destroyed, for such rebellious feeding, in a forbidden life
and way, on such forbidden fruits; 1 Cor. 6. 13. They gratify but that carnal,
earthly mind, that minds only earthly things, first-creation vanities. So, sin
they, after the similitude of Adam's first transgression. This great Sin,
Solomon observes to be a vanity, and an evil disease, common among men.
Multitudes of first-covenant Professors (call themselves what they will) will
be found guilty of this unpardonable Sin, unchangeable enmity to God and his
Gospel Spirit, at the final determination of Zion-controversies. They are
strangers and enemies to the Cross of Christ (Phil. 3. 18, 19) and that, as a
stranger and enemy to them, will eat up, or consume and destroy their fading
life and goodness, in final Wrath. It also eats up all the same kind of fading
life, riches, beauty or glory, in Saints themselves, in a way of everlasting
kindness, love, and faithfulness, for their eternal good. Away then will all
first-creation life, riches, and glory go, for ever, as to any goodness,
comeliness, or comfort therein, from all, Saints or Sinners, in love or wrath.
In wrath will he come upon incorrigible enemies, that (by choosing their own
first-Covenant-life, before his second) have forfeited the benefit of all his
dispensations of Love and Mercy toward them, as well as all their large and
great mystical earthly riches and possessions, for ever.

Verse. 3. If a Man beget an hundred Children, and live many years, so that the
days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good, and also that
he have no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better than he.
In Mystery; Man, in the top-excellency and most abundant fruitfulness of his
restored Nature, though he live long, and be filled with the utmost joy and
comfort, all riches, fruits and honors, there, amount unto, he is but an old
doting sinner against God and his Spirit of Grace, all along, throughout his
whole race or course, in this mortal world and state. He is an old, rich,
accursed Sinner; as to any durable life or riches, dead, miserable, wretched,
poor, blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. He is such a covetous Sinner, that however
he has blessed himself in his own way, or reckoned himself blessed of God, as
giving him more than heart can wish, there; though he be an hundred years old,
live never so long in this fools Paradise, he will find himself accursed for
ever, under the wrath to come, after all; Isa. 65. 20. The reasons hereof, are
here given; his soul is not filled with good, and he has no (...). The truly
satisfying new creation goodness, (that is only to be attained by an honorable
burial in Christ's mystical Grave, or through-conformity to his death of
Nature) is not found with or in him. He has nothing of that about him. Satan
has (...)'d his heart with unchangeable enmity to God, and all his durable
riches. Diotrephes-like, loving to have the preeminence, do such prate against
true Gospel-Saints with malicious words, and all the durable Gospel-Riches,
yea, the unsearchable Riches of Christ's Wonderful Divine and Creature-person,
that they preach (Ephesians. 3. 8.) as a mere blasphemous fiction, a nullity. It Is
but a lump of corruptible vanities, they, at best, are filled with. They, and
all this earthly trumpery will be found but the Earth and works thereof, that
are the (...) fuel, by the fire of Christ's day, to be burnt up, 2. Pet. 3.
10. Man's immortal Spirit can never be filled with true good, but in an
immortal Gospel-Life; never, in a mortal, fading Law-Life. He must be emptied
of the former, to be filled with the latter. This is done by the twofold Death,
and Life-work of the Gospel Spirit of the Cross, on his Law-Spirit of Nature;
slaying his Nature, and raising him, if passively obedient to the death of
that, into the life of the sacrificing Gospel High Priest of our Profession
(Heb. 3. 1.) the active Gospel-Principle of everlasting Obedience to God most
high. Without this, an abortive or untimely birth is better than the said rich,
and flourishing, long-lived first-creation sinner. This abortive is either a
literal ( that has not known any thing, or received any sort of good, (...)
God; and so, is free from the guilt of neglecting or abusing it) or mystical
abortive, that has never received the actual birth and life of a First-Covenant
State, from Christ; nor experienced a fruitfulness of his own Nature, therein;
and so, has not been possessed of such choicer First-Creation riches, to abuse,
in enmity to the second.

Verse. 4. For he comes in with Vanity, and departs in darkness; and, his
name shall be covered with darkness.
Man comes into the World with nothing but vanity, Sin, and darkness, about
him. And if he never attain any other life or riches, literal or mystical, but
what is Vanity, he has a dismal exit, or departure out of it, into a state of
everlasting darkness and death. He has no true happiness or satisfaction, from
first to last. All worldly life or possessions relating to his Body, Soul, or
Spirit, are Vanity. Restored righteous first-Covenant life, Law-principle and
operation, Tree and Fruit, Root and Branch; all is Vanity. In his best, and most
flourishing day's, therein, full of (and surrounded with) nothing but Vanity.
All will come to nothing, as to any good or comfort to him, therein, for ever.
And, as the second thing here, must he then (having nothing else to trust to)
needs depart in darkness, and his Name, or whole Person come, at last, to be
covered with eternal darkness, in a resurrection of Damnation, under the
irresistible power of the Cross, or two-edged flaming Gospel-Sword of Christ,
coming upon him, in final Wrath, to devour him, for ever; Isa. 1. 20. Who-ever,
Angel or Man, submit not to God's Sentence of Death, pronounced from the
beginning, on their first-creation, natural state, will fall under it, in final
wrath, for rebelling against it. This, as the just punishment of their
inexcusable wilful madness and folly. So, their Mystical Land, earthly Name,
Life and Possessions, they have rebelliously set themselves to keep up (rather
than exchange all, by an obedient Death, for God's Heavenly Life, new Name, and
true Land of promise) are covered, (and so, their whole persons) with darkness
for ever. The condition of an untimely birth, is better than any of these
abusers of God's first-creation gifts, against him and his offered second, to
their eternal ruin. The reason of this Assertion is given,

Verse. 5. Moreover, he has not seen the Sun, nor known any thing: this has
more rest than the other.
He, that is, the untimely Birth (v. 3.) not the He, that comes in with Vanity,
and departs in darkness, v. 4. This latter is the He, God has given riches,
honor, and all, his Soul could wish, (v. 2.) in its own life, will, and way;
and also, long life therein, (v. 3.) with abundant fruitfulness, figured by his
hundred Children. An abortive or untimely birth is better than he. The literal
abortive, comes not into the exercise of any bodily life, in this world. He has
not seen the literal Sun, nor known any thing, in or by bodily Organ's and
Senses. This abortive is a Figure of the Mystical, never brought forth in the
exercise of a living Soul, in a restored first-Covenant Rightcous-life, under
the (Law-Spirit of Nature, the Mystical first-Creation) Sun: and, less yet,
under the shining-Light of the New Creation Sun of everlasting Righteousness.
The abortive, in this chiefly intended Mystical Sense, is better than he that
receives; is, for a season, possessed of, and abuses all first-Covenant Life
and Riches, and that under second-Covenant Light, against God, and the life of
the second, to his sorer Condemnation and Punishment, under the Wrath to come,
than if he had never received or known any such things; 2 Pet. 2. 21.
Spiritual, Gospel Light, clearly, positively, and undeniably shows man the
vanity of all he is possessed of in his Law-life, and God's Command to him for
surrender of all, by Death, in sacrifice to him, as the true payment of all
mystical Tithes and Offerings. In the methods of God's Wisdom, this is the
undispensable way and pass for any Man or Angel, into his New Creature,
Gospel-life of immortality (2 Timothy 1. 10.) and everlasting Righteousness.
First-Covenant-Light (that springs up with, attends and accompanies Law-life,
in Man) discover's the negative, toward this; viz. that all, which Man has,
there, is but a fading flower, altogether vanity. The very intrinsic nature of
all such fading life and things, preaches this in every such Man's own breast.
Hence have the stoutest and most peremptory self-confidents, a secret bondage,
all their lifetime in that State, through fear of death Heb. 2. 15. And,
further, even their first-Covenant Law-light, points toward Christ, for
spiritual, eternal Life, who will not fail to give it to all that rightly come
to him, for it, and submit to his terms of receiving it, even the death and
loss of all they are possessed of, in the first-Covenant, as loss and dung
(Phil. 3. 6, -- 10.) for the everlasting life and durable riches of the second;
Joh. 5. 40. and 6. 54. and 10. 28. and 17. 2, 3. knowingly then, to choose the
former, hold fast their own, in the first, in unchangeable enmity to God's own,
in the second-Covenant, is unpardonable madness and folly. It provokes God, to
swear in his Wrath they shall never enter into his Rest. Then, must their name,
their whole persons, be covered with everlasting darkness. The abortive is
freed from such their guilt of neglecting or abusing all such things, received
and possessed by them. He never had them; never saw or experienced any thing,
under the literal or mystical Sun of this World, or next. He is free from
condemnation, as to any of these accounts. If therefore liable to Judgment,
it is only, according to God's infinite all-searching understanding and
infallible sight of the inward mind of his Spirit, without the aggravating and
additional weight of his own wilful evil thoughts, or ouvert actions, by which,
any enmity to God, in his Spirit, could be manifested. So, has this untimely
birth more rest than the other. For, having never had the other's advantages,
he is free from the guilt of abusing them: yet, not free from all evil, or
guilt in his sight, to whom belong and are certainly known, all secret things
(Deuteronomy. 29. 29.) in the spirits of Men, not brought to veiw, by action, or so
much as imagined by them; not so much as imagined Treason against the King of
Saints. He saw Jacob and Esau, so as to love the one and hate the other, before
either of them was born, or had done good or evil, Romans 9. 11, -- 13. All Is
naked and open to him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 12, 13. He sees all
Men's thoughts, long before they think them, or are in being; Psalm. 139. 1, 2.
He knew all they will do toward him, and all he will do with them, for ever, from
eternity. All futurities have bin manifest to his Infinite Divine
understanding, from Eternity: and, to his all-searching New Creature
understanding, from everlasting. But, they that are never brought into the
exercise of bodily (or, if that, not into the exercise, of a first-Covenant)
life, such have not had the opportunity of a trial, how they would demean
themselves, therein. As less guilty, then, they will have more rest (or, at least,
less Torment and Wrath for their portion) than the other, though, or in case
they also perish for ever. For, as there are differences in Salvation -- Glory,
Joy, and Enjoyments; so, in Damnation -- Shame, Sorrow, and Torment. Else, how
comes self-exalting Capernaum (any first-Covenant People, exalted or lifted up
to Heaven, in second-Covenant Light, so as to taste and see how good the Lord
is, in his New Covenant life, 1 Pet. 2. 3. and Heb, 6. 4, -- 6.) to be tumbled
down to the lowest, hottest Hell, under the most fierce and fiery indignation
of God, for ever? Their greater punishment, carries, with and in it, a
character, that is clapped upon their backs, as greater sinners, by the abuse of
such utmost advantages for their good, then those of literal Sodom and Gomorrha
(Mat. 11. 23.) figuring the general rout of all common Sinners of the Gentiles,
in the corrupt spirit of Nature, under what ever outward nominal distinction,
by the title Mahumetan, Pagan, or Christian. Names vary not the case, one jot,
where there is nothing of Christianity, in a first or second Covenant, a Law or
Gospel-life; righteousness of Man or God. They are enemies of all
righteousness, with Elymas the Sorcerer; Act. 13. 8, -10.

Verse. 6. Yea, though he live a thousand years, twice told; yet has he seen no
good: do not all go to one place?
Nothing but Vanity in the largest measures, highest degrees, and most fruitful
exercise of a single first-Covenant, or natural, first-Creation life, with the
longest continuance therein, is to be found by Man. Let him live a thousand
years, twice told, in the largest possessions thereof, he sees not, or enjoys
any true, unchangeable good, therein, from first to last. All the goodness
thereof comes to the same end and pass, with his bodily life, and the concerns
or good things of that. The death of both and all, is the same end of all, to
the longest lived Methuselah, and to an Infant, that dies at an hour old. The
same period is put to the mortal first-Covenant life of the Spirit, as to that
of the body. If therefore a Man have no other life to trust to, beyond both
these, he will be covered with unchangeable darkness, in eternal Death (the
mystical Tophet, state or place of Torment, for ever) prepared for all
self-confident first-Covenant Kings, Princes of this World, in the but fading
glory of a first-Covenant life. Such Princes crucified Christ, for his Doctrine
of the second. They despise (and wonder at) it, and so, perish, or come to
naught, with all, they choose, and please themselves, with. 1 Cor. 2. 6. 8. Acts
13. 41. Do not all go to one place? All these eminent long-lived vanity-mongers
go to the same place or state of unchangeable enmity to God, and darkness to
themselves, with those that had shorter continuance in, and smaller enjoyments
of the said righteous life of vanity, in holy flesh; or, with them, that never
had any thing, at all, of it, polluted Heathen's, fixed in the vile affections
and lusts of literal Sodom. All comes to one, at last, wise first-Covenant
Saints, and foolish common sinners of the Gentiles. Yea, their greater and
higher advantages, wilfully abused, gain them only a deeper cup or measure of
Wrath, for ever, than those of less seize, and standing therein; or, of
none at all. After all their enjoyment of, and flourish in a but changable
good, rejecting God's everlasting (as recompense of their most foolish choice,
to walk in the light of their own fire, the warmth, light and zeal of, and for
their own enlivened, enlightened nature, and compassing themselves about with
sparks of their own kindling, duties, fruits, works, producible or performable
therein) must they lie down in sorrow, darkness and death, for ever. This will
they have from God's hand. Isa. 50. 11.

Verse. 7. All the labor of Man is for his mouth: and yet the appetite (Heb.
Soul) is not filled.
No satisfying answer to all the needs of Man's Immortal spirit, in all
first-Creation Vanities, is ever to be found. No literal or mystical riches
(that are all but perishing Vanities) can do it. Let Man lay about him, while he
will, do what he can, in the activity of bodily, or but first-Covenant
righteous life, he never finds or gets any such thing, as will stop the craving
mouth, or fill the appetite of either, so as to give any thing of true rest or
satisfaction to him. All Man's trading in a vain life (where Belly and Meats,
desires and desirables, are perishing vanities, and to be destroyed, 1 Cor. 6.
13.) is, with himself, altogether vanity, (Psalm. 39. 5.) fleshly tree and
fruit, root and branch, mouth, appetite, and meat. Unprofitable is all man's
labor then, for fetching in Provisions for his flesh (even holy flesh,
righteous, cleans'd nature) to gratify or fulfill the lusts thereof; Romans 13.
14. The very meats of Christ's first-Covenant, earthly Table (afforded man for
a season, in that state) will, with that renewed holy life and appetite, come
to naught. A Plea therefrom, will stand Man in no stead at the last day, (as
having eaten and drunk thereat) for entrance into his Kingdom; Luke 13. 24, --
30. Mat. 7. 21 -- 23. He will not know, or own them, but hid them depart from
him, as incorrigible workers of mystical iniquity, the highest and most
criminal rank of unpardonable sinners. Out of Heathen Countries, from East,
West, North, and South, the four winds of Heaven, shall an Elect Seed be
wakened up (signally, by the preparatory dispensation of Angels, in association
with the risen Witnesses from among Men, to preach the (...) Gospel) into the
spiritual, Kingdom-life of the (...), and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God; and such high (but
hypocritical) pretenders to it, be thrust out; Luke 13. 28, 29. Mat. 24. 14,
31. All this will be preparatory to Christ's second coming. Abundance of
Christ's Spouses and Children in the (...)-Covenant, become incorrigible Rebels
against him, and his Spirit of the second, and consequently, the siercest
Persecutors and haters of all his Gospel-Saints and Truths. Then he most
justly, turns from being a Savior to them (as, for a season, he was, in the
(...)) to be their unchangeable enemy, and (...) against them, (Isa. 63. 8,
10.) or pour upon them his unchangeable wrath, in and by that very spirit of
the second, they (...) with a perfect (...); and it, them; Zec. 11. 8. Sure,
the unchangeable wrath of God must needs light and rest, for ever, on the
guilty heads of the unchangeable enemies of God. The stated Case for Salvation,
from the beginning, is the surrender of, and passing out of all first-creation
life and vanities, into the second. The rebellious keeping up the first against
the second, loses all, and excludes from the second, that is God's and the
Saint's true Rest, for (...). Solomon, lamenting the folly of Man in his own
vain self-chosen life, will, and way, puts these two following Questions to him;

Ver. 8. For, what has the Wise more than the Fool? What has the Poor, that
knows to walk before the Living?
What or who is the Wise? the Fool? the Poor? and his knowledge to walk before
the Living? what Living? who? All these are to be inquired into, and considered
of (promiscuously and inclusively) in one line of discourse. The Wise, is Man
in the restored; the Fool, Man in the degenerate, corrupt spirit of Nature.
All Is but Nature, both are possessed of, corrupt or righteous: so, all is vanity.
Nothing of Grace, true Regeneration, Gospel-conversion or life, in or about the
best of them. Paul, at best, in his Law-life of Nature, fiercely persecuted
this. And, in his Gospel-life of Grace, was as fiercely persecuted by the
other. The Wise, Strong, and Honorable in Christ's first-Covenant
communications, finally opposing the second, is a greater sinner and fool, than
the fool, in the corrupt spirit of Nature, here; and will fall under sorer
Condemnation and Wrath, hereafter. So, is he the worst, and will have the worst
on it, in this World and next. He is the disputer of this World, that is
perfectly unreasonable and untreatable, as to the Gospel-things of the next,
which he can never discern, in the Wisdom and Spirit, he is of. They are
foolishness to him; 1 Cor. 2. 14. He denies all, root and branch; the very
foundation of all Gospel-Saints and Truth's; the living Cornerstone, the Rock
of Ages, the fountain Gospel Spirit. He denies there is any such thing. And, if
the foundations of all, the true Saint is, has, or has to say, be destroyed or
denied, what is to be done? Psalm. 11. 3. They deny the Creature-Holy Ghost or
Spirit of everlasting Righteousness, in Christ and Saints. They say, there is no
such thing. A Spiritual creature-life, between Natural and Divine, the said
wise first-Covenant Saint, utterly denies; and shuffles out of all his Divinity
and teaching. What Is then to be done with him, or said to him? He is the most
unreasonable Man, in the World, to be dealt with, about Gospel-affairs,
(however highly he pretends to them) being wholly destitute of any spiritual
Faith, to discern them; 2 These. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 14. True Saints are not to cast
Pearls, Gospel Truths, before such Swine (Mat. 7. 6.) but, beware of such
Gospel-Wolves in sheeps clothing; Mat 10. 16, 17. Can any deny this? Law-life,
Wisdom, Glory, Honor, Power (all fading things) must be parted with for God's,
Christ's Gospel-Wisdom, Righteousness, Glory, never to be done away; 2 Cor. 3.
10, 11. 1 Cor. 3. 18. This is implied; 1 Cor. 4. 10. To the self-confident
first-Covenant wise, all spiritual, Gospel Truths are foolish; and the
spiritual Saint, a fool, a mad man; Hos. 9. 7, 8. Christ's own People in the
first, reckoned him mad, for the Doctrine of the second; Joh. 1. 11. and 10.
20. what plainer, or more suited to convince? All Men, corrupt or righteous,
are fools, and enemies to all Spiritual, Heavenly Gospel-Things or Truths.
These things are suited only to spiritual discerning or judgment, which they
are wholly destitute of; 1 Cor. 2. 14. Wise Man walks but in a dream, an image,
a vain show ( Psalm. 39. 6.) dotes only on vanities. All Glorious, Heavenly,
Spiritual and Divine things (all true Divinity) lie clear out of the walk of
his narrow limited wisdom, that is bounded only with vanities, for object. All
divine and spiritual things are stark foolishness to such wise-fools. Such,
dying as they live, will be left in (...) Want, Nakedness, Misery, and
Confusion. The best things they can amuse and please themselves with, are used
and enjoyed by them, but in a Spirit of Enmity to God. What was Paul, while but
there? But, besides the truly Gospel-wise, in the spirit of Grace; and fool, in
general (in the whole spirit of Nature, corrupt or righteous) there is also in
the compass of Nature, the wise Man in the restored, and fool in the corrupt
spirit of Nature. Also, in the corrupt Nature, is there a sort of wise Men and
fools; Some, of great natural abilities, cultivated by learned education and
study: others, of small natural light or reason; of weak and uncultivated
minds. But all, in Nature, are fools to the spiritual wise, in Grace. And even
such wise Men, may be short in natural parts and learning, of either the
first-Covenant wise Man, or learned enlightened Heathen, in their own Sphere of
activity, a subtilty and deep reach about natural concerns and objects.
Children of this World, in their way, may be wiser than true Children of light,
or the next; Luke 16. 8. But, of all sorts of natural wise Men, none so much
decry the spiritual Man, for a fool and mad, as the wise, strong, and
honorable in the first-Covenant. See else, Hos. 9. 7, 8. Joh. 10. 20. 1 Cor.
2. 14. and 4. 10. 2 Cor. 10. 12. Psalm. 50. 20, 21. Joh. 16. 2. Act. 26. 9. 1
Cor. 1. 18, -- 28. Which think ye, were the fools, the learned Council of the
Jewish Priests, Elders, and Professors, or Peter and John, they termed ignorant
and unlearned Men? Act. 4. 13. No wisdom of Man can understand or open their
Writings. The wisest Men, first-Covenant Saints, are fools to the Gospel-wise
Man, whom they reckon the arrantest fool, of all. If the Wisdom of God be
foolishness to them, can any wonder, those that come with the words of that
wisdom, should be reckoned fools, by them? Paul, that had bin a wise Man in
Man's day, was a fool, weak despicable, no body, with such, when a truly
Gospel-Wise-Man. The true Gospel-preaching of the cross and death, on all
first-Creation-Life and Wisdom, in first Covenant Jew or Gentile, and wise,
learned Greek, is an high offense, and sore stumbling block, to both, in their
several states, and way. To be even with such, they both agree to reckon them
the veriest fools; the Offscouring of all things; 1 Cor. 1. 23. and, 4. 13.
But all, that have an incorruptible Seed of true Life in them, though (while
dormant, and unknown to themselves) they bluster and storm at the
Gospel-Believer, awhile, with Paul, they will, with him, when awakened, become
true friends of the spiritual Brotherhood, and helpers of their Faith. The
wisdom of the natural Man, in all variety, will be found foolishness, at last;
and the spiritual Man, the only wise, in the view of all Men and Angels, good
and bad. True Saints will laugh, at last, at all their scornful mockers, that
have laugh't awhile, at them. And, all such laughing wise-fools, will have
time enough to recant their misjudging the truly wise, in eternal darkness and
death. Who Is the fool, then, they will sadly experience, after all their priding,
vaunting, hugging, and blessing themselves, in their vain show, their dream,
their fools-paradise. Nothing of their vain pomp will descend after them; Psalm.
49. 17. All their shortliv'd merriment and laughter is but as the crackling of
thorns under a pot; a blaze, and away, Eccl. 7. 6. Envy them that will. None
ought; Psalm. 37. 1, 2. Pro. 23. 17. The spirit of Nature cannot well or easily
be unriddled, anatomized and laid open, in its deep, self-destroying deceits,
in few words: yet, will needs have all in a word; and rather, not that; or, if
that, scornfully reject it, with a whiff. It Is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know (or discover) it? The wisdom of God (in himself
and Saints) this only can search it out, and cause it to know it self; teach
it, or bring it to the true (...); Jer. 17. 9, 10. Nothing in Nature, nothing
below the all-searching Gospel Spirit in Christ and Saints, can discover all
its Meanders and Wiles; anatomize and unriddle it, to the full. The holy Ghost,
in and by Peter, found out the falsehood of Ananias and Saphira, and slew them;
Act. 5. 1, -- 10. The first-Covenant wise Jew or Christian Gentile, boasts
himself as a fit Teacher and Guide to the common sinner, in corrupt Nature;
little dreaming, that himself, in (...) Nature, is guilty of a more criminal
sort of mystical (...) and (...), against God and his Spirit of Grace; Romans 2.
17, -27. He sits in his majesterial Chair, as an instructor of fools; insulting
over the gross sinner, with a touch me not, stand by, keep off; for, I am (...)
than thou. This renders the proud Pharisee, an abomination to God; Isa. 65. 5.
To such self-confidents, Paul puts diverse searching questions, which discover
him more deeply guilty of mystical sins, against the Gospel, bearing the same
title, with the literal Adulteries, Thefts, Idolatries, and Sacriledg, he
justly reproves, in the common sinner against the Law. The death and loss of
all, such boast in, is absolutely necessary (in the methods of God's Wisdom) to
Salvation; the receiving that Gospel Spirit of life, in which any can be saved.
Miss this, and miss all. Come short of the Grace, and ye fall short of the
Glory of God; never enjoy the beatisical vision thereof. An exact observer of
the letter of the Law, may be a most criminal breaker of its spiritual mind or
meaning; as Paul, once. The Law-Saint, or legal-spirited Christian Believer,
finds the corrupt Heathen, a nobody to him, and he is a nobody to the true
Gospel-Saint; a mere blind Ignoramus, as to all-Gospel-truths; yea, worse, a
mortal hater of, and enemy to all Gospel-Saints, as no-bodies to him; the worst
of Men, the (...) of the World. The circumcised, cleans'd first-covenant wise
Man, by opposing the second, becomes a greater sinner, and worse Man, than the
uncircumsised, polluted Heathen. If he, and the Heathen fix themselves in
righteous and corrupt Nature, the (...) righteous Man, will have the worst
on it, for ever. Twill be easier for the literal, than mystical Sodomite, in
Hell; Mat. 11. 23, 24. But, what then has the wise Man, or first-Covenant holy
Man, more than the fool, in corrupt Nature? What advantage has he? Much every
way, says Paul, in answer to his own question; Romans 3. 1, 2. The Law, or
restored life of it, rightly used, is of great benefit to Man, in suppressing
and keeping under the vile affections of corrupt Nature: but, if abused,
against spiritual conviction, in a (...) enmity to the Gospel, it is rendered by
Man, worse than nothing; and he is, thereby, rendered worse than the fool, or
common sinner, (...) in polluted Nature. For, he is absolutely excluded God's
Rest, on his wilfully contracted incurable Leprosy, or disease of unchangeable
enmity to God; the other, not so. But, leaving both their cases; what has the
poor, that knows to walk before the living? What has the poor,
broken-spirited Saint, beyond both and all the the said wise and fools, that
are levelled, at the death of the body, and come all to the same sad end, a
being covered with darkness, for ever? This truly poor in spirit is a blessed
Heir of the Kingdom of God. The natural Man of the true Saint, impoverished and
run down by the cross (as to that wisdom, life, riches, and fading glory, the
self-exalting first-Covenant Princes of this World keep up, in rebellion
against God, and enmity to the cross) is the poor and needy, the Scripture so
ring's of, specially the Psalms. And, occasionally has this mystical poor, bin
plentifully spoken of, and charactered in this and the like discourses, on Job,
Timothy, etc. Christ pronounces such poor, blessed (Mat. 5. 3.) the opposite
rich, or wise, cursed, Woe to the rich; Luk 6. 24. Such mystical rich go merrily
(without regarding this woe they are under) with their whole Soul, or unbroken
natural spirit, to Hell; while the true Saint, in the broken, crucified,
impoverished, mourning state thereof, is following the slain Lamb, to Heaven.
Blessed are such mourners; Mat. 5. 4. Both the wise and fool, in the restored
or corrupt spirit of nature, set by, and laid aside, Solomon ask's, in
reference to this third Man, distinct from both, What has (or is) the poor?
etc. What has he got, in the room of all the lost life, wisdom and riches of
his own Nature? spiritual, everlasting Gospel-life and riches. This is the case
of such, as, with Paul, are content to become fools, weak, and despicable, as
to all the first-Covenant rich and wise boast and glory in. What this mystical
fool and poor has, is plain; durable riches and life, in God. What has the
opposite wise, then? no more, to speak on, than the fool in polluted nature. All
are fools, one and 'tother, as to their eternal concerns; mind no such things,
Spiritual and Heavenly. These go for nothing with them; but, are all in all.
The Spirit of God, asks and resolv's his own question, negatively and (...);
Isa. 66. 1, 2. God delights not in any thing of the first creation (where all
is corruptible, and altogether vanity; even all the life, goodness, and
top-excellencies thereof, in Man and Angel) But, in the second, where all the
goodness, materials, and ingredients are incorruptible and unperishable. Hence,
delights he in one poor broken-spirited man (in the first, in order to his
being quickened up into the second) incomparably beyond all the unbroken glory
and excellency of all natural Men or Angels, though not found in enmity
(changeable or unchangeable) to that Gospel Spirit or cross, that will break
down all fading good, in all Angels and Men, in Love or (...) Wrath. What God
delights not in, he requires our obedient submitting to his destroying, in
order to be brought forth in what he does delight in, and will delight in, for
evermore. So, of the work of his hands, by a first-creation, come we to be the
Sheep of his Pasture, in and by a second. All first-creation or Covenant-Life,
Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. are but Law-Ceremonies; not Grace, or
Gospel Truths; mere transient vanities, perishing next to nothings. When they
have served their season, away they are to go, as dung, for Gospel-life; Phil.
3. 8. The Poor, here, as to all Law-life and riches, are the only true wise
Men, that know how to walk before the living; even, before the living God, unto
all-pleasing, in the living Word, Wisdom, New Creature Gospel Spirit of the Son
of God. They are taught, principled or spirited, so as infallibly to know the
whole mind, and do the whole will of the Father. They have obediently quitted
(and departed out of) their own Country, and Father's House, the mystical Land
of their Nativity, their natural state and life; and, are entered into God's
new creation, spiritual, mystical, true Land of promise, or state of life, the
Land of the truly living, for evermore. So, know they how to walk before the
living God, the living word of God, and all the truly living partakers thereof,
blessed Angels and spiritual Saints, in that blessed new land and life. They
know how to walk with God, in some degree toward what Enoch did; and to demean
themselves as orderly Gospel-spirited walkers, before all the blessed
inhabitants of that new Land of the living. These poor ones, little Children
(Mat. 18. 3.) Brethren of Low degree (in their own Spirit (...) nature,
demolished, defaced, and impoverished by the cross) are the only right sort of
true rejoycers, because sure of an exaltation into that Gospel-life of Christ,
wherein they will certainly know to walk before all the said living, God,
Christ, blessed Angels and Saints; Jam. 1. 9. The fixed fool or wise (in the
natural state, corrupt or enlightened) are utterly incapable of Repentance,
Pardon, or Salvation, for ever. The door of Grace is fast shut upon them. If
then, Christ had not a secret spiritual Seed of unfix'd ones, amongstus
(whether in the corrupt or enlightened spirit of nature) where were any true
Church of spiritual Saints, or so much as a hopefulness of such a thing, this
dark day, on Earth? Had not the Lord a very small remnant-Seed of true Saints
among us, we should be as Sodom and Gomorrha, literal or mystical. Both, both,
in a wonderful degree, however unconsider'd, or unperceived by such, whose
minds the God of this World has wonderfully blinded, left the true Gospel Light
of Christ should shine unto them; 2 Cor. 4. 4.

Verse. 9. Better is the sight of the Eyes, than the wandering of the desire,
(Heb walking of the Soul) this is also vanity, and vexation of Spirit.
The wandering desire or walking Soul, is a fit character of Man's natural
spirit, exercised in a first-Covenant principle of life and action, subject to
all sorts of uncertainty. Man, therein, lives and walks at all-adventures, as
the margin renders Lev. 26. 21. It Is a starting, turning ( Psalm. 78. 57.)
versatile principle, in which, Man, at first, was liable to Apostasy; and,
since his Apostasy, any Men in that restored principle and life, are exposed to
the same, as has bin sufficiently experienced by millions. It Is a tossing,
fluctuating principle, unstable as water, with Reuben; Genesis 49. 4. Man,
therein, is apt to be carried about with diverse and strange Doctrin's; tossed
to and fro with every wind of false, deceitful, delusive, and destructive
Doctrine, by the slight and cunning craft of Men (Ephesians. 4. 14.) and Devils,
Satan and his Gospel-ministries. These false Doctrines (or the matter of them,
the Wisdom, Righteousness, Glory, things of Man, or Angel in the first
Creation, asserted to make up an absolute Safety and Salvation to Man) do
utterly pervert and destroy him, for ever. They tend wholly to the establishing
of Men, with Satan's perishing Meats, in unchangeable enmity to God. This is a
most evil, wicked thing, and state. But, it is a good thing, that the heart be
established with Grace, (or in that Gospel Spirit of Grace, that is in
unchangeable union with God) not with Satan's perishing (but Christ's
never-perishing) meats; Heb. 13. 9. Man's tossing, roving, rolling spirit,
wandering in its desire, up and down, to pick up a satisfaction in Satan's vast
heap of first-creation vanities, the perishing dust, himself feeds on, (Genesis 3.
14.) if permitted, by God, to make his own final choice, brings him, at length,
to be established by such gratifying, ensnaring, captivating (...) or things,
in unchangeable union with the Devil. He feeds on Wind, (Hos. 12. 1.) Ashes,
(Isa. 44. 20.) a deceived heart turn's him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? (...) diverse, uncertain
Doctrins or things, the Spirit of God calls strange meats, wind, ashes, lies.
Satan, by (...), has all first-creation vanities at his dispose, all the
Kingdoms of this World and glory of them, as (...) up to him, to give to
whomsoever he will; Luke 4. 6. (...) (...), on which he offer's all to Christ
himself (or any thing thereof, to others) are, that he, or they, take and own
him for God, and worship him, as so; (v. 7.) and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. He can gloss
over his vanities, so as to answer (...) palate, gratify every extravagant
desire of Man's wandering spirit (being completely skilled, and knowing therein,
by the overreaching subtilty of his superior angelical nature) and, by his
powerful insluence upon Man, can he kindle, blow up, and inflame his desire or
lust after his perishing desirables. Yet farther; if Man, by spiritual
conviction-light, grow jealous and suspicious, that his meats are dangerous;
and shy, as to an eating of his dainties, he will gild them over with the
nearest possible resemblance and counterfeit appearance of Christ's
never-perishing meats. And so, does he fetch many back from Christ, that have
tasted of his true heavenly meats, begun well in his spirit, or in obedience to
his Gospel Light, and ran well, for a season; Heb. 6. 4, -- 6. 1 Pet. 2. 3.
Gal. 3. 1. -- 4. and 5. 7, 8. The Devil is ready for Man, at every turn; can
humor him to a hair, while at his own choice, as to what he will feed and live
upon. And, in presenting his dusty diet, in all variety thereof, he uses all
imaginable self-pleasing, and most subtle arguments, as to Eve, to engage men
to feed at his table, till established in his spirit of enmity to God, and to
his never-perishing Meats. Hold your own, says he, and ye shall be as God's;
Genesis 3. 5. God offers you a happiness, in your eternal and unchangeable
subjection to him. (...) teach you how to become Gods your selves, in an
absolute, uncontrolled sovereignty of your own wills, like the most High, as I
have made my self; Isa. 14. 14. What kind of Gods, will he make them? Gods or
Princes of this World under him, in unchangeable enmity to the true God, most
high. He is the God of all such Gods, King of all such Kings, and Children of
pride; Job 41. 34. In stead of not dying at all, as he flatters them, they sink
and die with him, once for all, irrecoverably, eternally. While people are
gadding abroad, to change their way; (Jer. 2. 36.) wandering like Bee's, from
one fading flower to another, in Satan's first-creation field or worldly
dominion, they look not after God; their backs are upon him; they bow down to
feed with the Serpent, on dust: their ears are deafned, their eyes or minds
blinded by him, that they will not listen to God's Counsel, look after his
meats; have no palate to savor or relish his things, the things of God. They
are wholly of Satan's palate, savor only natural, first-creation vanities, the
things of Man, or evil Angels. Solomon (with Paul) discovering Satan's devices
and wiles, herein, directs Man, here, to get out of his vain wandering walk, in
the delusive, destructive desires of his own spirit, after any first-creation
vanities. And then, does he direct and point him to Christ, for his never
perishing-life and meats, with an eye of spiritual Faith, fixed thereon; and
affections (accordingly) unalterably set on things above (all perishing
vanities, the dust of this World, Col. 3. 1, 2.) the peculiar delights of the
Sons of God. When Men are once brought into the exercise of spiritual senses,
for this new diet, in Christ's new creature spirit of life; as living and
walking circumspectly and wisely therein, they will have no savor or regard for
Satan's meats; let him gild them, by his subtle artifices, while he will or
can, to make them pass for spiritual. Christ, with his Spiritual meats, once
rightly seen and fed upon, takes Men off from their wandering desire after
Satan's meats, and discovers the great danger of feeding on them. Solomon, in a
right compassion to his fellow mortals, would put a stop to the restless
extravagant wanderings of their minds and hearts after Satan's many things (a
multitude of delusive vanities, that can never give any true rest or
satisfaction to them) and six their eye or heart on Christ's one thing
necessary, that comprehends all things, truly, or unchangeably good; Mary's
happy and better choice.

Ver. 10. That which has bin, is named already; and it is known, that it is
Man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.
Man's first-Creation state, is a State of Vanity. And, so are all the things,
he does, deal's in, seeks, or feeds upon, for his satisfaction. That which has
bin, is named already; Man. The convincing view of himself has bin given him by
God, and experienced by himself; that he has nothing of goodness about him, in
his first-creation-make, or natural state, but (...). His vain desire feeds
only upon vain desirables, dust, the old Serpent's diet. Till something of
new creation Life and Wisdom, be found in him, and experienced by him, all is
Vanity within and round about him, that he is able to take notice of, or
delight in. His life, and all his labor in his own Wisdom and Spirit, is
Vanity. All Is but the number of a Man, or Angel; both are but the higher rank
of Beasts, in all their first-Creation excellencies, or natural perfections;
Rev. 13. 18. Genesis 3. 1. All their life, and things, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Glory, Thoughts, Desires, Words, and Actions, are but perishing, earthly,
sensual or natural things; and, if fixed in, devilish; Jam. 3. 15. All such
things, at best, while not fixed in, are admitted no comparison, with the
Glory, Life, Wisdom, Righteousness, and things of God, communicated to, and set
up in spiritual Saints, by a new and second Creation, with all the Fruits,
Desires, Thoughts, Words and Actions, performed or brought forth in his
Gospel Spirit, the New Covenant principle of Life and Action. The Glory of Man
or Angel, in the first-Covenant State, that is to be done away, is no Glory, to
the Glory that excels and remains, for ever. 1 Cor. 3. 10. So, the
Righteousness or Wisdom of Man, in the first, is no Righteousness or Wisdom to
that of God, in the second Covenant-Saint. But, the things of Man or Angel,
turned into (and used in) unchangeable enmity to God, become abundantly worse
than nothing, the greatest Wickednesses, Madnesses and Follies: their
Righteousness, Wisdom, Light, etc. the greatest Wickedness, Folly, and
Darkness. The highest, subtil'st and powerful'st Beast in the first Creation,
is the Devil, and his whole evil angelical party. Man, the next Beast, in
degree, below these, is deeply concerned, to know the number of his own evil
humane, and this evil angelical Beast's name: to take the right and full
measure of them, in their utmost Strength, Poli cies, Artifices, Wiles,
Devices, Subtilties, and Methods of delusion, in their whole Mystery of
iniquity; else, what will become of him? For, these evil angelical
Principalities and Powers, he has, to grapple with, ( Ephesians. 6. 10, - 13.) and if
conquered (as he is sure to be, if he have nothing about him, but his own Life,
Wisdom, Strength and Armor of man) he is undone for ever. Unless therefore
there be some way for man, to become wiser, stronger and more subtle than the
Devil and all his Angels, how can any escape their hands, or be saved? Will any
say, it is a most presumptuous spiritual Pride in any man, to pretend to this?
The proud, self-exalting presumption lies wholly at their Door, who refuse to
have their own Nature humbled, in order to this right exaltation, Jam. 1. 9.
and 4. 10. They are the proud resisters of that Grace, God bestow's on the
humble Submitters to. And, this Grace enables them, so to resist the Devil, and
his whole party of incorrigible wicked Angels and men (the Powers of darkness
and gates of Hell it self, all their joint consultings and forces) as to make
them all, in and with their Captain General, the Devil, flee before them, and
fall under them. This whole Army of rebellious Luciferian self-exalters, God
will resist, or fight against; ver. 6, 7. Where will they be then, but under
Saints feet, by being forced to pass, with all their incorrigible stiff Necks,
or obstinately stubborn Spirits, under their two-edged Sword? Psalm. 149. 6, -
9. In the evil angelical nature, is comprehended the full sum and most absolute
perfect Beauty, Strength, Power, Wisdom, and Glory, that is to be found in the
first-Creation World. But, the least in God's Spirit of Grace, the
Kingdom-spirit of God, will master and tread all this under foot. Yet, therein
do wicked Angels set their heart, as the heart of God, as typ'd in the proud,
rich King of Tire; Ezekiel. 27. 3. and 28. 12. Thou sealest up the Sum, full of
Wisdom, and perfect in Beauty. But, with all this, art to be utterly destroyed,
for ever, as follows; v. 13, - 19. They say, they are God, and sit in the Seat
or Temple of God (in a counterfeit appearance of the New Creation Spirit of
Christ, the creature-Temple of the infinite Divine King, in personal Union with
the inhabitant) and positively require all men to worship them, as God, or
Gods; many Gods, with their many Lords, self-exalted men, under them; 2 These.
2. 4. The very God, the very Christ, the very Apostles and Saints of Christ,
will discover and rout all these mysterious workers of Iniquity, and destroy
them for ever. Saints will prove more then conquerors over them all, at last.
Down go all final incorrigible workers of mystical or literal Iniquity, at
long-run, and never rise more; literal and mystical Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon;
as figured, Jer. 51. 64. What Wisdom, short of God's, in his-communicated
Spirit of Grace, the holy Ghost, is able to discover these false Gods, false
Christ's, and their false Gospel Ministers, and Apostles, in such beautiful
disguise, and taking false dress, as they are permitted to come forth in, to
deceive? Spiritual Wisdom, in true Saints, can count, number, discover, and
sind them all out. Yea, and they will be the very hand, at last, by whom, in
association with the holy Angels, the vials of God's (...), shall be gradually
poured forth, upon all the guilty heads of such Gospel-Wolves and Lions, in
Sheeps and Shepherd's clothing, or appearances. Evil Angels, as all
comprehended under the name and title of their head, and called Satan, help
their (...) amongst Men, to transform themselves into the likeness of the
Apostles of Christ, to carry on their anti-Gospel-work. This work, Paul found
them, both and all, at, 2 Cor. 11. 13, -15. and ver. 2, -4. The end of both,
Paul could tell, will be bad enough, even according to their works. These two
evil humane and Angelical Beasts, do jointly, in design, make up one and the
same antichristian Beast, or Man of Sin, the mystical Sodom, Egypt, and
Babylon, which the Devil, as the mystical King Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar, is
the supreme manager and ruler of. Spiritual Saints, in the wisdom of God, (...)
out this whole body of Mystical Sinners, the whole Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition; number and sum them all up, so as to discover, they all amount unto
no more (with all their big looks, stout words, and vast numbers) then the
first-creation Beast, fixed in unchangeable enmity to God; which they are sure
to have under their feet, in conclusion, at the winding up of this World, with
Satan's Kingdom, and beginning of Christ's, on the Earth; Jer. 23. 5. Rev. 5.
10. True Saints know, they are, all together, but a man, and not God, though
they set their heart as the heart of God, and presumptuously say, they are
wiser then Daniel, (Ezekiel. 28. 2, -8.) or the spiritual Saint; yea, reckon him a
nobody, a fool, a mad man, the offscouring of all things; 1 Cor. 4. 10, 13.
Yea, so stubbornly daring and presuming will they be found, as to say, under
the hands of God, Christ, and his Saints, when (...) them, that they are God;
ver. 9. But, shall be irresistibly forced to acknowledge, they are all but a
man, and no God. All their pretensions, crafts, power, Luciserian presumptions,
and confidences, will fail them; not do their work, nor serve their turn. The
spiritual Saint has a certain, steady, infallible view of the most dismal and
dreadful conclusion, all their vain boast and fading Glory will come to; after
all their huge swelling words of Vanity, scornful looks, and scoffings at that
new Light, that discovers, and will master them all. The three sixes, in the
number 666 ( Rev. 13. 18.) make up, and point out to us, the first-creation
state, with the utmost Glories and Excellencies thereof, in Man and Angel, as
of the six day's works of God's hands. God rests only in the new creation, or
seventh day's state, turning and ceasing from all his first works, in the six
days; Psalm. 102. 25, -28. Isa. 66. 1, 2. Heb. 1. 10, -12. And, God the
Mediator rested or ceased from his first-creation life and works, in angelical
and humane nature, of the first-creation sort, becoming thereby, the Lamb slain
from the beginning, and toward the latter end of this World, in the fullness of
time; Heb. 4. 4. 10. The true Saint, finding out the number, weight, and
intrinsic nature of all first-creation excellencies (when he has summed them
all up) can write down, at the foot of the Account (after imprimis, Satan; and
item, all other evil Angels and Men) the total sum, the burden of this Book,
All Is Vanity, and will prove eternal vexation of Spirit, to all that trust
therein. Vanity? Yea, lighter, worse than Vanity it self; Psalm. 39. 5. and 62.
9. Angels, that are of higher degree: and Men, of lower, in such fading
Glories, all are but Vanity. And so, Men of higher and lower degrees, in the
literal or mystical Riches, Pomp, and Glory of this World; all, Vanity. No
getting out of the sphere of Vanity, within the compass of the first creation.
No goodness in Man or Angel, but what is a perishing Vanity. This has already
so bin named, or called by its right name, Vanity. And it is known, that it is
Man, the Man of sin, in Angel and Man, fixed therein; and whatever is to be
found in the whole first-creation. This is God's divine thought and judgment,
and the infallible judgment of the new creature Gospel Spirit of Christ, in
himself and Saints, in exact harmony with the infinite divine understanding and
thought. The Spiritual Saint, weighing all, in the balance of the
new-creation-sanctuary-spirit, calculates and finds out the total sum, or
comprehensive number of all first-creation goodnesses, and excellencies,
represented in all the several parts and distinct Glories thereof, and finds
all Vanity. All, therein, are found wanting, with Belshazzar, and too light, by
this Mean Tekel, as having nothing conducible to true blessedness, about them;
or of any avail, toward it: but indeed, as to that new creation Spirit of
everlasting life, Glory, Wisdom, and Righteousness, wherein true happiness is
to be found, wholly destitute of it, and unchangeable enemies to it, and all
its things, things of God; and, by infallible consequence, are they wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked. All old, perishing, first-creation good
things, (...) pass away, and will be taken from all Angels and Men, good and
bad, in Love or Wrath, for evermore. In the room thereof, all God's new and
everlasting good things are set up, in obedient Saints; 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6.
15. Mat. 19. 21. In incorrigible sinners, only the unchangeable Wrath and fiery
Indignation of God for ever, succeeds in the room thereof.

If the changeable first-Covenant life, set up by God, in the first-creation of
Angel and Man, had not bin found faulty, wanting, or defective (as to the true
unchangeable blessedness of either) no place or room would have bin sought or
found, for a second: no need of Gospel, or a New Covenant principle, the Spirit
of Grace; Heb. 8. 6, 7. They, that, by (...) in the first, make void the Grace
of God, in the second, will, in conclusion, sind all, in the first, void, and
of none effect, as to the blessedness they have vainly flattered and promised
themselves, therein. Changeableness, and now, enmity, the great defects in the
first-creation state of Angel or Man, can neither be cured nor found out by the
single first-creation wisdom and light of either. It Is utterly impossible. Nor
therefore does God require it, of them. But, he requires of both and all, to be
beholden to him, for his unspeakable new creation gift and wisdom, whereby, all
may be done. For this, must they submit to his terms of receiving it, the free
parting with, and giving up their first-creation life of vanity, with all the
things thereof, in sacrifice to him, by a holy death, under his cross, or
Gospel-sword. First-creation life, in Man and Angel, was represented to them
both, by the Tree of that Knowledge or Wisdom that (...) up, to their own
destruction, if rested in. Life, in an absolute sense, unchangeable and
everlasting, was figured by the Tree of life, after which they were all to
seek, as that, wherein, the Kingdom and Righteousness of God, is to be found;
Mat. 6. 33. By mere natural light, in their first-creation-make, could neither
Angel nor Man, in innocence, reach the truth of this Mystery. But, by
convincing spiritual light, both had the conviction-sight of it, in their
higher and lower spheres. The Angels higher natural capacities fitted them for
stronger and clearer conviction-sight thereof, which rendered their resusal to
submit to the terms of receiving it, absolutely unpardonable, at first. Man's,
through mercy, was not so. But, 'twas the fault of both, to lean to their own
fallible understanding, rather than follow and obey God's spiritual convictions
and commands to them, forbidding them, so to do. The sad consequence of such
foolish choice, will the fallen Angels experience, to eternity. And, so will as
many Men, as fix there. Man's true concern, for preventing all this, is, to
listen to that voice of true Wisdom, which declares the vanity of all natural,
first-creation life; and then, also, another life, above and beyond that, a
life of everlasting Righteousness and Truth. This brings with it durable riches
and goodness, delights of the Sons of God; and so, takes Man off, from his
wandering desires and pursuits after first-creation vanities, the delights of
the Sons of Men, where it is impossible for them, ever to find any true rest or
satisfaction. All such seeking for a happiness, tends to everlasting torment
and vexation of spirit.

Solomon's concluding advice then, to Man, in this verse, is, not to contend
with him that is mightier than he; by keeping up his own fading life, in a
direct known rebellion against God's convincing discoveries of a more
excellent, (That he call's his own) and his express command, for parting with
that, he calls our own. For, Have thou an arm like God? Job 40. 9. contend not
with him, then. For, who has directed his spirit? or bin his Counselor? Isa.
40. 13. Shall he that contends with the Almighty, instruct him? he that
reproves him, must answer it. Job 40. 2. This silenced Job; Once have I spoken;
yea, twice, but I Will proceed no further; verse. 5. Presume not then, to keep up
thy own forbidden life, to thy known certain eternal Damnation; and to refuse
so great Salvation as is offered, in God's own. Woe to him that strives with his
Maker: Isa. 45. 9. Let the potsherds of the Earth (Men in their but
earthly-Jerusalem or first-Covenant spirit) strive, contend, and dispute with
one another, as to this or that way of Salvation, in their tossed, fluctuating
understandings (under the various winds and blasts of diabolical Inspirers and
Suggesters, on the troubled mystical Sea of their weaker humane nature) while
all of them equally, that is, wholly miss the only true path of life, one and
the other. But, let them all take heed of striving with their Maker, about the
way of Salvation, proudly exalting the conceptions and words of their foolish
wisdom, against the plainly and abundantly declared word's and methods of his.
Shall an earthy, clay-Man say to God, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. 20.
whv have thou set me up in a life, I may not keep, as my (...) (...) thee, and
concern to my self? Why did. not give (...) (...) creature-life, thou
call'st thy own, at first? So might I have escaped the hearing of all the hard
sayings of the Cross, and the Death-blows thereof, upon mine. Can any Man hope
to prosper, in such contest and dispute with his Maker? Nay, but O Man, who
(...) (...) that thus reply (...) God? Job, presently, on such (...), did
silence his own quarrelling spirit, that darkn'd the counsels of God's Wisdom,
with the ignorant words of his own; Job 42. 3. What a noise have we heard,
among tossed humane, earthy understandings, pro and con (and the same Men off
and on, therein) about Free Will, Water Baptism (with many other, besides the
cinque-points, in the (...) '(...), (...) new Arminian Controversy) while all
are in a tumult against God's Free Will, in his new creation life; and against
his Fire-Baptism on their free will, or cleans'd natural state? In what
unutterable confusion, are mortals tugging and sweating against their own
Salvation, and for their everlasting destruction? A deep silence and
inadvertency, we sind amongst them, as to the true life and glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, in all their Skirmishings, and Polemical, quarrelling
Divinities, so called. They are, one and all, without controversy, for the
same righteous first-creation life, freewill, and delights of the Sons of Men
(call all, by what disguising Names they will) and, as one Man, against the
spiritual life, glorious liberty and delights of the Sons of God. They all
unanimously, with a full mouth, set themselves to hunt and run down the only
Gospel-Divinity, and Doctrine of true Salvation, the very Christ, the very
Gospel, as the most dangerous, destructive Doctrine, in the whole World. To a
seed of unawakn'd spiritual Saints, engaged for a season, through ignorance, as
Paul once, among these wicked Confederate's, Devils and Men, is it said; Say ye
not a confederacy, in a resolved union with them, that are fixed in this
Confederacy, against God, to their eternal ruin? Isa. 8. 12. Fix not your foot
with them, in this desperate quarrel, against God. As for others, they will on,
in the proud waves of their own understandings under the inspirations and
doctrines of Devils, swelling up, in their words of vanity, to the highest pich
of presumption, against Christ, all Gospel-Saints and Truths. So will they
hasten the wrath of God, upon their own guilty Heads. The cornerstone of that
rocky new creation building, they reject, will fall on them, at last, and grind
them to powder; dash them all to shivers, as a potters vessel. On these
accounts, Solomon continues his advice to Men; saying,

Verse. 11. Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is Man the
better?
These many things, that, with Martha, Man cumbers himself about, are all
variety of things, relating to his outward or inner Man, in his natural state;
which he covet's, greedily seeks after, and feed's upon. The whole round of
this vast heap of vanities, Men march up and down amongst, to get; Satan walks
up and down in, to give them, as he sees occasion, to carry on his interest,
among them. All this is his circuit, sphere, walk, and permitted dominion, as
God and Prince of this World (Job 1. 7. Luke 4. 6. Joh. 12. 31.) He is the
master-Prince of all such Mystical humane first-covenant Princes of this World,
as crucified Christ (1 Cor. 2. 8.) for his Doctrine of the World to come, as
treason against the peace of their joint worldly dominion, and tyranical
domineering over and against the Saints of the most high. A fixed,
self-confident, righteous first-Covenant People, will unanimously vote true
Saints to death (as they served Christ himself) rather than robbers and
murderers. By such, did the Prince of darkness and death carry on his murdering
work on the Prince of Life,? and Author of Salvation; and, at same time
procured, by them, a pardon for a convicted murderer; Act. 3. 14, 15. That, Men
get, by such fighting against the only spirit, wherein and by, they can be
saved, is, their own everlasting destruction, by the same hand they oppose,
executed upon them. And, what get they in their own way, amongst a heap of
delusive vanities? nothing, save an increase of vanity, and of their sin and
guilt, for their wilful rebellion therein, against all the faithful warnings,
advice, and commands of God's spiritual Law, to the contrary, for their good.
So, will they find, at length, that by increasing their heap of vanities, they
have bin heaping or treasuring up wrath to themselves, against the last day.
They will be (in such sense) filled with their own devices, and reap the sad
fruits of their many inventions ( Prove. 1. 31. Eccles. 7. 29.) under wrath, and
a total disappointment of all their vain opinions, and labors, about and for
rest and happiness. Abundantly the worse will they be, for all they have bin,
done, or had.

Verse. 12. For, who knows what is good for Man, in this life, all the days of
his vain life, which he spends as a shadow? For, who can tell a Man, what
shall be after him, under the Sun?
There Is great cause for these two pertinent queries, concerning Man. For, in
his natural state, at best, is he wholly ignorant of both these things, viz.
What Is best for him to do, in this World; or what will be after him, under the
Sun, when he is departed out of it. What Is truly good for him, in order to true
Blessedness, here, or hereafter, he knows not. But, when convincingly showed
all, wherein, from what hand, on what terms, or, by what way and means, it is
attainable, if he refuse so great Salvation as is offered, in God's Spirit, and
choose the life of his own, before and against it, he spends all his days and
labors, in and about a shadow; and so, chooses his own damnation. He is
possessed of no good, but what will vanish and leave him, for ever; Psalm. 39.
5. and 49. 12. when he is stripped of all his fading good, and finds himself
unchangeably evil, under unchangeable Wrath, he will, too late, be forced to
see the Truth, here declared, by way of question, that he spent all his days in
(and all his hours about) a shadow. But,

To the second Query. These are the sad things, that will be after a Man has
spent his days here, in a shadowy state of Vanity; as amused and diverted, all
along his vain life, with variety of perishing Vanities, under the influence of
the God of this World. Amidst a flush and confluence of these delusive
entertainments, he seems little concerned what shall be after him; or what will
become of him, for ever. He obstinately deafens himself to all counsels and
instructions, about what indeed is eternal life, or the way toward it (the
death of a fading natural one) as mere aerie notion, fiction, and enthusiastical
delusion. He strikes in, with the God of this World, as willing to be blinded
by him, against all Gospel Light and things. He desires not to be troubled with
such matters, but, to live in (...) perfect inadvertency and unconcernedness,
as to such good things as cannot be lost; and, as in no danger of losing what he
has, which most certainly will be lost, for ever. Man's days in this World are
but as a hand-breadth, nothing to his endless sorrowful State, hereafter. Yet,
all his solicitude is about his concerns here; scarce a thought, about his
eternal concerns, hereafter. All duties and performances, in a life of vanity,
do but add to, and increase vanity; and, what is he the better, as to true
happiness, or any thing toward it? In every respect, worse: in none, better.
For, what he sinfully heaps up, against conviction, he more and more sinfully
delights in. As the heap of vanities, increases, his evil love to, and delight
therein, increases. So, in all his labor, he adds iniquity to iniquity, on all
hands. His heap of vanities, and his vain love to it, increases; all, in a
known rebellion against God. Here Is Man's destructive trade in vanities,
wilfully neglecting all God's Counsel, and durable riches. He neither lay's to
heart the desperate consequents of his evil choice and dotage on his own
perishing life and riches, or the unspeakable happiness that would have come
after, and befallen him, had he obediently exchanged and parted with all, for
God's everlasting. Solomon bewail's this twofold ignorance of unhappy Man, as
to the everlasting good things, that would have fallen to his lot, after this
life (above all conception, or thought of his natural heart) on a right choice;
or sorrows, and torment for ever, on a wrong, in a state of everlasting
darkness and death. This is the unknown, or unconsider'd state, that will come
after all his jollity and deceitful pleasure, in his vain life, under the Sun.

CHAP. VII.
V. 1. A good Name is better then precious Ointment: and the day of death, then
the day of one's birth.
NOthing is (properly) good in God's sight, but what is unchangably so. Christ
would not suffer our nature in the changeable first-covenant life of the Law,
to be called good, in his (...) person; Mat. 19. 17. The good name then, here,
is the new name, ( Rev. 2. 17.) which imports (and belongs to) that newness of
life, in which only it is possible to bring forth fruit unto God, or be saved.
Romans 6. 4. and 7. 4. This is, here, asserted to be better then all the precious
Ointment, in its kind, of first covenant Life, Light, Wisdom, with all variety
of Gifts and Abilities therein, as also, all spiritual enlightening Gifts,
received upon that foot, or in that Law-state, short of the very Gospel-life
and more excellent way (1 Cor. 12. 31.) called Love; 1 Cor. 13. To this, only,
belongs the new, or unchangeably good name, here. This is the unspeakably more
excellent Gift, then the said precious Ointment. All first-creation-Life and
Goodness, being corruptible; God, that sees all futurities and possibilities
(knowing it will change, or be changed and lost) calls it Corruption, in or
with which, no man or Angel, can enter into, or inherit Incorruption, the
incorruptible Inheritance (1 Pet. 1. 4.) the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
That incorruptible new creation Life, is convincingly showed and offered Men,
(in lieu of their obediently surrendered natural, and corruptible) in which,
alone, any can enter into, and inherit it. And, this is imported in the new or
good name, here. All old or first-creation life, at best, in Angel or Man, is
charactered by (...), grass, flower of grass, Vanity, a Dream; and they,
therein, said to be altogether Vanity; Isa. 40. 6, -8. 1 Pet. 1. 24. Psalm. 39.
5. Thus is the corruptible seed of a first-covenant life, (set up in both, by
the first-creation, or restored in Man, since lost by the fall, which in its
utmost growth, flourish, and fruitfulness, is but a fading flower, the mystical
natural tree of God's left-hand-planting) distinguished from the incorruptible
seed (1 Pet. 1. 23.) of his right-hand-planting, by a new creation, which
springs up in spiritual Saints, prospers into an everlasting Kingdom-state,
rendering them mystical Gospel-trees, the fruits whereof are incorruptible; and
the very leaves, such, as never wither or (...) away; Psalm. 1. 3. This
spiritual tree of Life, will be known by its fruits, in distinction from the
natural, fleshly tree, all the fruits whereof, are (as the root, and tree, they
grow upon) perishing Vanities. The new Name or Life of the New Creature,
Gospel Spirit, or living Word of God, set up in man, can never be turned into a
lie. Man's old name, and fading first-covenant Law-life, at best, when asserted
to be a spiritual, Gospel-state of everlasting Life and Salvation, is turned
into a flat lie and falsehood, and all the things, births, works, fruits, and
products thereof and in, though good in their kind, when called spiritual, and
confidently rested in for Salvation, are all lies, and enmity to God, and his
Gospel Spirit of Truth. Renewed nature, called Grace; the renewed old or
natural Man (with his first Covenant righteous Life and Name) called the
new creature, the spiritual Saint, with the new Covenant-Life, and Gospel-Name;
all these are dangerous, destructive lies. In sum, the good Name and precious
Ointment, here, are the differing characters of first and second-Covenant Life.
The former, through the said mistake, Paul found to be a body, a law, a state
of sin and death (Romans 7. 24. and 8. 2.) which the new covenant law of the
Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus freed him from, by putting his nature, therein,
to death. The Spirit of life is the death of death, when it puts the law-spirit
of Enmity and Death, to death, in the Saint; utterly abolishing all the
Anointings, or said precious Ointment, received in the natural state; and
giving all again, with usury, in the unchangeable life and transcendently more
precious anointing of the spiritual Man. Man, in restored first-Covenant
Law-life, is apt ( as Paul once) to despise and reject all Gospel-Tydings or
witness of the second. The good Name, imports a transcendently higher and
better anointing, then the precious Ointment, here, can signify. For, then the
spiritual, there is no better kind of precious ointment, receivable by, or
communicable to, Man. This true meaning of the Holy Ghost, in Solomon, as to
this former, will much conduce to, and facilitate the opening of the latter
clause of this verse.

-- And the day of Death, then the day of one's Birth. The stress of these
words cannot lie in the literal sense, which cannot hold, generally, nor mostly,
true. For, the literal death of the vast number of wicked men, is abundantly
worse, then the day of their litteral birth, and life, in this World. Man,
though born dead in Sin, is capable of a restauration-birth of a first-Covenant
life in his Spirit, which puts him under hopeful advantages, and possibilities
of a new-creation-birth of an everlasting righteous Life. These hopes are
utterly cut off, from all that die in their Sins, as all that die, in a state
of enmity to God, and his Spirit of Grace and everlasting Life, do. This
necessitates the allowing a mystical meaning to these Words; which is this. The
death of Man's Spirit (as to all natural first-creation life, (...), or
first-Covenant righteous) obediently submitted to, with certain hope of a
Resurrection into the life of Christ's Gospel Spirit (that slay's and offers it
up, in sacrifice to God; as he served our nature, at best, in his own person)
is transcendently better, then the Birth and utmost flourish thereof, in him.
For, now is he much forwarder on his way, in the right method and death-pass,
toward an everlasting righteous New Covenant life. Paul counted the former
dung, to the latter, and suffered the loss of all therein, for it. Phil. 3. 7,
8. If Man submit not to the terms and ways of arriving at this new birth, for a
newness of life, he will come to a latter end worse then his beginning (in
either of his two former Births, litteral or mystical, of bodily or
first-Covenant life) eternal death. By obediently losing and quitting the
former, natural, or Law-life, for a spiritual, Gospel-one, he comes to a latter
end, better then any of his beginnings (in Adam, before the fall; or since, in
his own said twofold personal birth) eternal life. A rebellious pitying and
sparing our own nature in the first-covenant life thereof, loses all, for ever.
An obedient giving it up, to death, and right losing it, saves all; Matthew. 16.
25. The Spirit, or inner natural Man, when crucified, and raised into Christ's
spiritual life; the death, or dissolution of the body, is not feared but
desired; as by Paul. He earnestly longed and groaned after the shaking off, and
being perfectly rid of the dusty, mortal, perishing earthly life and state, of
his whole natural Man, body and spirit (2 Cor. 5. 1, -- 4.) and so, to be
wholly at home with the Lord (ver. 6.) in the entire, single, uninterrupted
exercise of spiritual life, amongst the best company, the pure, unchangeable
Friends of that life, blessed Angels, and Saints departed. In this World, the
Saint is surrounded with innumerable Enemies thereof; very burdensome, ill,
unpleasing company to him. In the birth and utmost flourish of a first-covenant
Law-life, we are still under Satan's power, and delusive influence. He can
deceive us, into the same perdition with himself, by that very righteous life.
By inducing Men, to overvalue, and and rest in it and on it, for Salvation, he
brings them into unchangeable Union with himself, in Enmity to God. When
perfectly crucified, as to the life of the Law, and raised into the life of the
Gospel, we are not under the Law, but under Grace. Then, Sin and Satan have
lost their dominion over us, for ever. We wholly cease and are freed from both
and all; all enemies, and dangers, whatsoever; Romans 6. 7, -14. 1 Pet. 4. 1. The
birth of a first-Covenant life, gives not full victory over Satan: the right
death of Nature, and loss of it, does. Therefore, better, on all hands, as the
only way to free us from death, and set us up in eternal life. The right, full
death, of Man's Law-spirit of bondage, delivers him from all bondage and fear
of death, for ever; which, all their first-Covenant lifetime, Men are
continually subject to; Heb. 2. 15.

Verse. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house
of feasting: for, that is the end of all Men, and the living will lay it to his
heart.
The house of mourning, or state of sorrow to the natural Man (under the
death-blows of the Gospel-Sword, or spiritual cross of Christ) is better for
him, to go into and be in, then the house of feasting, in the most joyful
fruitful life and exercise thereof, in a first-Covenant state. For, therein
draws he nearer to a heavenly, spiritual, new covenant life. Our nature in
Christ, was straightened and sore pained under the progressive work of the Cross,
and pangs of Death, thereby caused, till accomplished; Luke 12. 50. His living
Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, (Mat. 26. 38.) as the Sacrifice,
under the crucifying Work of his own quickening Spirit, the Gospel High Priest,
and true Melchisedec. The first Adam ought to have given up that Sacrifice, to
God, by the same Priestly hand of (and in) the second. True Saints, with (...),
receive the sentence of death within them, and find it their great advantage to
have it speedily carried on, upon them; and, their ease, to have it perfected
or accomplished. The full death thereof, kindly submitted to, is perfect
conformity to Christ's death; and their perfect deliverance from all evil, all
wicked enemies, within them and without; and from all the danger of ensnaring
vanities and tempting objects, they are continually surrounded with, which are
gratifying to their natural life and desire, corrupt or righteous; while they
have any activity thereof, left about them. So, all former natural fruitfulness
in a first-Covenant, under Christ, as a fleshly Bridegroom, is turned into
barrenness; in which, with Hannah, they become a scorn and derision, to such as
continue fruitful Peninnah's, in the first; that house of feasting. Paul, that
was an eminent somebody, in the first; when converted into the Gospel-life of
the second, was a stark fool, a nobody, to such some-bodies. Phil. 3. 4. 1
Cor. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 10. 12. Rich, wise, full first-covenanters, were the
mystical strong Bulls of Bashan, that gaped on Christ himself (and so, on
Saints) (...) him round, as ravening and roaring Lions; Psalm. 22. 12, 13. These
are the mystical (...) cattle, that thrust with side and sheulder, and push all
the weak, poor, lean, wounded, diseased (...) (under the Death-work of the
Cross, upon their natural man) with their horns, Ezekiel. 34. 20, 21. Such lean,
barren, diseased ones, fools, and as little Children, are God's: The fat, wise,
and strong (finally persisting there, in enmity to the Cross) the Devil's. He
gets all such fat cattle. The poor and lean, get the Kingdom of God: the rich
and fit, the Kingdom of the Devil, by kinging it, in the same Spirit, with him,
against God. But, besides enemies without, the grieved, sorrowful natural man
of the Saint, within, adds to the affliction. All its whining passions, and
false reasonings, under, and against the Cross, or Spirit of Christ in him, are
foes of his own house (or, in his own person) in union with enemies without
doors. Thus, is his tribulation completed, in that house of mourning, that is
the ready road to Heaven. But, amidst all scornful despisings of first-covenant
(...), Christ, as Bridegroom to his spiritual Spouse, figured in Elkanah, loves
her transcendently more then any fruitful wife, in the first; and so, is better
to her then ten sons, any possible fruits brought forth, in that state; 1 Samuel
1. 1, - 8. Amidst all bitternesses of the natural, the spiritual hidden Man of
the heart prays for the full birth of the (...), figured by Samuel, which, when
born, turns the natural house or state of mourning, into a spiritual house, or
state of everlasting feasting and rejoicing. For this, see Hannah's song of
praise, in the true house of feasting, on God's having granted the prayer she
put up to him, in her house or state of mourning, and barrenness; 1 Samuel 2. 1,
- 10. Christ foretold the sorrow of his Disciples, on his departure from them,
as a fleshly Bridegroom, in the first-Covenant, till his return to them, in the
second, according to the promise of the Father (and of himself, too) which they
were to wait for, in that state of mourning to their natural Man. Joh. 16. 20,
-- 22. Act. 1. 4. and Act. 2. 1, -- 4, Christ's such return to them, turned all
their short sorrow into everlasting joy. Joh. 16. 16, -- 22, gives a full
account of his fore-hand preparing his disciples, in this case, to look for him
as a better Comforter, in a New Covenant Marriage-Union with him, as risen from
the dead. A little while, and ye see me no more, in the first. Again, wait a
little, and ye see me, in the second; in a life I have, in unchangeable Union
with the Father. They understood not this mystery. They knew not what he said;
or what to make on it. Yea, when risen, he found two of his disciples, in a
drooping, sad, dejected Condition; Luke 24. 17. In a little, short, temporary
wrath, he forsook their sinning natural Man, in a life of Enmity; but, with
everlasting kindness, he soon returned to them, in his never-sinning
spiritual-life; and set it up, in them, Isa. 54. 7, 8. It Is but once, and for a
little season, the waters of the Cross (figured by Noah's flood,) drown and
overwhelm their natural Man; extinguish all the life, lust, desire and thought
thereof; and then, all joy, for ever after, in Christ's rocky spiritual life
(figured by Noah's Ark) a state of everlasting feasting and rejoicing, in the
Kingdom of the Father; v. 9, 10. Christ will not leave them, long, comfortless,
in a state of, Orphanship and Widowhood, fatherless, and husbandless, as to
their natural state. He will soon be with them, again, in that Spirit of truth,
the merry, self-confident first-Covenanteer receives not; Joh. 14. 16, - 20. So
then, the Saints short mourning, ends in everlasting feasting, and rejoicing:
the others short rejoicing, in eternal sorrow, mourning, darkness, and death;
Mat. 5. 4. Luke 6. 25. Who has begotten me these, even these Children, or Sons
of Peace, these spiritual fruits, peaceable fruits of righteousness, brought
forth in a newness of life, to God? The Faith of the Saint's spiritual Man,
answer's this question of his amazed natural, ascribing all, to the spiritual
Bridegroom and better comforter, then himself was in the first-Covenant. No
way, but through the house of mourning and death (as to all fading first-Covenant
life of nature) into Christ's spiritual house of everlasting rejoicing, where
all sorrow and sighing (...) away, for ever; Isa. 35. 10. Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Rev.
21. 4. and 7. 17.

The contrary state to the said mystical house of mourning, is Man's flourish,
in a restored first-Covenant righteous life, holy flesh, and a fruitful living
and walking therein, as a present Victor and Master over (or (...) of) the vile
affections of the corrupt spirit of nature. Rectified rational and intellectual
powers keep the sensual, in some degree of a first-creation rectitude and good
order. All this, yet, is vanity, a fading flower. And this, with the fruits and
enjoyments of it, is all that is found in the first-covenant house of feasting.
The final self-consident keeping here, in refusal of (and opposition to)
Christ's offered spiritual, second-covenant life, is certain damnation. Satan
has a sevenfold more dangerous hold of them (and abode in them, as his
absolute temples and habitations, for ever) even of these mystical swept,
(...), garnished houses, in first-covenant life and second-covenant light, then
of Men in the corrupt spirit of nature, unfix'd; Mat. 12. 43, -- 45. Luke 11.
24, -- 26. So come such feasters, to a latter end, in restored, worse then
their (...), in corrupt nature; a state of unchangeable enmity to God and his
Gospel Spirit of Grace. Man chooses, rather, to follow the Devil's pleasing
false counsel, through a house of temporary feasting, into everlasting
mourning; then God's true and faithful, through a house of (...) and death,
into everlasting rejoicing, and life.' t. For, that is the end of all Men, and
the living will lay it to his heart. All Men, good and bad, must come, sooner
or later, for a season, or for ever, to the house of mourning, by the death and
loss of all the (...) goodness in their natural state, or house of feasting.
That house, or state of mourning, is the end, all men come to, on the said
differing accounts, specified. Such an end, they must all experience, after the
most fruitful flourish in their fading Law-life; even the death and loss of
all. Here Is then a character of the natural heart, in all Men Their inward
thought and design, is, to establish themselves in their own righteousness,
when they have it; and in the riches, and fruitfulness thereof, and so to have
the mystical Land of their own nature, called after their own old name, in
their old first-covenant life, or restored first-creation state, figured by
Men's calling their outward possessions, so, relating to bodily life, only;
Psalm. 49. 11. Conviction-light of the new covenant Spirit, they will receive, as
an ornament to prank up, adorn, and advance their nature; to puff it more up
with spiritual pride; not by obedience to, and compliance with it, to let it
fall down and be humbled to the death of that state, as they ought. So turn
they all spiritual inlightning Gifts upon (as well as fresh enlivenings of)
their nature, into their disadvantage, and sorer condemnation, for ever. Satan
offers to advance them in their own way, after their own heart, into his
superior angelical perfections and excellencies, of the first-creation sort,
gilding them also by his sinful transforming arts, with the appearance of
Christ's spiritual new creation excellencies; and then, has he them fast in his
fools-paradise, which they take for the Kingdom of Heaven. He wants not for
Men-Apostles to carry on this work.

Moral Heathens are bidding toward Salvation, by obedience to first-Covenant
light, only. Temporary Believers (by the knowledge of Christ, after the flesh)
are bidding at it, in a righteous first-Covenant life, under the perfect
righteousness of that sort, from Christ, imputed to them; or that comeliness,
put upon them; Ezekiel. 16. 14. The moral Heathen, with the Quaker, aim's at a
perfection in his own perpersonal Life and operations, of the same sort, Adam,
at first, had; not regarding imputed righteousness in either Covenant; or, at
all, the everlasting righteous life of the second. This is not (and so, nor
God) in all or any of his thoughts; Psalm. 10. 4. The legal-Christian-Believer
and Professor, though advanced beyond the highest pretender to Heathen morality
(yea and furnished with spiritual light, also) is yet but the supernaturally
adorned natural Man, that, often, with the (...) Galatians, retreats from Christ
in spirit (showed and offered him) to a resting in holy flesh, or his own
restored naturals, in a first-Covenant-life, for salvation; Gal. 3. 1, - 3.
This, finally and absolutely done, is the unpardonable refusal of, and sinning
against the Holy Ghost, God's holy New Creature Spirit of everlasting
Righteousness. The Morally righteous Heathen is not so resolutely fierce
against first-Covenant life, in the professing legally righteous and
Gospel-convinc'd Christian, as he is against the second, in the true
Gospel-believing Christian. Wot ye why? First-Covenant life advances nature, in
its own way, above and beyond Heathen Morality. But, in order to true Gospel or
second-Covenant life, Christ comes with fire and sword, to pull down and
destroy the Wisdom of the Greek, or Moral Heathen, and the first-Covenant
righteous life of the Jew or legal Christian. For this, is the Preacher of the
Cross, and work of it, a fool, foolishness, and a stumbling block to both; 1
Cor. 1. 23. Thus, comes the spiritual Saint (though transcendently advanced over
both their guilty heads, as far as the Heavens are above the Earth, into the
life and Image of the Heavenly, that is out of the sight and reach of both their
Wisdoms or Understandings) to be judged the veriest fool and mad man in the
world, by them both. They are agreed against him, to call and reckon him, so,
in their several gradual advances in Naturals. The highest rank of Naturalists,
in (...)-Covenant life and second-covenant light, called Christ (...) So, (
Joh. 10. 20.) for his Gospel-Doctrine (...) the Cross, on their Pharisaical
Law-life and Righteousness, leavened and sowr'd into unchangable enmity to
God's Gospel-life and everlasting righteousness. Awakened Saints and true
Prophets have bin so handled by such legal-professors, in all Ages; Hos. 9. 7,
8. Cain, a (...)-Covenant worshipper, killed his own Brother Abel, a second, on
this very single account. Paul himself, when a righteous, wise first-Covenant,
Law-Pharisee, in holy (...), fiercely persecuted the Gospel Spirit, in
(...)-Covenant Saints. (...), he was despised as a contemptible (...), by such
as he had bin, when a signal Friend and Preacher of the Gospel; 1 Cor. 4. 10,
-13. But, in his transcendently superior Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of
God, he passed not for Man's day, or dark-spirited judgment, whose wisdom
reached not such Spiritual Heavenly Mysteries, Things, or Truths; 1 Cor. 4. 3.
He regarded not their disregards, mistakes, contradictions, blasphemies, or
evil-speakings, and most unjust cenfurings of him. As elevated, by Satan, into
natural angelical excellencies (and tongues or language of Men and Angels,
intuitive, and by a sound of words, and all (...) things, gilded with
appearances of spirituality) do first-Covenanteers feed at the Serpent's table
with such delight, as to find ecstasies and raptur's of false, delusive joy, in
a way after their own hearts, and despise the crucisied, abas'd natural Man, in
the Saint, as the filth and offscouring of all things. Satan, thus (all along
this World, and his Reign) by his undiscerned, or wilfully unconsider'd pranks,
plays his game upon Man, so as to carry it, clear, with abundantly the far
greater number of professors, high pretenders to Gospel, and bidders at
Salvation, and the Kingdom of God, as the only reputed Orthodox, or
right-thinking heirs thereof. But, the truly living spiritual Saint, lay's all
these things to heart, as having escaped out of the dark, mistaking spirit of
bondage and death, others keep in. He sees, the house of mourning, or loss of
all fading goodness or life, in the natural spirit, will be the end of all Men
(and Angels) good and bad. Those that obediently surrender and lose it, find
eternal life: others, eternal darkness and death. True Saints, and incorrigible
sinners, all must come to it, at last; even, to experience the loss of all good,
in their own mortal life of Nature. It Is appointed to all, once to die, (Heb.
9. 27.) or lose all mortal life or good, in Body, Soul, or spirit. Is it short
of a wonder, that when Saints discover the devices of Satan, all his serpentine
crafts, thorow-out his mystery of iniquity; first-covenant professors, jovial
and frolic in his mystical, spiritual Snares (and a profane party, in his
brutish Snares, or Fetters of a contemptible strumpet) should, both and all,
despise and hate him, for his Gospel-news, and discoveries of their madness,
and desperate consequence of finally persisting therein? Yet, thus it always
was; and now is, more then ever, in these latter and worse then all former
times; 2 Timothy 3. 1. The great peril to true Saints, in the power of Godliness,
is from (...) Brethren, in the form thereof, the life of the Law, righteousness
of Man; Psalm. 50. 20. Isa. 66. 5. In them, is the highest strain of selflove.
For, they have the most plausible, beautiful self, to love; the mystical
visage, or clean face of a cleans'd, enlightened Spirit. The literal Beauty, or
outward Glory, found in a profane party, lies but in bodily complexion, Skin,
and glittering outward Circumstances, Pomp, and Ornament. The true Saint, that
brings tidings, in his new Light, of a spiritual Life, Beauty, and Glory,
(demonstrating all, these two sorts of mad People are pleasing and sporting
themselves with, to be but shadows, a dream, a vain show, kick-shows, lighter
then Vanity, and themselves also; Psalm. 39. 5, 6. and 62. 9.) spoils all their
sport; gives a damp to all their delusive pleasure and delight: yea, vexes and
torments them all; specially, the dwellers upon Earth, (Rev. 11. 10.)
inhabitants of the earthly Jerusalem, in first-covenant-life, holy flesh. The
brutish inhabitants of the Sea, a profane party, are more gravel'd with, and
vexed at such reproof and condemnation, as is reflected upon them, by the
doctrine and conversation of strictwalking righteous legal-spirited Teachers
and Professors. They little mind, or are able to take any cognizance, of the
spiritual, Gospel-Saint, or his doctrine. And, what need the Law-pretender to
Gospel, (gilding all his Law-things with Gospel-words and appearances) fear the
Gospel-Saint's Testimony, as to true Gospel-things? What? Why, this spoils all
their mystical Babylonish sport, and trading Ministry, with their false Wares.
It discovers all, to be but Pictures, or Idols, pourtrai'd on the Walls of
their house or Church on the Sand; and on the mystical whited Sepulchers,
themselves, who personate and would pass current, in such disguise, paint, and
gildings, for the true Gospel-Heirs of the Kingdom; and so, jussle out the true
spiritual Heirs, as blasphemous wranglers about it; and groundless, unwarranted
pretenders to it. Mean while, the true Heir's invisible Saintship, (on which
his title and claim to the Kingdom of Heaven, depends) consist's in a life
(...) with Christ, in God; hid, under a vail, of not (...) (...) (...), or
Law-life. But, when this vail wear's off and grow's daily thinner, under the
continual batteries and macerating-work of the Saint's spiritual, on his
natural Man; the spiritual begins to shine through the vail, look out at the
windows (or holes made in his natural spirit, by the Gospel-Sword and Cross)
and flourish, or (...) himself through the (...) thereof. So, through his
impoverished (...) mind or earthly nature, comes his spiritual Man to shine
forth in a right Gospel-conversation, to (and with) other awakn'd spiritual
Saints ( Cant. 2. 9.) in such Gospel-works, and fruits, by which he (...) his
Father, which is in Heaven; Mat. 5. 16. But, in converse with unawakn'd Saints,
and the generality of the two other sorts of sinners and (...) of God and them
(that the world is full of) must they, with Moses, pull the (...) vail, again,
over their spiritual faces, luster, and beauty, that they may appear to, and
talk with them, in their own guise, dress, and language. They must, in this
sense, become all things to all Men, with design to gain some, to their
spiritual Life and Doctrine; yea, turn many to the everlasting Righteousness of
God, by a true Gospel-conversion; which, Paul wholly wanted, when an eminent
Law-Saint; 1 Cor. 9. 22. They must thus, with Paul, please all Men in all
things; 1 (...). 10. 33. How? In a serviceableness only to their true interest,
and the interest of Christ therein, by gaining the opportunity to insinuate
Gospel Truths into them, and jussle out (...) lies. As to a soothing Men up
into a considence in Man's and Satan's Law-Gospel, he says, do I seek to
please Men? then I should not be the Servant of Christ (Gal. 1. 9, 10.) but
indeed an enemy to him and his Gospel, as I (too long) was, through a confidence
in my own Law-life, or holy flesh. But, if no compliance, in any sense, might
be lawfully used by spiritual Saints, with otherwise-minded people (common
sinners or first-Covenant-Professors of Christ) all opportunity of gaining them
to a Gospel-state, would be lost. There Is no dealing with them, at first dash,
without something of condescension from a pure spirituality of conversation.
To grate on them, with forced spiritual discourse, and high mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, where there is nothing preparatory, toward the reception of
such matters (or hopefulness to give them any advantage thereby) would render
the most pertinent things, impertinently as well as unsupportably troublesome
and tormenting to any earthy, fleshly-minded company, corrupt or righteous,
holy or profane. Such, too generally, is the guise, dress, and temper of (in a
manner) all sorts of People, in common conversation, at this day, that should
they see or hear the inmost thoughts of spiritual Saints, they would not endure
their company. Self (the Anagram of Flesh, backward, rejecting h, that is no
letter) holy or unholy Nature, professing or profane People, are all of a knot,
in confederacy with World and Devil, against the spiritual Saint, and all his
right words, to a tittle, about Salvation, special; 1 Timothy 4. 10. Yet, enough
has he, to bear him up, and maintain in him, an undaunted spirit, and
invincible courage, against all the despisings and misjudgings of these two
sorts of blind, dark-spirited, confounded haters and rejecters of all
Gospel Light and truth. They both sit, as in Plato's feigned Cave, admiring
their little glimmering Moon or Candlelight (their intellectual, rational
Lamps, in a Night-state) or, at best, and highest, but such Daylight, as the
mystical first-creation Sun, or first-covenant Spirit, gives, and makes out to
them. In these various states, postures, accoutrements, and enjoyments of
Nature, sit they both, in a readiness, to deride and scoff at the true Saint,
pretending to a yet transcendently higher Daylight, under the beamings forth of
the New Creation Sun of infallible, everlasting Light, Life, Righteousness and
Wisdom; the Gospel-new-Covenant-Spirit of Grace and Truth. Those that are
lifted up from amongst their fellow-mortals, out of themselves, or their own
deep, dark, dungeon-spirit of Nature, corrupt or righteous (a miery pit of
Corruption and (...); filth of flesh or spirit; enmity to God, and death to it
self; a Body, a Law of Sin and Death, as Paul found; Romans 7. 24. and 8. 2.)
into the marvelous Palace or Paradisical- Light, and glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God, cannot forbear to go tell their (...), how they fare. They give
them an account, or true report of the new creation Land of Promise, or state
of Life, with the fruits and peculiar enjoyments therein, above all other
Countries, Lands, or States, as far as the Heavens are above the Earth. How is
this News resented by these two sorts of Sodomites (the Profane in silth of
(...); or Legal-spirited Professor, in filth of spirit, enmity to God and all
spiritual Truths) that is brought to both their ears, by the Gospel-spirited
Saint? They all hiss at, and deride his pretension to such Sun-light, as the
most presumtuous conceit, and phanatical delusion, in the World. They sit them
still, will not budg an inch from their opinionated happiness, in Rational Light
and Moral Heathenism; or, first-covenant life also, in Legal Christianity;
just, as the case was in Plato's Apologue, or fabulous Cave-students, in their
demeanor toward him that had ventured up a rocky Precipice (with great
difficulty and danger) into the open Air and Sunlight, on his return and
tidings thereof, to them. What of all this? The Saint is not to regard, these
contradicting Blasphemers misregarding him, or his words; nor be weary, nor
faint in his mind, or Spirit; Heb. 12. 3. They are to look wholly to God,
Christ, blessed Angels, and Saints, that know and own them, for what they know
themselves to be. What matters it for Man's day, or judgment, in which nothing
of their spiritual life or doctrine, is rightly seen, felt, heard, or
understood? Saints, by spiritual senses, do all this, natural never can do.
They hear, see, look upon, and handle the Word of life, even the original
new creature life, in the living Word and Wisdom of God, Christ's Person; 1
(...). 1. 1. And, they (...) such life also, in the derived streams of the
living waters thereof, in true Saints. When their own Spirit is dead, in Man's
sight and judgment, it is, most of all, alive, in God's Sight, in his Spirit of
Grace. And, those that live and spend their Widow-hood (on Christ's death and
departure from them, as a (...), first-Covenant Bridegoom) in the pleasures of
that life, he has forsaken them in; however alive in Man's sight, are dead in
God's, while they so live; 1 Timothy 5. 6. Incorrigible sinners, in filth of Flesh
or Spirit, pass along this mortal World and Life, jollily, in the broad way, to
an eternal house of mourning ( Job 21. 13. Psalm. 39. 5, 6, 11. and Psalm. 49.
10, -- 20.) while true Saints (through much tribulation and mourning) are
passing into an eternal house of feasting. Those that will on, in their various
temporary houses or states of feasting, literal or mystical, making large and
swift steps toward the Chambers of death, seem to have much the better on it,
in this World. Who can help them? Who can lift them up out of these drowning,
self-chosen, lustful, goatish ways of Vanity, that will most certainly set them
among the left hand (...)- Goats, at last day? Mat. 25. 33. Will ye hear a
Wonder? Spiritual Saints have the best on it, even in this World; as thus: They
have the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. True
Godliness, the power of Godliness, is profitable to all things. The form of it,
and bodily exercise, or the fruitful exercise of Man's cleans'd natural Spirit,
therein, profits little. The truly pure, sinless use of worldly enjoyments
(without any sinful love to, or delight in them; and spending the strength of
all, in a serviceableness to the designs and interests of Christ, upon, and in
Men) belongs to the true Spiritual Saint, only. And, they have a daily increase
with the increases of God, in the promised life of the World to come. So, have
they the best on it, indeed and in truth, even in their mortal day and state, on
earth. All their Tribulations, Persecutions, and seeming worst things, are
wholly and exactly calculated for their good, by him who cannot miss of
accomplishing his design upon them, therein, and by. There are three sorts of
Men, on the stage of this Earth, together, in a confused jumble, as a mixed
heap, in mortal bodies. Profane inhabitants of the Sea, in the corrupt Spirit
of nature; of the Earth, in the righteous, cleans'd earthy state or spirit of
nature; and dwellers in Heaven, or in God's heavenly Spirit of Grace; Rev. 12.
12. All People upon Earth are living and walking in the corrupt, or changeably
righteous Spirit of Nature, or in God's unchangeably righteous Spirit of Grace.
No state in changeable nature, is unchangeable, or everlasting Salvation; but a
state of Grace only. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Not our working Spirit of Nature, but God's
working all, in us and for us, by his Gospel Spirit of Grace, will give us
entrance into his Kingdom. It Is the unspeakable new creation gift of God, and
workmanship of Christ, fits any, for the Kingdom. And, it is then, the
unspeakable folly and madness of Man, to refuse the receiving that Gift, on any
terms, seem they never so hard to his nature. Woe to Laughers, they shall weep
and mourn, eternally. Blessed are the mourners; they shall rejoice and laugh,
eternally. These were Christ's spiritual sayings and warnings to all, when in
our flesh. And he will be the Judge of all, in that Spirit, wherein himself is
justified, for ever, in our nature, before God most high; 1 Timothy 3. 16. An
innumerable multitude, that have thought it so brave, to have their wills, in
this World, will meet with unimaginable, amazing, surprising disappointments,
in the next. An irresistible blast, an irrecoverable death-blow, will they be
fore'd to receive on all first-creation delights, desires and desirables, belly
and meats; 1 Cor. 6. 13. All these dreadful things, the living spiritual Saint
lays to heart, and (as knowing the terrors of the Lord; what a fearful thing
it is, to fall into the hands of the living God, and be torn in pieces, without
any possibility of deliverance, Heb. 10. 31. Psalm. 50. 22.) endeavors to
persuade Men, while called to day, to desist from their jovial march and swift
posting it, in their several sensual and intellectual paths of delight, and
present pleasure to their mis-judging nature, which do all tend to (meet and
center in) one and the same point, a state of everlasting darkness and death,
under the triumphs of divine Justice and final Wrath. Solomon bewail's the
unhappy choice, most Men make, of the merry self-pleasing-paths to eternal
mourning. But, to allay the compassionating grief of this undeniably true
observation, he discovers an opposite party of happy People, that, in a new
life and spiritual understanding, do lay all these errors, follies, and
madnesses of their fellow-mortals, to heart (though they can have little or no
hearing with them) and that find it, their unspeakable concern and interest, to
obey the counsel, and follow the example of Christ, in his suffering steps,
through a temporary house of mourning, into his eternal house of feasting and
rejoicing. But, for such doctrine of the cross, and practicing it upon our
nature, in himself, was Christ himself contradicted and blasphemed ( Joh. 10.
20.) as by Beelzebub, the chief or Prince of Devils, a master devil, casting
out other lesser and weaker Devils; Mat. 10. 25. and 12. 24. Mar. 3. 22. Luke
11. 15. Holy first-covenant Preachers and Professors handled Christ, thus. And,
the Disciple must not look to fare better then his Lord, from or amongst the
legal-spirited generation, in any age of this World, under Satan's reign, and
in Man's day, while his Wisdom will shuffle it self in for Judge and Umpire, in
Religion and Worship, and force all it can, to receive its sentiments, as the
only Orthodox and sound (...).

Verse. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter: for, by the sadness of the
Countenance, the heart is made better.
The sorrow ( Heb. anger) or mourning of the natural Man, under the cross (at
which, offended, angry, troubled, grieved, as run down in his own life, and
denied the pleasing himself in his former freedom of feeding on the gratifying
delights of the Sons of Men) all this, as ill as it appears, is better than all
his former laughter, in the flourish, fruitfulness, and joy thereof, in its own
way, and after its own heart. When brought into such a state of darkness and
ignorance, under this dispensation, as not to understand God's design in all
his withdrawing from him the favors and fruits of his former presence (as a
fleshly bridegroom, in which he has found much content and satisfaction) yet is
this a certain truth, he ought to believe, for his own comfort; that this
sorrow is better than all his former laughter, in the first-Covenant house of
feasting, while the candle of the Lord, therein, shined upon his Tabernacle,
which Job (while yet in the dark as to what followed) wished for the fresh
experiencing; Job 29. 2, -6. The veneration his person was in, so that young
Men hid themselves, aged stood up, Princes refrained talking, and Nobles held
their peace, when he appeared and spoke amongst them; this honor from others,
and satisfaction to himself, he had found in the wisdom, glory, and
fruitfulness of his inlight'ned, righteous Nature, begot in him a lingering
desire to return thither, again, even to his old house or state of feasting and
rejoicing. O that I were as in months past, etc. Under the cross, all his Glory
and Visage was so marred, that now younger then I, says he, have me in
derision, etc. Job 30. 1. Not seeing the more excellent Glory that was to
follow; this was a hard point, with him. Paul, when of such a wise, strong, and
honorable Man, was rendered by the same sharp discipline of the cross, a fool,
weak, and despicable, saw that spiritual Glory (yea, had it in him) which is to
be revealed (or made manifest in him and others, at Christ's second coming, and
manifestation of the Sons of God, in the visibility of spiritual Saintship)
with which he reck'ned not the sufferings of the present time, worthy to be
compared; Romans 8. 18, 19. And, Solomon here, declares the advantage of this
amazing dispensation of the cross, wherein, Christ not only with-draws his
comforting presence, as a fleshly Bridegroom, but turns his hand against his
Spouses and Children, in the first Covenant, coming in the posture of an enemy,
with his Gospel-fire, Sword, and Cross, speaking nothing but war and death to
them, there. Yea, he runs (...) (...), as a Giant, with (...) force; breaks
them with (...) upon breach; takes them by the Neck, and shakes them to (...);
and, all this, sometimes, without showing any cause why, that the Saint is
able, presently, to take distinct notice of, in such confusion; as in Job's
case. Job 16. 12, 14. and, Job 2. 3. and 9. 17. (...) wonderful (...) and
contrivances of God's Wisdom, leave Saints quite at a loss, till they come to
see how matters go. Yet, this sorrowful state is better, in it (...), (...) the
(...) take it, then all his former laughter and (...), in the house of
feasting, by him (...). Christ withdraw's the lesser glory of the
first-Covenant-Sun, in order to shine upon him, in that of (...) (...), that
excell's, and remains for ever. The very Apostles were at the same loss, and
sad pass, with Job, on Christ's withdrawing from them, as a fleshly Bridegroom
and Comforter. Their hearts were sill'd with sorrow. But, the joy that
followed, in the visits of the better Comforter, over-answer'd all. When Paul
had, by the Gospel-Doctrine of the Cross, made the Corinthians sorry, dashing
all their vain hopes and false considences in the fading glory of a
first-Covenant life, he repented not, but, rejoiced, (...), as that right godly
sorrow, wrought a Gospel-repentance in them, to Salvation, not to be repented
of; or, that can never be sinally turned again, from; 2 Cor. 7. 8, -10. A
Law-repentance, or change of mind, from the corrupt to the righteous life of
Nature, they had experienced before, as himself, also, when he persecuted the
Gospel. But now, came they to the happy experience of a Gospel-repentance;
conversion, or turn of mind, from Law to Gospel, from the life and (...) of
Man, to God's. The letter, that made them sorry, seems to be his first Epistle
to them, wherein he shows the vanity of their false joy, and confident
reigning as Kings, without him, or Christ; yea, against both; 1 Cor. 4. 8. Nor
he, nor they, would ever have cause to repent of such right sorrow, as was
followed with repentance unto life. For, no damage, but great advantage,
received they, thereby. But, says he, worldly sorrow works death.
Unwarrantable joy in this world's vanities, disposes to unwarrantable worldly
sorrow (about the loss of them) which works death. A crucified mind to all
worldly, perishing vanities (upper or lower, mystical or literal) with the
sorrow of the natural Man, and pangs of death upon him, in order thereunto,
work life; or, a repentance unto life. Such short sorrow of the natural Man, in
the Saint, tends to his everlasting joy, in spiritual life. By obedient losing
his own life, he find's God's. From all these reasons or grounds, sorrow is
better than laughter: and this farther reason hereof, does Solomon give; for by
the sadness of the Countenance the heart is made better. The Visage of the
natural Man, marred, defaced and made black, by the Cross, in Man's sight; the
more comely is the Saint, therein, to God; Cant. 1. 5, 6. When Paul was a fool,
weak, and despicable, in the judgment even of those that were yet wise, strong
and honorable, in Christ (as to a fruitful flourish in first-Covenant life) was
he truly wise and honorable in God's sight, such a one as the Lord commended;
1 Cor. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 10. 18. The whole-spirited Man in the fading glory of the
first-Covenant, has the praise of Man. The broken-spirited Saint (as to all
that) has the praise of God; Luke 16. 15. Romans 2. 29. One such
contrite-spirited Man, God value's more, than all Angels and Men, in the
unbroken excellencies of the whole first-creation; Isa. 66. 2. How vastly
distant are God's thoughts, and Man's, in this matter? Again, the more sad and
marred the Countenance or visage of the natural, or old Man, in the Saint,
under the dispensation and discipline of the Cross, the better is his heart,
the more thriving, prosperous, and fruitful in spiritual life. The Spiritual
Man rises, as the natural decays and falls. The decay and sorrow of the old
Man, is abundantly over-answer'd by the increasing joy of the new. To the full
death of the old, does immediately succeed a compleatness of spiritual life, in
the new. As the outer, or natural Man perishes; the inner, or spiritual, is
renewed day by day; 2 Cor. 4. 16, -18. The light and short affliction of the
former, work's for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, in the
latter; and Romans 8. 18. Hereby comes Man, to be rid of all bondage, and regard
of ensnaring vanities, things temporal, delights of the Sons of Men, and to be
advanced into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, so as to look at (and
set his affections upon) things eternal, only; ver. 21. Lo then, the plentiful
harvest-sheaves, they that sow in the Tear's of their natural Man, shall reap,
in the Joy of their spiritual; Psalm. 126. 6. The decay of the life and glory of
Man, in the first-Covenant, attended with an increase of the never-fading
creature-life, glory, wisdom, and righteousness of God, in the second, render's
his heart less after Man's, but more after God's own heart, with David; and so,
better. The unchangeable good, new creature life only, with all the things, and
never-perishing meats thereof (in the Man-Christ, or his Saints and followers)
have God's approbation-Seal, as is implied, John 6. 27.

Verse. 4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but, the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth.
Here are the contrary places or states, in which the mystical wise and fools
are found, as the certain evidence of their wisdom or folly. The latter take
up, for happiness, in the flourishing fruitful life of their own restored
nature. This, in a known, wilful contrariety to the spiritual Law and Example
of Christ himself. In such place or state, by them chosen, will they be chained
up, as a Prison of everlasting darkness and death, under wrath. So, will their
house of feasting be turned into a house of everlasting mourning, torment, and
vexation of spirit. And this, will they, as a signal aggravation thereof, be
forced, by God's awakn'd convictions in them, to own, as the fruit of their own
device, invention, and wilful choice, against all fair warning. In a perfect
contrariety to these (merry travelers to the Chambers of death, and their own
everlasting confusion) are the truly wise, in the house of mourning, under the
cross, as their secret Chamber of safety, shutting their doors, ( Isa. 26. 20.)
window's, or natural senses, outward and inward, from all first-creation
desireables, visible or invisible, Satan's perishing meats; the dust, himself
feeds on. By this means, are they not exposed (as all, not under the Cross,
are) to be caught in and with the ensnaring vanities of this world. At winding
up, out come the reputed fools, under the cross, into an everlasting house of
feasting; and down sink their scoffing blasphemous enemies, heathen, or people
( Psalm. 2. 1. fixed in nature, corrupt or righteous, and so, in unchangeable
enmity to God and them) into a house or state of eternal mourning. Saints are
content to pass through all sorts of reproach, shame, and much tribulation,
without and within, knowing whither they are going, even to the Kingdom of God;
Act. 14. 22. Joh. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation. The world is
full of enemies, round about them; corrupt and righteous Men are all enemies to
the Life and Righteousness of God, in the spiritual Saint. Thus, does Solomon,
distinguish and character, by the marks of wisdom and folly, the
contarry-minded inhabitants of the two houses, on the Sand, and on the Rock.

Verse. 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a Man to hear
the song of fools.
Here Is the cause and ground, whence the said wisdom and folly come to be
practiced. The wise obediently hearken to the voice and rebuk's of Wisdom,
Christ; his death-reproofs upon their spirit of nature, that they may receive
his Spirit of Grace; Prove. 1. 20, -23. They receive (and submit to) the
chastning Discipline of the Cross, according to the revealed and known methods
of God's Wisdom, for Salvation. On the other hand, fools listen to the pleasing
voice and charming song of folly itself, in Devils and Men; their accursed
other Gospel, for Salvation, in the restored life of nature. Man's quiet
submitting to wisdom's sentence of death, within him (upon that life, they
preach up and warrant, for Salvation) is unspeakably better for him, then to
regard the delusive, destructive song, and flattering voice of fools, that set
up the first-covenant, law-life and righteousness of Man; most falsely calling
it, a Gospel-state and righteousness of God. This Gospel, or glad Tidings, if
true, Satan preached to Eve. Ye shall not die, at all. Ye have eternal life in
this first-creation state, or life of your own nature. The righteous life of
nature, in Man or Angel, is Eternal. This is Man's and Satan's other Gospel, in
perfect contradiction to Christ's, and the only way of Salvation. He that
hear's the reproof of (the spirit of) life, on his spirit of enmity and death,
get's true understanding, and abides among the wise; Prove. 15. 31, 32. He that
refuses it, destroy's his own Soul. Here are the infallible characters of
Wisdom and Folly. The only way to get true Wisdom and Life, is to quit and lose
our shadowy, under the Cross. To be fools, with Paul, as to all Men do, have,
delight in, or feed upon, in the first-Covenant, that we may find the Life and
Wisdom of God, in the second; 1 Cor. 3. 18. and 4. 10. God declares that all
who refuse the chastisments of his Cross, to the death of their continually
sinning spirit of Nature, are Bastards; and not Sons, in his neversinning
spirit of Grace; Heb. 12. 8. 1 John 3. 9. So, shall not be provided for, in his
house. In short; the rebuke of the wise, leads to eternal life; the song of
fools, to eternal death.

Verse. 6. For, as the crackling ( Voice or Sound) of thorns under a pa, so is
the laughter of the Fool: this also is Vanity.
Here Is a true character of the short-lived joy, song, and laughter (...)
fools. All mirth in first-creation life, is but as the crackling of thorns
under a pot; a short blaze, and away. This is all, the delights of the Sons
(...) Men, amount unto. All the fine song, or noise, made in the Wisdom
thereof, is but an uncertain sound of a tinkling Cymbal; 1 (...) 13. 1. and 14.
8. It gives no aim at the right way toward Salvation; or, at the right armor,
to undertake Satan, in. Yea, no greater or siercer Enemies, blustering
contradicting Blasphemers of the very (...) of Salvation, and right Armor for
the Lord's battles, then these (...) Sirens, first-covenant Singsters. Such
literal-wise mysticalfools, will meet with a total disappointment of all their
(...) for ever.

Verse. 7. Surely, oppression makes a wise Man, mad; and, a gift destroys the
heart.
In letter, the unreasonable Injustice and Oppression, practiced (...) the
corrupt spirit of nature, in all worldly Governments, may (...) here meant. The
root and cause of all, is an evil, false self-interest by which, Men in
Government, and Judicature, are mercenarily seeking advantages to themselves,
in the outward riches and honors of (...) World. This is employed, in saying; a
gift destroys the heart. (...) Joel and Abiah, Samuel's Sons, turned aside,
(...) lucre, (...) gain; took bribes, and perverted Judgment; turned their
bench (...) Justice into a seat of Iniquity, whence wrong Judgment proceeded.
This gave occasion to Israel's asking a King; under which (...) they found
themselves much worse, and that without remedy. (...) could not shake off that
new and grievous yoke. God would (...) hear, own, or help them, therein, as he
had threat'ned and forewarned them. His Spirit, in Samuel, ruled over them,
which was a Theocracy. So, God was rejected, Sin their choice of a King, like
the Heathens, round about them. 1 am. 8. They have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them; says God. Yet gave he them their national evil choice, in
his anger, after he had said, I will be thy King; and told them, they had
destroyed themselves, by their own foolish choice, but in him was their help;
Hos. 13. 9, -- 11. So, gives he particular persons their foolish choice, to be
reigning as Kings, mystical, in the restored first-covenant (...) of nature, in
preference to his Spirit of Grace, the principle of life and action, in the
second; a Theocracy; where God would undertake to rule over, and work all their
works of obedience to himself, in them, and for them. Such an evil self-chosen
kingly Power, he gives them, in anger, as a Judgment, and will take it away, in
final wrath, as he did (...).

For preventing, or, at least, allaying the cammon evil, and general calamity,
under the oppressive outward Governments of this World, God gives Laws, and
enables wise Men (in moral Heathenism, or but legal-Christianity, by the
knowledge of Christ, only, after the flesh) to make Laws, prohibiting all, in
places of government or judicature, to take gifts. The reason, alleged for
this ( Exodus 23. 8.) is, because a gift blinds the Eyes of the Wise, (Heb.
Seeing) and perverts the words of the righteous. So, they pass sentence,
contrary to their own discerning, Light, Thought, and Conscience. This brings
unreasonable oppression upon the innocent. A foundation is laid, and occasion
given to this oppression, in selling places of Judicature. Whoever buy such
places, are under a temptation, on that very account, to sell Justice; that
they may reimburse themselves, as to their own bribe for the place, by taking
bribes of others, in it. In the counsel of Jethro, to his Son in law, Moses,
approved by God, we find the right qualifications for Men, in such places; that
they be able Men, fearing God, Men of truth, (...) covetousness; Exodus 18. 2.
They were to be wise, understanding Men, such as should not respect persons, in
judgment; nor fear the face of Man, but hear (and do justice to) the small as
well as great; Deuteronomy. 1. 13, -17. Thus did Job. I put on righteousness;
delivered the poor and fatherless, that had none to help them. I caused the
Widows heart to sing for joy. I searched out the cause, to the bottom; brake
the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth; Job 29. 12,
-17. Did I fear a great multitude? or, did the contempt of Families terrify
me, so as to hinder my doing Justice to the poor, needy, and helpless? Job 31.
34.

So, of the literal; now, to the mystical meaning of these Words. A deeper and
sorer evil among Men, (because a greater sin against God) then the former, is
here pointed at, as the principal intendment. The truly wise Man, is the
spiritual Saint. By the oppression of him, are signified the additional
ingredients and aggravating circumstances of bitterness, by Satan's wiles, put
into the cup of sufferings, given his natural Man, to drink. In the weakness and
barrenness thereof, under the demolishing work of the cross, causing an hour
and power of darkness (all the former flourish and fruitfulness, joy and
feasting thereof, in the first-covenant, is turned into) comes the roaring
Lion, the Prince of darkness, to oppress, devour, and sink him, quite. Till
brought to the test, under the cross, he accuses him to God (be he never so
faithful to his first-covenant Light) that all his obedience is but mercenary
(from a self-interest, wherein gratified, to the utmost) and not, at all, from
any regard or love to God. Put forth thy hand, and touch all he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face, says he, of Job, to God. Let me be thy hand, or
employed instrument herein, and see where Job will be, then. All he has is in
thy hand, or power, says God. Job. 1. 9, -- 12. When this dispensation of the
cross (and trial of Job, thereby) was begun, Satan wind's about, and employs
his Serpentine craft and malice, against both God and Job, another way. He
endeavors to bring Job, to espouse his quarrel, against God, as dealing most
injuriously with him. He represents to Job, the cross-blows on his righteous
natural man, body and spirit (which himself was the permitted hand and
commissioned manager of, upon him) as a most unreasonable oppression. And, by
thus casting all the seeming oppressing-work, upon God, does he hide his own
real oppression, wicked counsel and suggestions, from Job's natural Man, now
brought into darkness, and not knowing what matters would come to; what God
would do with him, or what would become of him. Till new spiritual daylight
was caused to spring up in him, he could not interpret the riddle of the cross;
how this devourer of a fading life, goodness, clothing, belly and meats, should
be the very means of giving all again with usury, in a more excellent life and
way. Samson's riddle was the type of this. Out of the eater came meat, and out
of the strong, sweetness (Judge. 14. 14.) honey out of the Lion, by him killed,
ver. 6. 18. Samson (as a type of the Priestly Spirit of Christ, in its
crucifying, sacrificing-work upon nature) rent that Lion, as a Kid; which was a
usual sacrifice to God, under the Law. The natural Man of the Saint, while in
the dark, under the cross, is ready to strike in with Satan, against God. The
Devil stirred up Job's three Friends, far inferior to what he had bin, in the
Light, Wisdom, and Righteousness of a restored first-covenant Life. His
mistaking selfconfident Friends (under Satan's management of them, to oppress
him, by adding to his afflicton) deny the reality of his first-Covenant
Righteousness, and reckon him but a hypocritical pretender thereunto; and now,
under the punishing hand and manifested displeasure of God upon him, for his
hypocrisy and wickedness. Job, in his dark house of mourning, was sorely put
to it, as to what way he should go about to defend himself against their most
false and injurious chargings of him with falsehood and deceit, in all his
former life and practice. He did find all that life and goodness going to
wrack, in him, under the Cross; and knew not why; nor, what he should have in
the room thereof, as God's design in all. Yet did he stem the tide, through all
difficulties and enemies (with which, on all hands, surrounded and encountered)
till safe landed in the wished haven, the true Land of promise, state of true
Life, and Blessedness; a newness of life. His own conscience, yea, God himself,
were witnesses of his integrity in those first-Covenant Principles, they
charged him with Hypocrisy, in; Job. 1. 1, 8. and 2. 3. Their charging him
therefore with falsehood, was an unreasonable oppression, and added great
bitterness to God's afflicting trial of him, stirring up his muddy earthy part;
raising all the dust, and causing all the unadvised speeches, that in a long
debate of his case, with them, passed out of his mouth. After all, the Devil or
his Wife could do or say, it is said, he sinned not with his Lips; Job 2. 10.
Some few questionable words, he had (in his great Agony and consusion) uttered
(Chap. 3.) that seem to have introduced (or given some occasion to) the
following discourse of his three Friends. When Satan finds the Saint's natural
Man, under the Cross (for a removal out of first, into the second
Covenant-Principle) he puts him on a vindication of his own faithfulness, in
the first, so as strenuously to engage in a self-defence, against the
cross-work of the second, upon him. So, makes he the Saint himself,
instrumental to the heightning and aggravating of that mystical oppression,
which tends to the making him, mad. Saints therefore (and others too, under
like trial, that apostatize) are forbidden to take that gift which destroys the
heart. This gift is that, Satan offers, to bribe them off, from God, or
obedience to his Cross. (...) establish you, for ever, in the life and liberty
of your own wills, a way after your own hearts, says he; all which, God comes
not only to oppress, but utterly to destroy, in you; and you, therein. So,
represents he God, as the greatest Oppressor, of all, in that very dispensation
of the Cross, that is his certain and constant method for bringing about their
everlasting freedom from all bondages, enemies, and deaths. Satan and his
Instruments, bring all, that finally listen to their promised liberty, into
everlasting bondage, with themselves. This, by speaking great swelling words of
Vanity, to them, the alluring words of Man's and the old Serpent's Wisdoms; 2
Pet. 2. 18, 19. Ye shall be as Gods, says the Devil, if ye follow my counsel
and (...), ( Genesis 3. 5.) that is, ye shall be advanced into the highest pitch
of happiness, ye are capable of, if established, with me, for ever, in the life
and freedom of your own Wills and Spirits. And, this is, indeed, a fixed state
of unchangeable enmity to God, and death to themselves, in the utmost woe,
misery and confusion, imaginable, for ever.

Better is the end of a thing, than the beginning thereof: and, the patient in
spirit is better than the proud in spirit. 1. In letter; It Is better, quietly
to bear any evil, God permits others to do to us, ordered by him, for our good,
as the end thereof, that is better than the seeming evil beginning, that really
tends to such a good end. It Is Man's interest as well as duty, to be patient
under every dispensation, or, occurrent, by providence, to him. It Is folly and
sin, to be offended at God's dealings with us, as to things, not in our power,
to prevent, or avoid. Such anger is founded in pride, and rests in the bosom of
fools, amounting unto a jussling competition of their wills, with God's. And
hence, are they angry with their fellow creatures, God permits by injuring, to
cross them. On all accounts then, in reference to God, others, and themselves,
better are the patient than the proud in spirit. Man ought to suppose, God's
infinite Wisdom sees just reasons for crossing his will (that are undiscerned
by his short-sighted understanding) to his great advantage.

2dly. In Mystery; these words signify the differing demeanor of two sorts of
Persons, under the Cross; a spiritual Seed, that, at length, yield obedience
(...) it; and a fleshly first-Covenant Seed, that finally resist and refuse it.
The former, patiently submit to, and comply with the will of God, therein, as
finding their great advantage, in exchange, thereby, of the embondaging,
burdensome, perpetually sinning life of their own Law-spirit, for that light
burden and easy yoke of Christ's Gospel Spirit ( Mat. 11. 28, - 30) that is,
indeed, the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. They find this peaceable fruit
of all their loss and sufferings, even the everlasting Life and Righteousness
of God. In this newness of life, only, can they bring forth the peaceable
fruits of righteousness (and not in their own spirit of enmity) to God. This
end is better than the beginning. Beginning and end, here, signify God's
twofold gift of first and second-Covenant life, and principles of two differing
sorts, of righteous fruits, works, duties, and performances, toward God or
men. The method of God's Wisdom (in giving, first, the natural or
first-Covenant life; and afterward, the spiritual or second, 1 Cor. 15. 46.) is
not to be questioned, or disputed against, by Man's. Those disputers of this
world, that so do; and obstinately set up their natural, against God's
spiritual-creature-life, come to a latter end worse than their beginning, under
final Wrath. They, that in a lawful use of the Law (or of their first-Covenant
Law-life, called their own) exchange it, by death, for the second (a
Gospel-life, called God's own) come to an end, better than their beginning, in
unchangeable union with God: others, to a worse, in unchangeable union with the
Devil. By the Cross upon Nature, God tryes, whether Men love themselves and
their own life and things, or him, and his things, best; their natural, or his
Spiritual, new-creation-things. Satan himself savours only the natural things
of Man or Angel, in the first-creation; perfectly hates all the spiritual
creature-things of Christ and God, in the second; Mat. 16. 23. All Men, that he
can fix in a union of mind and will with him, are of the same palate, belly, or
desire and appetite with him, in unchangeable enmity to all the divine and
spiritual things of Christ and God. All Men and Angels, as under this trial,
they make a right or a wrong choice, find eternal life or death, the better or
worse end than their beginning. All that make the right choice, have the praise
of God, but lie under the utmost dispraise and malice of Man, all along this
World, under Satan's reign, and the day of Man's orthodox judgment, or Wisdom.
This is the great and main controversy between God and his creatures, (...) and
Men. (...) the very turning point, to (...) life or death; the obedient
submitting to the death of nature, or the rebellious keeping up the life
thereof. The Saint sinds the end that is better than the beginning; others, an
end, that is worse. The Saint sinds that blessed end of the Lord, that the Lord
Christ himself and his Servant Job found, to be the happy issue and result of
all their sufferings in the flesh, or natural Man; Jam. 5. 11. The truly
patient in spirit, here meant, that submits to the death of his own nature,
finds the life of God's new creature, spirit of Grace, in the room thereof. So,
is he transcendently better than the proud in spirit, that contradicts,
blasphemes and does despite to the Spirit of Grace, with all its words and
followers, to his own everlasting destruction. By sparing, saving, and keeping
up his own life, in enmity to the Cross, he loses all life and comfort, for
ever. The overvalue and love of his own freedom, or free will, brings him into
everlasting bondage. The quitting it, for God's Free Will to good only, and
that, unchangeably, is everlasting deliverance or Salvation from all
captivities, oppressions, enemies, dangers or deaths. The Saints new creation
life of God, swallow's up all death's and enemies into victory; renders them,
more than conquerors, over all, for ever. The proud lifters up of themselves
against God, will be made vessels of dishonor, under everlasting contempt; and
lie down in sorrow, for ever. This will they have of his hand.

Ver. 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom
of fools.
The spirit of Man, rich, full, wise, strong, and honorable, in the fruitful
(...) of a first-covenant life, is apt to be hasty, angry, and offended at what
comes to run down all this, in him; mar his (...), and lay all this his
fading glory, and honor, in the dust. The wise spiritual Saint, in Seed, may
be found in this hasty, angry demeanor against the Cross, or any words or
Doctrine thereof, ignorantly, for a season, with Paul: but, such anger rests
or abides, for ever, only in the bosom, heart, or spirit of fools, that
obstinately persist in such wilful madness and folly, as to their grand
concern, and utterly perish in their own corruption. Will Man justify himself
herein, saying, I do well to be angry at the Doctrine and work of the Cross? He
that contends with the Almighty, reproves God's declared method and way of
saving his own creatur's, let him answer it; Job 40. 2. Why? what? Says Man's
wrangling, disputing wisdom; Shall I suffer my house to be set on fire, the
Gospel Fire-Baptism (and death thereby) to be brought on my righteous natural
state? Christ did, on his more righteous. Shall I suffer the comely visage,
beauty, and glory, the wisdom and righteousness of my own nature, ('twice set
up in, and put upon me, by God himself, once at creation; and again, by
redemption) to be all spoiled and marred? Shall I suffer all my mystical riches
herein, to be seized, and like a tame fool, make no resistance? The Man-Christ
himself, did not. He opened not his mouth against this dispensation. He
suffered that fleece to be shorn off, all that riches to be taken away, as the
dumb Sheep, her literal fleece; yea, that life and all, as the Lamb brought to
the slaughter, without noise, or struggle, Isa. 53. 7. And, Paul was forthwith
obedient to the Heavenly Vision and discovery of the Lord's mind herein,
without struggle or dispute. He gave not way to the fleshly disputer of this
world, in himself or others, against the known Command of God, and method of
his Wisdom, for Salvation. He became a tame fool, in this case, as Man's wisdom
reckon's; an obedient, wise spiritual Man, as God's Wisdom reckon's; 1 Cor. 4.
10. Here Is the clash of two distinct opposite Wisdoms. They that reckon
themselves wise, are not wise, in God's account; 2 Cor. 10. 12. And those, they
reckon fools, the Lord commends; v. 18. Those that finally refuse to be
offered up in the fire of the same Heavenly, eternal, priestly, Gospel Spirit
of Grace, in which Christ offered up our nature, at best, in himself, without
spot, unto God ( Heb. 9. 14. Joh. 10. 17, 18.) will offer up themselves in the
false fire of Satan's spirit, unto him; will give their body or natural state
to be burnt by him; not in love, but unchangeable enmity to God. This is the
state, they choose to pass into, as set on fire of Hell; Jam. 3. 6. They are
backed and encouraged by Satan's lie, to set up their own nature, with him, in
unchangeable enmity to God. So come these mystical proud in spirit, by their
false, self-preserving reasonings, to be guilty of remediless folly and
madness, to their own destruction. All this proceeds from a (...) up thought,
of the wisdom and glory of their own nature, above what is written of it. They
take and assert it to be everlasting. But, no such thing was ever written of
it, in the Oracles of God's Wisdom; but, the contrary. It Is therein abundantly,
and frequently asserted to be but a fading flower, a perishing vanity, and Man
at best therein, altogether vanity, lighter than vanity, less than nothing. It
had bin better for him never to have bin at all, than never to be better. He
will find himself worse then nothing. Annihilation-death will be desirable, a
reduction to his primitive nothing, rather than a being exquisitly sensible,
under eternal torment, and vexation of spirit. When thus gulled by Satan, do
men carry his lie in their right hand, teach it as the only way of Salvation,
to their own and deceived blind-followers eternal damnation. To prevent this
great danger, Solomon advises not to be hasty in our spirit, to be angry, in
this grand concern and case; as knowing it a fault, Saints themselves are too
inclinable to; through a readiness to listen to the voice of their own spirit,
the words of their own Wisdom, which go forth out of their own mouth (Jer. 44.
17.) with Satan's strong delusions and reasonings, at the back of their own
humane arguings, to beget in them a rash, hasty, angry temper against the Cross
or spirit of Christ, and all the words thereof. A stiff-necked resisting the
cross-work of the Holy Ghost (Act. 7. 51.) upon them, is the unpardonable sin;
the great, the presumptuous transgression, the sin unto eternal death. They
that thus do, reject so great Salvation, as in God's way and Wisdom, is offered
to them, and (...) what proves damnation, in their own will and way; as the
Devil and his Angels, at first, did. But, it is the distinguishing mark, brand,
and character of fools, to suffer this anger to rest in them, or themselves to
be fixed in enmity against the Gospel Spirit and Cross of Christ. The very
Elect, Satan would thus deceive: but, though they be, for a season, ignorantly
engaged in the same folly, such anger against God's declared way of (...),
(...) (...) rest or abide, for ever, in them. Paul was (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...); Act. 26. 11. In letter, anger long rests in fools, for any injury,
real or supposed, done them; whereas a wise Man will pass by a transgression,
and not harbor in his bosom, long, troublesome, revengeful meditations of an
injury, to his own and (...) hurt. But, the said mystical fool, is the greatest
fool, of all (...) (...), in his greatest concern. His lifted up Soul in first
(...) (...) and ornaments, against God and the second, is not (...) (...) (...)
4.) indeed, a downright hater of (and hateful to) (...) (...) (...) in spirit
waits for new spiritual light or revelation: the proud in spirit, scorns and
scoffs at this new light, and rejects what ever his conceited wisdom cannot
receive or discern, that is, all Gospel Truths and Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God.

Verse. 10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better
then these? for thou do not enquire wisely, concerning this.
Solomon, here, prevents and rebukes Man's quarrel, and complaint, that the
latter day's of this World, since the fall, are worse then the former, before
the fall, which brought a desolating change upon mankind, into a dark, dead,
ignorant, corrupt state of nature. Man does not judge nor inquire a right, as
wisely considering and discerning this thing. Fallen Angels indeed, were gone,
without remedy, on their first sin. But it is not so with Man. For, God has
overruled his fault and punishment, to the farther magnifying of his
Free Grace, by which, he is offered better things, and greater advantages than
were given him, in his first creation. God has found a way for restoring him to
some measure of his lost righteous life. And, the universal experience of
mankind, as to the fading nature of that life, by the first sin, and fall from
it, and by a world of faithful warnings from God (and multiplied instances of
Apostates, after renewed therein) do make up an advantage to them, beyond what
Adam had, before his fall. For he, through something of inadvertency, was
surpised and caught alive (2 Timothy 2. 26.) in that snare of the Devil, the
very righteous life, he was (...) of; as if all, that God intended for his
final and absolute blessedness. All men, now, find that Suggestion of the Devil
( Adam, through the weakness of his flesh, or fleshly state, entertained as a
truth) to be a lie. If his saying, Ye shall not die at all, be not sufficiently
refuted by the death of all Men (as to that righteous life, set up in the
first-creation make of Adam) when will it? or, what will undeceive men? Man
then, restored into something of the same changeable righteous life, Adam was
created in the perfection of, may seem to have the advantage-ground of Adam, in
order to the second, personal trial of every one, against the like fallacious
arguings of Satan; 2 Cor. 11. 3. And, as men's advantages are greater, for
preventing a sinning after the similitude of Adam's transgression, so will
their punishment for it, be greater, even an irrecoverable destruction; the
latter end worse than the beginning; as higher and greater sinners against the
Holy Ghost, then Adam was, or, they, in and with him. The same sin, wilfully
repeated in any man, is absolutely unpardonable. If that of Adam (and all men
in him) had bin so, who could have bin saved? What Christ the second Adam, has
done for all Men, leaves no Men capable of defending or excusing themselves, by
that worn Proverb, a fleshly first Covenant Israel or people of God, had got in
their mouth's; that our first Parents ate sour Grapes, and their, Childrens
Teeth are thereby set on edge; Ezekiel. 18. 2. All Men may be recovered out of
their polluted fallen nature, if they will, by Christ's General
Redemption-work, as the common Salvation; 1. Tim. 4. 10. Jude 3. Romans 5. 18.
All are capable of such life, and justification therein, as Adam had, before
his fall. And, all are capable of a new trial, for the obedient exchange of
that life, for a better, an everlasting; which Adam, at first, failed in. Man's
latter condition then, since the fall, is circumstanc'd with valuable
advantages, both for escaping Damnation, and obtaining Salvation, beyond his
former, before the fall. All the evil consequents of the first Adam's sin, are
removed by the obedient death of the second; and Gospel-instructions are
afforded, to caution against the like, beyond what Adam, in innocence, had. So,
in the said respects, God has made the latter day's of Man, better than the
former, though man had made them worse. And, if man make the right use of his
advantages therein, as he ought, God will make his latter end better than his
beginning, by setting up in him, an everlasting Gospel-life, that never can be
lost, in the room of his fading Law-life, that has bin, and will be lost, for
ever by every man and Angel, that do what they can, to keep and save it, in a
known rebellion against the only Savior, and all his words of counsel and
instruction; Mat. 16. 25.

Verse. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the Sun.
The new creature Wisdom of God, in man, qualifies him for the inheriting of
God himself; renders him a joynt-heir, with Christ, of God; Romans 8. 17. The
corruptible, old, or first-Creation life and wisdom of Man, gives no title to
this incorruptible (...); 1 Pet. 1. 4. It belongs not to flesh and blood (1
Cor. 15. 50.) Man or Angel, in their natural make and state, which, at best, is
in both (and they, in it) altogether Vanity. No entering into the second
Covenant, and Kingdom-spirit of God, but by the sacrifice of all we received
from his own hand, in the first, to him; Psalm. 50. 5. All our own, in our
natural first-creation-make and life, must go, for all God's own, in the
second. If Man yield to his suffering, parting part (in order to his entering
the new Covenant) the surrender, loss, and perfect resignation of all his own,
without any reserve; if he come roundly and clearly (...), herein, not keeping
back any part of his earthly life or possessions, with Ananias and Saphira,
Heaven is his own; God himself, his inheritance, for ever. Christ will not fail
to perform his part, and undertake in the second Covenant, as to the
unspeakable gift, the promise of the Father, (Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4.) which he
calls his own. The young Man refused Christ's terms, herein; Mat. 19. 22. The
old Man, in him; was not willing to part with his old earthly things, for
Christ's new, and heavenly; his natural, for Christ's spiritual creature-life
and possessions. A conclusive refusal to part with all we have, is a final
parting-blow, between God and Man. Paul found Corinthian Professors, bewitched
Galatians, and belly-God Philippians, dangerously engaged toward a sixure in
this most presumptuous Sin and Error. 1 Cor. 4. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. Gal. 3. 1,
-4. Phil. 3. 18, 19. And, Christ found a first-Covenant party, in enmity to the
second, in most or all the seven Churches ( Rev. 2. and 3.) In Laodicea, scarce
any other; and all this, under the outward dispensation and ministry of the
Gospel; owning themselves, as Gospel-Professors. And, what or who else, in a
manner, at this day, can we find, but such anti-Gospel-Gospellers, in all
variety of opinion, form, and way? All the highly pretending and conceited
Children of the Kingdom, in the most sublimated Church-forms, or purest
Churches, in but restored first-covenant Law-principles, without advance by
exchange, and Gospel-conversion, will be found at a loss, and cast or kept out
of the Kingdom of Christ, as not at all, of his New Covenant Gospel Spirit of
Grace and Truth. It Is in the heavenly Wisdom of this, only, Men can attain the
sight and inheritance of the most glorious divine Sun, and of the new creation-
Sun of (...) (...), (Mal. 4. 2.) in the Mediator's person, which is the
greatest gain, the highest prosit and advantage, Man or Angel can receive or
enjoy, to all eternity. This, (...) proves, ver. 12.

Verse. 12. For, Wisdom is a defense (Heb. shadow) and money is a desence; but,
the excellency of knowledge, is, that Wisdom gives life to them that have it.
Here Is a distinguishing character of the first and second covenant spirits,
Lives, Wisdoms, with or by the effects, riches, and privileges of each. The
Wisdom and mystical money or riches of the first, are a defense against the rude
assaults, the unruly brutish motions of the corrupt state of nature; and, do
make up to Man, all, he thinks he needs, for eternal life; 1 Cor. 4. 8. Rev. 3.
17. But, through the fading nature of all that life and riches; and evil use of
it (in preference and opposition to the durable life and true riches, in the
Gospel Spirit of God) all is spoiled. Man's inordinate love to the former, is
that love of money, that is the root of all evil, against God, and to himself;
evil of sin and punishment. It renders all, the mammon of unrighteousness as
preferred to the (...) riches of Christ, in his infinite divine, and
everlasting righteous new creation Life.

First-creation Life, with the riches thereof, is to be allowed its due, as
good, in its kind, and lawful use, for suppressing the unruly desires,
thoughts, and motions of the corrupt state of Nature. Man, so using it, is
faithful to the Light afforded him by Christ, in the first Covenant, as a
fleshly Bridegroom. But then, farther, is he to follow this Bridegroom, in the
death and loss of all this fading life and riches, Wisdom and Money, for what,
in spiritual conviction-Light, is showed and offered him, by Christ, as a
better Bridegroom and Comforter, in the second. This second and principal
thing, done, (as the passive part of obedience, required in the right and
lawful use of all, in the first Covenant law-state) God is well-pleased, and
Man saved. But, be Man never so faithful in the active obedience, performable
in his law-life, if he refuse to perform or yield to the required passive
obedience, all his active turns, in conclusion, to no account, at all. Himself
is turned out of God's house, for ever, as but that servant, in his own
law-spirit of bondage, that refused to become a Son of God, in his
Gospel Spirit of glorious liberty, that makes free indeed; Jo. 8. 35, 36. The
truth, the Gospel Spirit of Truth, makes Man truly free; ver. 32. Where, (or in
whomsoever) that Spirit is, is liberty; 2 Cor. 3. 17. The Gospel-law of the
Spirit of life, is the perfect law of liberty. It renders Man free, not to, but
from all sin and death, at last; Romans 8. 2. Jam. 1. 25. Man's spirit of
bondage, chosen, before and against God's spirit of true freedom, becom's a
house, a prison, a state of eternal death, to him. If Man use his law-life,
aright, as to the first end, for which restored; and miss the appointed and
declared second, all comes to worse then nothing, for ever. He misses that true
Wisdom, that gives and is eternal life to them that have it. This, the Law-life
and best Wisdom of Man, can never give (or be) to him; Gal. 3. 21.

Verse. 13. Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he
has made crooked?
Consider well the life and state of Men and Angels, as the first-creation
Workmanship of God's hand; and you will find it crooked; first, comparatively. To
the second make of them, by his new-creating Workmanship, all the fading
goodness, Life, Wisdom, Glory, and Righteousness of the first are as nothing;
no Glory, etc; 2 Cor. 3. 10. If the Glory and other things of Man, in the
first, be not only presumptuously compared with, but preferred and exalted into
a jusling competition with, and opposition to the Life, Glory, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Works, Fruits and things of God, offered them, by a new and
second Creation; this renders all such things, worse then nothing. Yea, if this
be finally, wilfully and conclusively done; the Glory, Wisdom, Light, Life,
Righteousness, all things of Man, are turned into unspeakable shame, utmost
folly and highest wickedness, to which belong utter Darkness and eternal Death.
The corruptible seed (1 Pet. 1. 23.) of God's left hand planting, in Man's or
Angel's natural, first-creation-make and state, at its utmost growth, flourish
and fruitfulness, amounts but to a fading flower. Man, in all, at best, is
altogether Vanity. This fleshly state of Life, was figured by the tree of good
and evil, before the fall. Since the fall, it is always evil, root and branch,
tree and fruit; silth of (...) or spirit are found in all its operations,
fruits, products, or performances, root and branch. When Paul was eminent in
the restored righteous law-life of Man, how fiercely did he persecute the
Gospel or New Creature life of Christ, in himself and Saints? That was filth of
Spirit, enmity and despite to the very Gospel- spirit of Grace, in which any
can be saved; 'twas a sinning against the holy Ghost; but, ignorantly. When
done knowingly, and so, wilfully, it is the presumptuous, unpardonable Sin unto
Death.

God made Man upright, set up in him a first-Covenant-life, perfect in its
kind; but, fallible, corruptible, changeable, loseable, as all mankind have
sadly experienced, by the first error of humane nature, at best, in the first
Man. Now, what is corruptible, God calls corruption. The natural seed of a
first-Covenant life, cast into Man, in his natural, first-creation make and
fashion of being, was sown in corruption, dishonor, weakness. By the obedient
death of Man, therein, it is raised in Incorruption, Glory, Power; a spiritual
body, or man. His whole Body, Soul and Spirit, is filled and clothed with a
Spiritual Life, Glory, and everlasting Righteousness. Flesh and blood (the
comprehensive character of all, Man or Angel were possessed of, by the first
creation,) cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption; or attain the incorruptible Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Nor Man nor
Angel, in innocence, had any such thing as eternal Life, or everlasting
Righteousness, actually, about them or in them, that qualifies any for entrance
into the Kingdom of God. Man and Angel then, set up by God's left hand, as we
may say, in a first-Creation-state, if they knowingly and wilfully set up for
themselves, there, in enmity to God and the second, they will be found those
lustful Goats (that through inordinate love to, evil covetousness and lust
after their own fading life and things thereof, so as to hate and reject God's,
by a new and second Creation) at Christ's left hand, severed from his obedient
spiritual Sheep on his right, and forced to receive the meet recompense of
their error, the vengeance of eternal fire; Mat. 25. 33, -46. Jude 7. By
choosing their corruption, or natural state, before God's Incorruption, or
incorruptible spiritual Life, will they utterly perish in their own Corruption;
2 Pet. 2. 12. The question here, then, amounts unto this. Who can make the
natural or first-Creation state of Man, straight (or, unsubjected to change and
miscarriage) that God, in the abovesaid sense, has made crooked, liable or
subject to both? This question imports an utter impossibility of making it
straight; Eccle. 1. 15. It Is therefore, peerless folly and madness in Man or
Angel, to attempt it; or, to establish themselves in it, for happiness. There Is
no way possible for either, to be happy, but by the death and loss of all their
own, there, for God's own, which they can only arrive at and attain, by the
death of their spirit of nature, and so, a resurrection into the life of his
spirit of Grace. God positively requires both and all of them, to part with
their crooked changeable, first-creation thing or things, for his unchangeably
straight and incorruptibly perfect new creation life, and things. However
straight the former appear in Man's day or discerning; in the Light and Judgment
of his Wisdom; in God's, it is crooked; and so, declared, for Man to take notice
of. Man ought to consider the whole work of God, from first to last, beginning
to the end; his beginning with him, in a first creation, and ending or
finishing Workmanship upon him, in and by a second. Men ought also to listen to
his whole counsel and instruction; to his convincing discoveries and
revelations of the second and more excellent state they are offered, by a new
Creation, and the way of attaining it. The death of their crooked state, is the
undispensable means and way of being exalted into God's straight. Their
crooked, set up in unchangeable enmity to his straight, is certain damnation to
them. They ought to believe God's own report and declaration of their crooked
natural state, and look after his straight spiritual Life, and State, in a
Spirit that can never sin; 1 John 3. 9. They ought not to stick at any cost, or
loss, they can be at, for Truth, ( Prove. 23. 23. and Luke 14. 28.) or for the
life of God's new-creature-spirit of Truth, and everlasting Righteousness.

Verse. 14. In the day of Prosperity, be joyful; but, in the day of Adversity,
consider: God also, has set the one over against the other, to the end that
Man should find nothing after him.
The good and evil day, in the original, are here translated, the day of
Prosperity and Adversity.

Here Is a twofold day, for Man, in God's wise method and appointment, set, one
over against the other, which it is man's duty and concern, to take notice of,
and comply with, recoycing in the former, and duly considering the yet greater
advantages to him, in the latter. To follow the Lord's counsel, in both, is his
best course. The spiritual mystery of these Words is the principal intendment.
But, first, in the litteral sense; the greatest content, joy, and satisfaction,
man can find in the greatest outward Prosperity (when surrounded with a
confluence of all visible desireables in this World) he must come to experience
the loss of all, first or last, which he ought to consider. In the perishable
nature of all such enjoyments, is discernably writ out a day of adversity, over
against his utmost prosperity, therein. The perishing nature, also, of that
life and desire in him, that is gratified by such things; the belly that is for
such meats, does farther preach the same doctrine to him, cautioning against
the placing his happiness in such slippery, uncertain things. Death puts a full
period to all such desires, as are answered by such desireables. Vanity on all
hands, proclaims a day of Adversity and darkness, set over against the day of
such Prosperity. Unwarrantable overvalue for, love to, and delight in such
worldly things, will cause a destructive worldly sorrow to man, if he outlive
them. When run down into a despicable state of misery and want, he knows not
how to bear it, or what to do with himself. Life grows a burden. Sometimes he
makes away himself, as weary of it.

But now, as to the mystical, principal sense of these words; Here Is a most
concerning caution to man, in the utmost flourish, fruitfulness and inward
mystical riches of his nature, in a first-covenant righteous life, where belly
and meats, desires and desireables, root and branch, tree and fruits,
principles and operations, are all but a higher sort of perishing vanities,
sigur'd out by the former. All this yet, is but a vain show, a dream, a fools
Paradise, a shadow, an image only of true durable life and substantial riches,
in the heavenly creature-image of the second Adam. Man, at best, in all this
fading glory and honor of his own nature, is altogether vanity. Ps. 39. 5, 6.
The first Adam was made in but the earthly, shadowy Image of God: the heavenly,
substantial, creature-image of the infinite Divinity is found only in the
second Adam, and his spiritual descendents, by a new birth, or second creation.
A day of adversity, then, is written out, in the perishing nature of all such
inward, as well as outward prosperity, over against the highest prosperity,
therein. All such mystical, soul-riches, life, food, clothing, glory, honor,
wisdom, righteousness, all will be gone again, most certainly make themselves
wings and flee away; Prove. 23. 5. While then, Man sets his eye or heart on such
things, which God says, are not, he is sure to meet with an amazing
disappointment. By new creature things, things of God, (which God's Wisdom
reckon's the only creature-things that are; man's wisdom, things that are not)
will God bring to naught all those things of man, which his foolish wisdom
reckon's the only creature-things that are; 1 Cor. 1. 28. In the day of man's
prosperity in the restored first-Covenant righteous life of his own nature
(under the cherishing, impregnating influencings of Christ, as a fleshly
Bridegroom, or Husband, rendering him fruitful in such births, fruits, works of
righteousness and duties to God and Man, as are producible and performable
therein) should he be joyful, and thankful to God, for mercifully restoring to
him, the proper life, food and clothing of his dead, desolate nature, lost by
the fall. Ezekiel. 16. 3, -14. This is the common Salvation, or general
deliverance, all men may receive, from Christ's General-Redemption-Purchase.
This, by his putting our nature, at best, in himself, to death, as to this very
life, he offer's, thereby, to restore in all men. And thereby, has he showed
them the right use of such life, when restored, even to give it up, in
Sacrifice to God, as he did, in order to receive from him, that spiritual,
new creation life, in the image of the Heavenly, into which, he has exalted our
nature in his own Person, in which he lives, and in which, we may (on like
obedience, as thorow-followers of his suffering-steps) live with him, for
evermore; Rev. 1. 18. A twofold day of adversity and house of mourning then,
will infallibly succeed a twofold day of prosperity and feasting, in all
possible outward or inward Riches of this World. In the day of the said utmost
twofold Prosperity, then, is it man's important concern, to have in his eye,
thought, and due consideration, the approaching twofold day of Adversity. Such
a consideration may keep him from a sinful overvalue of, and over-rejoycing,
or trusting in his fading enjoyments, and uncertain (...); 1 Timothy 6. 17. The
day of adversity, as to all such riches, under the Cross, and in the house of
mourning, and death to Nature, is the method of God's Wisdom, for the bringing
him into his house of everlasting feasting and (...), with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. So is the day of adversity and mourning, a greater Mercy, then
the restoring him into the utmost prosperity of his nature, outward and inward,
as bringing him nearer to absolute life, and special Salvation (1 Timothy 4. 10.)
then when he first believed (Romans 13. 11.) in Christ, so as to receive the
fresh gift of a first-covenant life, from his hand. On obedient submitting to
the appointed death-pass into the Glory that follows, excels, and remains for
ever, does Christ stand ready, to perform the promise of the Father (Act. 1.
4.) in giving Men durable Life, Riches, never-perishing food and clothing. So,
follows a day of everlasting Prosperity and feasting, to them. They must suffer
and die with Christ, as to the fading, first-covenant law-life of Nature, that
they may live and reign with him for ever, in the Gospel-life of his Spirit of
Grace and Truth; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. God sets all this, before Man; declares his
whole counsel to him, with the advantages of his compliance with, and
disadvantages of his rebellion against him, as to absolute Salvation, on the
one hand; or final damnation, on the other. Isa. 1. 19, 20. All this, fairly
declared, man may run and read, what is like to become of him, for ever, as
wilfully running after Satan's lie, or obediently complying with God's Spirit
of Truth. God has so clearly stated his true interest and duty, in reference to
his eternal (...), that he will make him consess, at last, he kept nothing from
him, that 'twas his true advantage to see or know. This, to the end Man should
find nothing, after him; no concerning Truth, that has not bin (...) and
plainly set before him; and so, no cause to complain of God; as the Septuagint
render it. For the joy of an everlasting day of Prosperity, spiritual feasting
and rejoicing, set before them, ought Men, with Christ, to despise the shame,
and sorrow, brought upon their natural state, by his Cross. Heb. 12. 2. Former
Saints and followers of Christ, are a great cloud of witnesses, for this (ver.
1.) that the sufferings of the natural man, in the present time, are not to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed to and in the spiritual state of
the whole man, Body, Soul, and Spirit; Romans 8. 18. Unchangeable enemies of the
Cross, from a most foolish, unwarrantable love to their own nature, will find
all their day of Prosperity therein, inevitably swallowed up into an eternal
night of darkness and death, under the fiery Indignation of God.

Verse. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my Vanity: there is a just
Man, that perishes in his Righteousness; and, there is a wicked Man, that
prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
Here Is Solomon's large experience of all things in this first-creation World
of Vanities. He has seen the end, all corruptible perfections and excellencies,
therein, will come to; Psalm. 119. 96. The just man, here, may be the moral
Heathen, that depends on his own personal Righteousness, as also the
first-covenant Jew or Christian, that depends on the perfect Righteousness or
Comeliness of that sort, imputed to, or put upon him; Ezekiel. 16. 14. Both these
are bidding, with some confidence and hopefulness, at Salvation, in the
natural, corruptible first-creation or first-covenant Principles of Light,
Life, and Action; their own Wills, Understandings, and Wisdoms, under the Law
of works, that requires such obedience as is performable in the active, working
power of their enlightened Nature. These two sorts of just Men, in
Heathen-morality or legal-Christianity, have nothing, brought afloat, in, or
about them, but what is perishable; which, therefore, fixed in, is unchangeable
enmity to God. This enmity to God's Spirit, which, is the unpardonable filth of
Man's, renders all such righteous opposers of the vile affections or filth of
Flesh, in the corrupt spirit of Nature, guilty of the most criminal sort of
uncleanness and wickedness. So, do all such just men perish, in (and by) their
Righteousness, as abused, and set up, against the Gospel-Life and everlasting
Righteousness of God, in his Spirit of Grace. The gross, profane wicked man, in
the unbridled, unconscionable exercise of the corrupt spirit of Nature,
contrary to both the said righteous Men, often prolongs his life, in a
prosperous, flourishing outward condition, in this World; Job 21. 7. And the
literally-righteous, spiritually-wicked Man, typed hereby, may prolong his
days, also, in this World. Both these fortunate fools, are, through the mistake
of the natural man, in the spiritual Saint, envied, as (...), in their
differing ways more then heart can wish, while his nature is plagued and
chasten'd, daily, under the Cross; Psalm. 73. 2, -- 14. But, when his spiritual
man recovers and comes to work, he sinds himself, passing, according to the
fixed methods of God's Wisdom, through a house of mourning and death, into
eternal life; and the other, through their desired Prosperity and house of
feasting, into (...) sorrow darkness and death; ver. 17, 20. He owns his
natural man, to be foolish and ignorant, as a Beast, as to the making any right
judgment, in this case; ver. 22. That brutish fool understands not this riddle
of providence, in outward dispensations to friends, as (...); and foes, as
friends. He sees not this mystery, that when the wicked spring as the grass,
and all the workers of Iniquity flourish; it is, that they shall be destroyed,
for ever; Psalm. 92. 6, 7. They are, in their various self-pleasing wicked ways,
but treasuring up Wrath for themselves against the day of Wrath, and posting to
eternal death, as happy as they both seem to themselves and others, to be.
God's abused patience and longsuffring toward them, will be found, at winding
up, a signal aggravation of their sin and punishment. Yet, mean while, God
magnifies his mercy toward them, in giving them so large a time, to take
notice of (and advantage by) his instructing warnings, for preventing the wrath
to come. The mystical-wicked, first-covenant Brethren, fixed in enmity to the
(...), do long live and prosper (generation after generation) in union of mind
with the Devil, filling up the measure of their Fathers, in the highest and
most criminal wickednesses. Wolves in Sheep's-clothing are they; Serpents, a
generation of Vipers, that have drunk down the old Serpent's poison of
unchangeable enmity to God; and, (...) then, can they escape the damnation of
Hell? Mat. 23. 31, - 33. They (...) and follow their first-(...) Fathers, in
former generations, as persecuting Zelots against the second, and so pass along
into the same everlasting darkness, after them, and never see light; Psalm. 49.
13, 19. To prevent this dangerous fixure in the righteousness of Man, in the
first covenant, against the Gospel-life and new creature righteousness of God,
in the second, Solomon advises all, capable of repentance or change of mind, as
follows.

Verse. 16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy-self over-wise: why
should thou destroy thy felf? (Heb. be desolate?)
Man is righteous overmuch, or long, in the first-Covenant, when he overmuch
values it, and lay's to great a stress upon it; when he trusts, rest's in, and
builds upon the changeable, fallible principles thereof, for Salvation. On this
mistake, he refuses Christ's heavenly call to him, to come up, out of the life
and image of the earthy, into his heavenly; out of the perishing life, wisdom,
and righteousness of man, in the first-covenant principle, into the everlasting
Life, Wisdom and Righteousness of God, in the second. An overvalue for, and
unwarrantable security in the first, endangers man's shutting the door of his
heart, and deafning his ear to Christ, against his gracious offer of (and
invitation into) the second. So, by preferring the Law-righteousness of man, to
the Gospel-life and righteousness of Christ and God, do men destroy themselves;
bring the desolating, final judgments of God, upon their guilty heads. This get
they, by being overmuch righteous, and over-wise, as putting a value upon such
righteousness and wisdom of their own nature, above what is written of it (1
Cor. 4. 6.) in God's Oracles of Truth. Job, while yet much in the dark, as to
what God was about to do with him, said, though he were perfect, yet would he not
know his own soul, but despise even his righteous life; Job 9. 21. The
professing Jews blasphemed and crucified Christ; Paul breathed out threatenings
and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord, from a fond conceit,
overvalue for, and (...) in the restored life of the first Covenant, and the
wisdom and righteousness of man, therein, so as to prefer it to the everlasting
Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God, in the second. This (...), when Paul
was happily delivered from, he found his Jewish professing Brethren, still in,
Romans 10. 1, - 3. They were ignorant of God's Gospel Righteousness, in the
second; and so, zealous for their own Law-righteousness, in the first. While
thus ignorant, as he, once; and so, pardonable and curable, he earnestly prayed
they might so accept of, and receive his Gospel-instructions, that they might
be saved. He had greater love and better desires for them, than they yet knew
how to have, for themselves. He compassionatly bemoans (and laments over)
(...), on the same account, Christ himself did; Mat. 23. 37, 38. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, etc. Behold, your house is left unto you, desolate. Here Is the
temper of the mystical earthly Jerusalem professor, in all times and places,
under Law or Gospel. They have bin, all along, generation after generation,
found in a posture of (...) toward all right words, brought to them in
Christ's Gospel Spirit of true (...), declaring the death of nature in the
first-Covenant, undispensably necessary to their sinding eternal life, in the
second. The final refusal of the Lord's Counsel, herein, will render their
first-Covenant house of feasting, eternally desolate. This twofold error, one
the certain consequent of the other, even, the placing Salvation in the first,
and finally rejecting the life of God, in the second, is certain Damnation.
Man, established in his own righteousness, as a state of Salvation, is the
unchangeable enemy of God, Christ, all spiritual Saints, and Gospel-(...). This
unlawful use of the Law, or their own Law-life, against Christ's everlasting
Gospel-life, amounts to that love of the World (or of themselves, in their
worldly, first-creation, Law-life of Nature) that is enmity to God and his
Gospel Spirit of Grace. This is spiritual and most criminal adultery; Jam. 4.
4. Law-life, thus abused, is the leaven of the Pharisees, a root of
bitternesses against the Gospel-life and Truths of Christ, with mystically
profane Esau; Heb. 12. 15, 16. Such wilful opposing (instead of obedient
submitting to) God's Righteousness (Romans 10. 3. and Jam. 4. 7.) keep's Men from
ever entering into God's Righteousness. David the Type, and Christ the Truth,
intercede against such incorrigible enemies; Let (...) not come into thy
righteousness; Psalm. 69. 27. Let their habitation be desolate; ver. 25.

'Be not then righteous overmuch, or overlong, by overmuch valuing, and over
long staying in that first-Covenant life, place, or state; whence (by the death
and loss of all thou art there possessed of) the true spiritual Children of
Christ break forth, into the new-creature-life of God; Hos. 13. 13. Be not
over-pleas'd (transported and delighted) with the fading righteous life of thy
own nature, so as to be leavened and sowr'd into a bitter enmity against that
spiritual life of Christ, in which alone, any can be saved. Prefer not thy
mortal, to Gods immortal righteous life. Why should thou destroy thy self? or
be (...), and undone for ever? This, by turning all the fading Life,
Righteousness, Wisdom, Beauty, and Glory, by Christ himself, set up in, and put
upon thee, into a perfect abomination to him, and cause of final desolation to
thy self.

Verse. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou
die before thy time? ( Heb. not in thy time?)
Here Is another branch of Solomon's advice to another sort of Men, whom he
call's wicked, living in the vile affections and lusts of the corrupt spirit of
nature; refusing the Redeemer's purchased and offered Deliverance out of that
most palpably evil and shameful state of bondage, and death in trespasses and
sins. These, under the self-polluting practices of their unbridled brutish
lusts, carry folly and madness written in their foreheads, to be seen and read
of all men, in and by the restored common light of Nature. They hate the
righteous life of their own nature, with all reproofs and instructions, toward
their recovery, into it. They abuse what light of Reason they have, rendering it
a slave to those brutish powers of life (it ought to direct and rule over) so
as to prog about and fetch in provisions for them. The consequent hereof,
Solomon declares, to be a dying before (or, not in) their time; saying, Why
should thou die before thy time? In a literal sense, how often do men hasten
the death of their body, by (...), riot and luxury? These are bloody-minded
men, that shall not live out half their days; Psalm. 55. 23. They wholly delight
in the brutish lusts and pleasures of their degenerate nature, polluted in its
own blood, (Ezekiel. 16. 6.) dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Solomon
advises men, not to be over-wicked, or stay overlong in the brutified,
polluted state of fallen nature, out of which the first-covenant (...) of
Christ, do break forth (by a being born of (and knowing) him, (...) the flesh)
into the righteous fleshly-life of the Law; who also (...) to break forth, out
of that fading righteous state (with the spiritual New Covenant Children of
Christ) when warned of, and called thereunto, become guilty of more criminal
(...), (...) and abominable Idolatries, then they that remain wholly in their
polluted Nature. A being born but of the flesh, or will of (...), in Christ, is
vastly short of a being born of the spirit or will of God, in him; Joh. 3. 6.
and 1. 13. That that is born of his flesh, is but flesh, holy flesh, righteous
Nature; makes but a first-Covenant Saint, Spouse, and Child of Christ, which
Paul wholly quitted as dung, for the knowledge of (...) after (...) Spirit, or
in his Spiritual, Resurrection-life. This turned the Law-Saint, in holy (...),
into a Gospel-Saint, in God's holy new creature Spirit of everlasting
Righteousness; 2 Cor. 5. 16. Phil. 3. 6, - 10. So became he a fool, weak,
despicable, as a crucified, dead Man, to them that were yet wise, strong, and
honorable in Christ, by the knowledge of him, only, after the flesh (1 Cor. 4.
10.) or, in but the first-Covenant.

But, to the wicked, here. Christ has restored the first-Covenant Light of
Rational Nature in every Man, that comes into the World. By this, he shows (or
gives them a fair prospect into) this first mystical Canaan, or earthly
Jerusalem-state; and so, a call into it, even into the righteous, cleans'd Life
and State of their own Nature. Those that refuse deliverance out of their
polluted, dead state of Nature, do, by this additional evil, to their
Hereditary Disease and Pollution from Adam, pull the just charge of that
original Sin, upon their own guilty heads, as delighting in it, and choosing it,
in preference to any thing of the righteous life of Nature, Adam had, before
his fall. They render themselves literal Sodom, incorrigibly and therefore
unpardonably wicked, to whom belongs the vengeance of eternal fire, (Jude7.) as
the meet recompense of such error; Romans 1. 26, 27. Will they reckon it too
hard, eternal punishment should be brought upon them in Hell, for a little
short brutish pleasure, upon Earth? In this also they greatly err, not
considering, that their unchangeable enmity to God, deserv's his unchangeable
Wrath upon them. Thus, Man dies before his time, chooses his state of death and
pollution, when he might receive the fairly offered Righteous Life of his own
Law-Spirit of Nature, again; after which, yet, he may die eternally, if he
refuse, by the right death and sacrifice of that, to receive eternal Life, in
God's Gospel Spirit of Grace. But, as an enemy of all Righteousness, or
Righteous Life, God's and Man's too, does he turn that but changeably dead
state of Nature, he was born in, into a state of unchangeable, eternal death; a
latter end worse then his beginning, worse then that changeable, curable,
recoverable state of death, he was born in. Such brutified monsters will not
admit any thing of the least (...) toward their Deliverance or Salvation; not
any thing toward (...) rendering them clean sacrifices to God, in a restored
first-Covenant Life, in order to receive his life, in the second. By this
overplus of wickedness, does man hasten his own eternal ruin. If he hate the
Righteousness of man, that he has seen, much more does he hate the more
excellent, spiritual, New Creature, everlasting Righteousness of God; and much
more yet, the infinite and eternal Righteousness of the very Divinity, that he
has not seen (1 John 4. 20.) As still more and more above, and contrary to the
vile affections and lusts of his brutified self-polluting Nature. Eternal death
is the undeniably just recompense of all that finally refuse to submit to the
Lord's declared terms, for their receiving eternal life, whether they be found
in corrupt or righteous Nature; whether Publicans and Harlots, common (...) of
the Gentiles; or Righteous Scribes and Pharisees, professing first-Covenant
Jews, or Christian Gentiles. So have we the sense, in which these two verses,
16 th and 17 th, are spoken to two sorts of Men, professors and profane; one
perishing by being overmuch righteous; the other, by being overmuch wicked.
The former will needs have his Righteousness and Wisdom, to be everlasting and
unchangeable ( above and beyond all that God has ever written or spoken of it)
crying, Peace, peace, to himself and others therein, as entitled thereby, to
eternal life and peace, in and with God. All this, in a perfect contrariety to
all God's Declarations, Counsels and Warnings, about it. So, they love and
delight in, what, Christ makes the hating, parting with, and death of,
undispensably necessary to their being saved. Eternal death is the meet
recompense of such error, finally persisted in. As for the overmuch-wicked (
ver. 17.) he sinks himself into a far worse condition, then left in by his
first Parents. So come they both, to a latter end, worse than their beginning,
eternal darkness and death. These two sorts of incorrigible sinners, mystical
and literal Sodomites, bring upon themselves swift destruction, by denying the
Lord that bought them, (2 Pet. 2. 1.) One denying or refusing to receive him,
so much as in his first; the other, in his second or New Covenant life. And, of
the two, the mystical Sodomite will have the worst on it, for ever, under the
wrath to come; Mat. 11. 24.

Verse. 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this; yea also, from
this withdraw not thine hand: for, he that fears God, shall come forth of
them all.
The good, we should take hold or lay hands on, is Christ's new creation life
of Truth, the absolute unchangeable good thing, that is to be sought and pure
as'd, at any rate; sold or parted with, at no rate; Prove. 23. 23. (...) bad his
highest ( all the Kingdoms of this World, and Glory of them; all first-creation
excellencies, humane and angelical, and that, as transformed into the gilded
likeness of the second) to purchase the life of Truth, out of Christ's own
hands. How Christ handled him, we find, Mat. 4. Luke 4. But, he prevails with a
World of professors, that have put their hand to the Gospel-Plough, (as brought
by Gospel conviction-Light to see their concern, in running down Nature, at
best) to look back (Luke 9. 62.) to his first-creation offers, withdraw their
hands from, and turn their backs upon Christ and his Kingdom-Spirit (with the
bewitched Galatians, Gal. 3. 1, - 3. and 5. 7, 8.) which alone could secure
them from the destruction, the overmuch righteous or wicked, come to. That
dungy-life, Paul quitted (which many hold fast, unto damnation) are we to
withdraw our hand from, and let go our hold of, in order to lay hold on that
unchangeably good thing, that is eternal Salvation. Those, that having begun in
the Gospel Spirit, withdraw their hand from that Gospel-plough or cross upon
their cleans'd enlightn'd natural Spirit, and return to the love of and
self-deceiving (...) in their holy flesh (or righteous Law-life of their
restored Nature) are in a dangerous way toward final Apostasy, and Damnation.
Paul found the bewitched Galatians, not so absolutely gone, as to (...) no room
for his Gospel-endeavours and intercessions, toward their recovery; Gal. 4.
19. But, many, (...) Gospel-convictions (owning and following Gospel Truths,
for a (...)) play false, and turn final Apostates; sell Christ's Gospel Spirit,
for their holy (...); take off their hand, and let go their hold (...) Christ's
Spirit of Truth, for Satan's Spirit of lies, on his engaging to advance them in
their own nature, will, and way after their own heart. Such often become his most
pregnant, eminently accomplished Instruments, to oppose those very
Gospel Truths, that, for a season, they professed and owned. They knowingly
part with, or sell Christ, his Gospel Spirit of Truth, (and his great
Salvation, therein offered them) for themselves, or their holy flesh, restored
Nature, the Devil, and Damnation. They part with Christ's great Spiritual,
Gospel-Pearl, for their lesser natural, after they had agreed to (and vowed)
the parting with all, for that one thing necessary. They Will not stand to their
new covenant bargain; not go through, as to the cost for a new building, the
utter demolition of their old. They Will not part with all their old things, for
Christ's new. They like them not so well. So, hold fast what they have, and
lose all; whereas they that obediently lose all they have, find all again with
usury, in what the others refuse; Mat. 16. 25. After all fair warning of this,
thus they do. What help? To begin in the Spirit, and finally apostatize to a
false confidence for Salvation, in the flesh, fits Men for the hottest Hell,
the greatest portion of Wrath, for evermore. This exposes such bidders at the
new-building, to everlasting derision and contempt; Luke 14. 28, -- 30. When
Men have yielded, a little, to cross-work; suffered something of the old
building to be pulled down, ( Gal. 3. 4.) Stood the shock of some reproach from
scorners, for it; and then, are offered by Satan, not only to be repaired and
made whole again, as ever, but also to have their old natural first-creation
building raised higher, and made larger, and wider (by the super-additions of
superior angelical excellencies and brightnesses, of the same first-creation
sort, with their humane) they are willing to take this for the right
new-building, for the Kingdom of God; the true Gospel-state. When Satan has
them, at this lock, in this snare, he lays his confirming paws upon them,
fixing them in unchangeable enmity to the very Gospel-Life and Spirit, in which
any can be saved, or ever could. They are then fully engaged in the sin against
the holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit of Truth, beyond retreat, leaving no place for
repentance; Heb. 6. 4, -- 6. and 10. 26, 27. This get all such Esau's, by
greedily catching at Satan's first-creation morsel, in preference to Christ's
offered new creation birthright; Heb. 12. 16, 17. They let go Christ's
new creation all things, for Satan's glittering gilded first-creation nothings,
perishing vanities; Christ's heavenly, for his earthly things; dust, the old
Serpent's diet; Genesis 3. 14. This trade, many thousands have driven, and do
drive, in this World, to their eternal ruin, in the next. There Is no helping
them that will not be helped. Finally to refuse the things of God, for the
things of Man and Devil, deliberately, on a fair view of both, is unpardonable
folly. They see how matters go, on all hands; see what they refuse, and for
what; so their sin remains, upon them, for ever, as Christ told the Pharisees;
Joh. 9. 40, 41. They that refuse to part with their earthly life, as dung
(Phil. 3. 8.) for Christ's heavenly, will perish as their own dung, for ever;
Job. 20. 7. All fading first-creation Vanities, are dung to Chrst's heavenly,
spiritual things, things of God, offered, by a New Creation. The best services
in their own life, on this fatal miscarriage, will he spread as dung, upon
their faces; Mal. 2. 3. To withdraw their hand from Christ's offers, to comply
with and accept Satan's, is a drawing back to perdition; Heb. 10. 39. This,
Solomon warns against; farther declaring, he that fears God, shall come forth
of them all; shall escape out of all sin, all evil company, and ways, every
evil path, that mystical Sodomites are in ( ver. 16.) or literal, ver. 17. He
shall be delivered from the presumptuous, unpardonable sin of both and all, a
sixture in their differing evil ways of death, and be finally delivered and
acquitted, as to all his other sins, on the death of the guilty sinner, the
evil-doer, in him. He shall surmount all sins and sinners, come out of all
literal or mystical Sodomies and Sodomites, in corrupt, or righteous Nature;
and so partake of none of their plagues, under final Wrath; Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor.
6. 17. The Saint is highly concerned to watch and fight against the
Belial-party in him, flesh (or nature, corrupt or righteous) with the
affections and lusts, that war against his own Soul; Gal. 5. 24. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
What Satan backs and (...) to gratify, support, and cherish in Saints, are they
constantly to fight against, oppose, cross, impoverish, and run down to death.
If they not only live but walk in Christ's Gospel Spirit, wherein he will judge
the World (and they, with him) thus will they do. They Will judge the World within
them their worldly natural Spirit, now; pass sentence of death upon it, in
harmony of their spiritual mind, with Christ; and as workers with him, join in
the speedy carrying on the (...) of it, lest Satan set or fix their heart in
them to do evil (Eccl. 8. 11.) in unchangeable union with him. All, that by
Christ's Spirit in them, mortify the lusts and deeds of their body, or natural
state, will live, for ever, with him; in his spiritual. Romans 8. 13. The right
death of what is exposed to all snares, deaths, and enemies attacks, delivers
out of, and from them all; from all snares of Satan, on the right and left hand
(calculated to the self-interest, palate, and desire of Nature, in the corrupt
or righteous life and principles thereof) in order to lodge all he can, in
unchangeable enmity to God, with himself. God warns all sorts of Sinners, as to
Satan's various snares; if therefore caught therein, it is at their own peril.
Their destruction is singly of themselves by their own choice; Ezekiel. 3. 17, --
21. Prove. 8. 36.

Verse. 19. Wisdom strength'neth the wise, more then ten mighty Men which are in
the City.
The Wisdom or living Word of God, the Gospel Spirit of Christ, makes all the
truly wise partakers thereof, Spiritual Saints, stronger and wiser too, then
all that is found in the first-creation-state of Men and Angels; 1 John 4. 4.
This new-creature-wisdom of God, by which the Worlds were made (Genesis 1. 1. Jo.
1. 1, -- 3. Col. 1. 15, -- 19. Heb. 1. 2.) Wheresoever it is, or in whomsoever,
admits no comparison of any first-Creation Power, Glory, or Excellencies, with
it. Prove. 3. 13, -- 19. 2 Cor. 3. 10. The evil Angels, with their Luciferian
head, as the supreme invisible Principalities, Powers, and Rulers of this dark
World, may fitly be represented by the ten mighty Men, in the universal City,
Province or Dominion thereof. The truly wise Saint, in the Life, Light,
Strength, Power, and Armor of God, can discover all the devices, and vanquish
all the power, the mystical Goliath and his Philistine Army can come forth
against him, with. True Spiritual David's, in the new name and power of the
Lord, will be too hard for them all; will be more then conquerours over the
whole incorporated first-creation City of evil Angels and Men. Their weapons
are spiritual and mighty through God to beat down the City, and strongest forts
thereof, about the ears of the rebellious defendants, that have fortified
themselves, against the new Jerusalem City of God. The enemy has none but
carnal weapons, fleshly Wisdom, Power, Strength and Arms, perishing Vanities.
Saints, with spiritual, will tumble down all their strong holds and every high
thing, that exalts it self, against God and them. They have in a readiness,
Power to revenge all such disobedience of Man and Angel, when their own
Gospel-life and obedience is completed; 2 Cor. 10. 4, -- 6.

Verse. 20. For, there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not.
This confirm's what is said, v. 19. There Is not one man amongst all men, in
their earthy, first-creation life and wisdom, at best, without sin, in God's
sight. Yea, their highest righteousness and wisdom, opposed to God's, are the
most criminal wickedness and folly. There Is none truly righteous, among them
all; no, not one. None, in their earthly spirit, or natural state, corrupt or
righteous, understands or seeks after God, in his spiritual, new creation life.
So, are they all, unprofitable to themselves as to true blessedness, because
not one of them does that good, in God's sight, that is of any conducibleness or
tendency thereunto. They rebel against (swell with indignation and despite to)
his offered Spirit of Grace, wherein alone, any can ever please him, or be
saved. Their throat is an open Sepulcher, to belch out blasphemies, threatenings
and slaughter against it, or any that own or talk of it, in its own words and
wisdom. (...) tongues are deceitful, the poison of Asps is under their lips;
their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, against it; their feet are swift
to shed the blood of any that declare it. From Cain downwards, to the end of
this World, Satan's reign, and man's day, all is of a piece; one uniform spirit
of contradiction to, and rebellion against the Spirit of God, and all its
words. Destruction and misery are in their way's: and the way of peace have
they not known. They have no fear of God before their eyes. Yet, flatter they
themselves, as true fearers of God, at peace with him, and in the very way to
Salvation. If good words, fair speeches, and most (...) selfpleasing
imaginations will do it, they are in a fair way to blessedness, while they are
serving their own belly, gratifying their own lust and desire, in direct enmity
to God, Christ, all Gospel-Saints and Truths; Romans 16. 18. They (...) peace,
peace, to themselves and others, where there is no peace; and say, the Lord
says, when it is Satan and their own lying spirit of divination says so; Ezekiel.
13. 6, -- 10. They have not known (or (...) (...) foot in) the way of peace
with God, but Satan's way of enmity to him. And, in all this, with their
leader, are they bold, confident, and fearless; behave themselves as Satan's
Children of pride, without fear; Romans 3. 9, -- 18. Job 41. 33, 34. There Is not
a just man upon Earth (in the restored righteous life and image of the earthy)
that sins not. There Is not a man, perfectly free from filth of flesh, the
vile affections of the corrupt spirit of nature; and filth of spirit, or enmity
to God, and his Spirit of Grace, is inseparable from the most restored
righteous life of Nature, since the Fall. Only, by the perfect death of the
spirit of Nature, under the Cross, can this enmity be slain and utterly
abolished out of any man. So, there is a very great mixture of sin, in any
possible fading good, found in, or performable by man, in his highest renewal.
Enmity to God lurks under all their fair shows in holy flesh, form of
Godliness, righteousness of man. This spoil's all. The perpetually sinning life
of Nature, utterly abolished by death, and the never-sinning-life of God's
Spirit of Grace, set up in the room thereof, can render any man truly and fully
just, in God's sight. He that is so dead, ceases, or, is freed from all sin, and
justified before God, for ever, in a newness of life, that is above all death; 1
Pet. 4. 1. Romans 6. 7.

Verse. 21. Also, take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear
thy Servant curse thee.
In letter, here is a prudent walking, required, by not troubling ones self,
with regarding (or harboring any revengeful thoughts against others, for
their) injurious words. But, as the chief intendment, is advice here given to
the spiritual wise Man, as to his deportment toward the natural, in his own
person, made clean, wise, and righteous, in first-creation principles. The
spiritual is to take heed to any words or doctrine, proceeding from this
natural (so as to follow the direction or counsel of its fallible wisdom and
judgment, about things pertaining to God, and his own Salvation) lest he hear
this natural Servant, that would fain be dictating and ruling, as a Master,
curse the spiritual, Heaven-born Son, in him. Paul, on his Gospel-conversion,
immediately, conferred not with flesh and blood, (Gal. 1. 16.) leaned not to,
but turned from his own understanding, and owned the infallible spirit of the
Son of God, for his Counselor, and the directer of his paths; Prove. 3. 5, 6.

t. Lest thou hear thy Servant curse thee. Here Is the reason, for this advice.
The natural ought to be an (...) servant to the spiritual man, in the Saint, as
its dictatour and ruler; but often, presumes to usurp the authority of its
Master, pretending to an infallibility in its judgment, and so, sit to be
obeyed by the whole Man. But, the words of his Wisdom, thwarting the Counsel,
Doctrine and words of the spiritual, it sollow's, the said natural Man will be
apt to curse, blaspheme or speak evilly, of all the right words of the
spiritual. These words of the (...), contradicting Servant, or Woman, against
its spiritual Lord, Master and Husband, is the spiritual Man in the Saint, not
to heed; nor follow the false reasonings thereof, against his spiritual mind.
If he do, it will breed great disturbance and confusion to him. By a perverse
mis-interpreting the Methods of God's Wisdom, in his dealings with them and
others, in this world, and its false conclusions therefrom, will it raise a
sore, troublesome combustion and tumult, in him; Psalm. 73. 1, -14. When the
spiritual Man recover's it self, it does, in Christ's Heavenly Sanctuary-light,
render all well and quiet, again, by its infallible discerning, arguings, and
concludings. And, it discovers the natural disputer of this World, ignorant and
foolish as a beast, unfit for the debating or rightly judging such matters,
between God and them; v. 15, -- 22. So Jer. 12, 1, -3. and 20. 7, -9.

Verse. 22. For oftentimes also, thine own heart knows, that thou thy self
likewise have cursed others.
Others; that is, the Spiritual Man in other Saints, while and when in but the
single activity and exercise of thy natural. Paul, while in his legal-spirited,
cleans'd, righteous nature, was of a perfectly contrary judgment to
Gospel-Saints, about Salvation, and all things, relating or conducing to it.
Hence, did he blaspheme Gospel Truths, and persecute the Declarers and Owners
thereof. So has the Saint this farther argumentative Consideration, for quiet
bearing contradiction to, and (...) for his Gospel-Doctrine; not only, because
Christ, that never (...), did patiently bear it; ( Heb. 12. 3.) but, because
himself, before (...)-Conversion, contradicted, blasphemed and persecuted
others, on the self-same account. Peter's natural man (before the spiritual
Seed was wakened in him, or known to him) very (...) joined with Satan, in that
seeming friendly advice and rebuke to his Master; Be it far from thee, Lord:
this shall not be unto thee; that is, pure nature in thee shall not die. Christ
rebuked his rebukers, Peter and the Devil, as an offense to him, for being
offended at that Cross and Death, which by God's appointment, is to be brought
upon the natural-state of all Men and Angels, first or last, in Love or final
Wrath. 'Twas the self-same Doctrine, the Serpent preached to Eve, and, by her,
to the first Adam. Ye shall not die at all; this shall not be unto you. Ye have
a life, above all danger of death, in your natural first-creation make, and
first-Covenant life or state. The Devil was unchangeably fixed in enmity to the
Cross upon Nature: Peter, not so; but, beguiled as Eve, (2 Cor. 11. 3.)
unawares. Job, while in the single activity of his decaying natural man, under
the Cross, multiplied words without knowledge, walked in company with wicked
men, enemies of the Cross-dispensation he was under. Yea, he added rebellion to
his sin, clapped his hands, and multiplied his words against God. Job 34. 7,
-9. and 35 -- 37. and 35. 2, 3, -- 16. The natural man is an offense to the
spiritual, because offended at the doctrine of the spiritual, in others, and in
the Saint himself. There Is just ground for the spiritual to be offended at the
words of the natural man's wisdom, about Salvation. The natural, without any
just cause, is offended at the spiritual, for the words of God's Wisdom. Satan
and the natural man, in the Saint himself, are of the same mind, judgment, and
palate, in this great Case. Neither of them savor, but hate all the Eternal,
Divine, Spiritual, Gospel-Things or Truths of Christ and God. They are, only,
for the old, temporal, fading first-creation life, wisdom, and things of Angel
or Man, perishing vanities. This whole Controversy is clearly discovered and
stated, by Christ himself; Mat. 16. 21, -- 26. The natural man, or spirit of
the Saint, in the single judgment and voice thereof, is the foe of his own
house, the false friend in his own bosom, that is not to be listened to, or
trusted, in this greatest Concern and Case. The secret of the New Covenant,
even the required death and loss of the changeable, womanish state of Nature,
in the old, or first, is to be kept from her; Mic. 7. 5, 6. The spiritual Man
should shut out, or exclude his natural, when he retires into his Closet to
pray, and treat with Christ, about the death of the natural. For, if that be
admitted any share in prayer, it will ask amiss, even the sparing its own life,
and what may nourish and gratify the lusts thereof, whether in its corrupt or
righteous state, (...) of slesh or spirit. It will never vote or ask aright,
any thing of God, in Prayer. The thought and voice thereof, is to be rebuked
and rejected, as well as Satan himself, with a get thee (...) me; stand (...).
Nothing but death will fully silence, the cross-desire of Nature to the
Spiritual Cross. It Is the love of God, therefore, brings the cross upon it, and
the highly concerning duty of the Saint, to yield obedience to it. No other
way, to be saved. Paul, when a holy Law-Man, gladly received the sentence of
death within (...), on his righteous natural state. 2 Cor. 1. 9. Gal. 6. 14.
All the thoughts, (...), and words of the natural man, in the Saint or others,
are to be suspected and rejected by the spiritual; not regarded or listened to,
either as to its counsel, or cursing the contraryminded spiritual. Sometime or
other, 'twill be at this work. For, it is flat against all the thoughts and
words of the spiritual, in its preaching or prayer. It Is the carnal or
fleshly-minded enemy to God and the spiritual, lusting against the Spirit of
Christ, in himself; and against the spiritual mind thereof, in the Saint
himself. Gal. 5. 17. The carnal mind of enmity to God, finally followed, is
eternal death to man; Romans 8. 6, -8. It enviously lusts against the spiritual
mind (Jam. 4. 5.) is directly contrary to it, in all its thoughts, desires, and
affections, lusts, and motions; labors, might and main, to hinder what that
would beat; and further what that is against, and hates; Romans 7. 15. Out of the
Saint's mouth (by reason of the untamed, or not fully crucified unequal
Yoke Fellow, his natural mind or man) proceed's blessing and cursing; Jam. 3.
9, 10. The spiritual blesses God, the Father; the natural curses the spiritual
man, in Men, that is made after the Supreme new creature image or similitude of
God, in Christ's Person; the image of the Heavenly Adam. The restored natural
man may (and ought to) bless God, for his mercifully restored righteous
Law-life, as effectually called out of his corrupt state; but when by God's
second voice, or (...) call, summoned to deliver up all that, back again, for a
spiritual and more excellent life; he curses, rebell's against, and (...) this
Gospel-voice, (...) heavenly Call, all the words and things or truths of God's
Gospel Spirit and Wisdom. On these various accounts, (...) (...) and Cursing,
for a time, out of the same mouth of the Saint. But others, in their restored
Nature, fixing themselves in enmity to God's Spirit of Grace, go on cursing,
and (...), to eternal death. With Gospel-Brethren these things ought not so to
be; nor will always be so. When the envious, spiteful Curser and Blasphemer,
the Belial-party, the Insidel or unbelieving Rebel, in the Saint, the natural
man or spirit, is fully crucisied, dead and buried, and then raised into
unchangeable harmony of mind with his spiritual; and so, with Christ and God
most high; then, all such cursing-work will cease, for ever. But, till all old
things, with Man's old life of nature, are passed away from the Saint, and all
God's new things, fully completed in him, has, even he, need enough of this
advice, not to heed the Counsels, per verse thoughts, reasonings, cursings or
evil-speakings of the natural spirit, in himself or others, against the whole
Gospel-Doctrine of the Cross, and only way of Salvation. Let it bark and make
what noise it will, they should regard none of its thoughts, lusts, words, or
ways, so as sinfully to comply with or follow it; but slight, turn from, and
avoid, as much as in them lies, this troubler, opposer, and hinderer of their
spiritual mind, till wholly cut off, and taken out of the way.

Verse. 23. All this have I proved by Wisdom: I said I will be wise; but, it was
far from me.
The Wisdom, by which, Solomon examined, found out, and proved the truth of all
things, could be no less then the spiritual, new creature Wisdom of God. In
this, he saw all things, divine, spiritual and natural, in their distinct
differing excellencies and perfections. So could he call all things by their
right names, and give their true discriminating characters. This is the
peculiar privilege of the spiritual Man's understanding; 1 Cor. 2. 10, 15.
Solomon, in this, did, with his Father David, see all natural first-creation
things of Man and Angel, at last, to be altogether vanity; Psalm. 39. 5, 6. The
wisdom of Man, at best, is the wrangling disputer of this World, about, and
against all things of God, in the next. It Is the contradicting blasphemer of
all such things, absolutely denying the very Gospel Spirit, life, and principle
of the next. It Is the wisdom from beneath, earthly, sensual or natural, and, if
fixed in, devilish (Jam. 3. 15.) the unchangeable enemy, and opposer of God's
Wisdom, and all the words thereof, in true Saints. The natural undertaker in
such Wisdom, to debate matters of Salvation, things of God, is the untreatable,
unreasonable man, Paul desired to be delivered from; 2 These. 3. 2. A
self-confident Man, utterly denying the very Gospel-Principle (or Spirit of
Christ, the Saints rocky foundation) in defense of his sandy, is unreasonably
burdensome to the Saint, when intruding to discourse Gospel-matters, which he
knows nothing of. Envying, strife, confusion, tumult or unquietness, and every
mischievous evil thing or work; what else can come on it? (...). 3. 16. 2 Timothy
2. 16, 17. Here Is the result of all such discourse and engagement. The
quarrelling worldly Disputant, discourses in choler (...) goes away, full of
Wrath, meditating revenge on the spiritual Saint, for his cross-doctrine. Such
Swine, ravenous Wolves, and poisonous vipers, Christ advises Saints, not to
cast Gospel-Pearls or Truths, before. But, where the wise man suspect's and
question's his fitness, in such wisdom, to judge of such matters, the case is
altered. He may hopefully be dealt with, in such affairs.

In the latter clause of this verse, Solomon speaks of another state and
wisdom, he had bin eminent in; the wisdom of Man, distinct from that, wherein
he had proved all things. What he happily, at last, found in the Spiritual
Wisdom of God, he had bin successlessly and vainly seeking, long before, in the
wisdom of man, though taller then his fellows there. I said, I will be wise, but
it was far from me. True Wisdom was far from me, as wise as I thought my self.
All eternal, divine, spiritual, heavenly, most excellent, concerning things and
truths, lay clear out the reach and comprehension of that earthly wisdom, as
far as the Heavens are above the Earth.

Verse. 24. That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
How should the shallow, weak-sighted, low, earthly wisdom of Man, ever find
out the exceeding deep, high, remote, divine and creature-things of the wisdom
of God, that are all spiritual, heavenly, and from above? Gospel-things and
Truths, mysteries of the Kingdom of God, lie in a depth unfathomable; at a
distance, never to be reached by the utmost line of natural, first-creation
understanding. They are spiritually (...), (1 Cor. 2. 14.) Or by new creation
understanding, only. Man, in his best wisdom, bid's at an absolute
impossibility. Brute beasts, in mere sensual life, may as well, if not better,
bid at the rational things of Man, as of nearer kin to their things, (all of
the first-creation sort, natural) then the spiritual things of God, are, to the
natural Man and his rational, intellectual things. And, when Man has thus
presumptuously pitched upon things, beyond the reach of his own wisdom, he is
ready to complain of, and dispute against God, that he has reserved things of
highest concern to him, out of his sight; all spiritual, heavenly, new creation
things, Wisdom, Life and all, in which found; Romans 10. 6, 7. This does Man, in
stead of yielding to the terms of receiving that wisdom (wherein he might
reach, see or know all things) the loss of his own; Life, and all. All
spiritual things or truths are hidden, sealed up mysteries, from the most
soaring, searching capacity of man, in first-creation wisdom. The Scriptures
are a Book sealed, as to all the spiritual truths thereof, from the highest
wisdom of Man; Isa. 29. 11. The professing learned Jews; yea, the very Apostles
knew not what to make of Christ's Gospel-words, New Covenant doctrine, while
they were but in old or first-Covenant Wisdom. The Bread I give, is my flesh,
says Christ. How can this be? say the Jews; Joh. 6. 51, 52. A hard saying, who
can hear (or understand) it? say his very Disciples; ver. 60. So, when he spoke
of his Sufferings, and Resurrection; a little while, and ye shall not see me,
viz. as a fleshly Bridegroom; again, a little while, and ye shall see, and know
me, viz. as a spiritual one, in my Resurrection-Life (Act. 2. 1, -- 4.) which
was the promise of the Father, Act. 1. 4. What Is this, he says? say his
Disciples. We cannot tell what he says, or means; Joh. 16. 16, -18. Such
mysterious things or words, do absolutely nonplus Man's. wisdom. It knows not
what in the world, to make of them. Hence, man thinks, or says in his heart,
Who shall ascend to Heaven, to bring down Christ to me, in that new creation
Life and Wisdom, you talk of, that is above my understanding, and out of the
reach of my Wisdom? Vain Man suspects not his own wisdom, as to its
sufficiency, for the reaching any thing that concerns him; and so, concludes,
all the spiritual, heavenly Truths and mysteries, the Saint speaks of, are just
nothing. So, all the spiritual sense of Scripture, all Gospel Truth is
rejected, to a tittle. The death and loss of that first-covenant life, wisdom,
and all the things thereof, for the Life, Wisdom, and things of God, in the
second, is the only way for man to understand all the mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, the whole counsel of God, the methods of his Wisdom, and contrivances
of his infinite Understanding, about the Salvation of his Creatures. The death
of Man's Law-spirit of nature, at best, and resurrection into Christ's
Gospel Spirit of Grace, is the only way, by which he can enter into, or so much
as see the Kingdom of God, and things thereof; Joh. 3. 3, 5. The loss of a
first-covenant Wisdom, Life and all; the becoming a Fool there, with Paul, a
nobody, is the only way to that Wisdom, wherein to see and know all things; 1
Cor. 3. 18. and 4. 10. Solomon then, charges himself with that foolish thought
(many are guilty of, who are far inferior to what he had bin in that natural
wisdom) wherein he said, I will be wise, or shall find this Wisdom of mine,
able to reach and comprehend all things. By Spiritual Wisdom, that can so do,
does he discover and judge the former overweening thought of his natural, that
never could. It Is in spiritual, New Creation life and wisdom, Man or Angel,
ever could, can, or will truly see their eternal concerns, or be saved. Man's
wisdom is bounded with first-Creation-vanities, perishing shadows, only, for
object. Here Is his walk, to and fro, in the Earth, among earthly shadows of
heavenly, substantial things.

Verse. 25. I applied mine heart, to know, and to search, and to seek out
Wisdom, and the reason of things; and to know the wickedness of folly, even of
foolishness and madness.
Solomon, here, by way of confirmation to what he had said (v. 24.) offers his
own certain experience of the utter impossibility of reaching and discerning
new creation Life, Wisdom, and things of God, in the single first-creation life
and understanding of Man. Few, if any, travel and reach so far, in this Wisdom,
as he had, through a super-eminency therein. And, as to the insufficiency of
his own wisdom, however great (1 King 4. 29, -- 34.) For directing his steps,
and ordering his conversation aright, before God; this did sufficiently appear,
by his falling again, under the prevailing lusts and vile affections of the
very corrupt spirit of Nature, in him. He did set his heart, to experience the
wickedness of Folly, even of foolishness and madness, in direct opposition to
his own wisdom and rational Light. He gave up himself to all extravagancies, in
brutish pleasures. And, he found such wickedness, folly; and such foolishness,
downright madness. He walked contrary to all Light or Wisdom of Man, in
Heathen, first-Covenant Jew or Christian. He fed, with the Prodigal, on husks
(among Satan's Swine, the common herd of brutified sinners, literal Sodom,
Egypt and Babylon) the lowest part of the dust of this world (things below the
Serpent's own angelical belly, desire, appetite, or palate; affording only such
pleasure, as is common to brute Beasts. At this low rate, was Solomon wallowing
with the Sow in the mire. Yet, under all this madness and folly, that his own
wisdom hindered not his falling into, lay there an incorruptible Seed of
Spiritual Life and Wisdom in him, that lifted him up ( Eccl. 4. 10.) out of all
his extravagant madnesses. It put forth it self, through Christ's powerfully
influencing it; lifted up its own head, into the exercise of a prevailing
authority and ruling power, and so, his whole man, out of the dark Dungeon and
deep pit of miery filth and corruption, into the mavelous Light and glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God, yea, the topheight of a supreamly double-portion'd
spousal Saint. Thus did God favor this Jedid-jah, or beloved of the Lord (as
by the Prophet Nathan, he named him, at his birth) this Solomon (or Son of
Peace) as his Father David named him, 2 Samuel 12. 24, 25. The Lord raised him
up, from feeding on the lowest dust in Satan's kingdom of darkness and death,
to feed on the highest never-perishing meats, divine and creature glories, in
his Kingdom of marvelous Light. By this most transcendent change, from a most
polluted Beast, in the first creation, to the highest rank of Saints in the
second, was he enabled to give a true account of the single first-creation
Spirit of Nature, in all the several parts, states, conditions, and dimensions
thereof, from first to last, as having fully experienced it, in all its wisdom
and folly, all the pleasures and contentments of it, whether in the corrupt or
enlightened state thereof. As the result of all his Observations and
Experiences, he declares it, in general, to be the Woman, he describes and
character's.

Verse. 26. And I find more bitter then death, the Woman whose heart is snares
and nets, and her hands as bands: whosoever pleases God (Heb. is good before God)
shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.
The Mystery, here, lies in the Woman, figured out by the amorous, enticing
practices of the literal. Interpretation is properly the discovering the
hidden, unknown, mystical Truth, signified in the Scriptures of Truth, by
literal shadows. The Mystery here, is the practice and way of the womanish,
changeable first-creation spirit or natural state, in all its variety,
throughout Satan's whole mystery of iniquity, falsehood, and deceit, from the
beginning, to the end of this World. What tumults and confusions, the literal
Woman is made the occasion of, in States, Families, and all worldly Societies
(through her deluding Arts, and Men's foolish dotings on her, in the vile,
womanish spirit of nature, on all hands, in both Sexes) is no news to the
common light of Nature in all mankind. But, God's Words of counsel and
instruction, signify Mysteries, hidden from the best Wisdom of learned Man.
The literal sense, here, is obvious to the unlearned. To the Mystery then, of
this Woman, Solomon here reflects upon, and sum's up his whole Experience in
the Life and Wisdom of his natural state (after all the sore mistakes he had
bin involved in, with his fellow-sinners and mortals) calling that changeable
state, in Man and Angel, Woman. This mystical Woman, in both Man and Angel, is
here considered, as fixed in unchangeable enmity to God, and the true
Spiritual, New Creation Man, or Heavenly creature-Life and Image of God, in
Christ, blessed Angels, and Saints. The ring-leading Head of all, thus fixed,
is the Devil. This Head, as representative of the whole party of incorrigible
wicked Angels and Men, and comprehending them all, is the Woman here, the
mystical Babylonish-strumpet, guilty of unpardonable Adulteries and spiritual
wickednesses, against Christ, the true Spiritual Lord and Husband of Angels and
Men, whom they ought all, to obey, and be eternally subject to, in every thing.
The very person of the Devil, as possessed of the highest natural glories and
excellencies, by the first creation, was, therein, the supreme first-Covenant
Spouse of Christ. But, this Spouse, soon apostatized, and became the grand
mystical strange Woman and Adulteress, that did, from the date of her first sin
and fall, set herself to draw as many Angels and Men as she could, into the
same adulterous and murderous mind of enmity against Christ, that spiritual
Lord and Husband, they all ought to submit to his terms of being married to,
for ever, in the new and everlasting Covenant. All that rebelliously keep up
their own life and beauty, in the first, against him and the second, will be
judged, as mystical Wedlock-breakers, Murderers, and most criminal Idolaters;
Ezekiel. 16. 15, 38. The Devil, by this practice, in the top-excellency of
first-creation life, has rendered himself a bottomless pit of deceits, and all
sorts of spiritual wickedness, endeavoring (and abundantly prevailing, through
God's permission and Men's wilful folly) to corrupt their spirits, and fill
their hearts with the same unchangeable enmity to Christ and God, with himself.
By the Workmanship of this mystical Woman, are Men rendered temples of her
unchangeable evil Spirit. The mouth of this strange woman, is a deep pit: he
that is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein. This have we, from Solomon,
also; Prove. 22. 14. But, whosoever pleases God, shall escape her. Thus, gives he a
true account of the said bottomless pit, with the sad condition of all that
fall therein; and the blessed privileges of them that escape her. All blind
leaders, with their followers, in the first-creation-state, excluding Christ
and the second, tumble together into this deep ditch or bottomless pit of
unchangeable wickedness; Mat. 15. 14. Luke 6. 39. The very spirit of the Devil
is this ditch, or bottomless pit; the mother of all mystical Whoredoms, and
spiritual abominations of the Earth (Rev. 17. 5.) Or in the earthly, natural
state; lying in wait, as a robber, for a prey, and increasing the transgressors
among Men; Prove. 23. 27, 28. All, that in their renewed spirit of Nature,
righteousness of Man, or Form of Godliness in the first-Covenant, finally deny
and reject the Power of Godliness, the New-creature-life, Wisdom, and
Righteousness of God, in the second, are fallen into this bottomless pit of
deceits. All fixed first-creation builders on the Sand, absolutely reject,
exclude, and deny that Spirit of Grace, that is the cornerstone and rocky
foundation of the true Church. The Woman, here, is, indeed that strong,
powerful Man of Sin, or Son of Perdition, that by his superior angelical
strength and subtilty, when fallen, was too hard for Man, at best, in innocence.
By the obedient death only, of Man's spirit, at best, can he receive the life
of that new creation spirit of Christ, that is greater, stronger and wiser then
he; 1 John 4. 4. Then, he is an over-match for the Devil; able to fight, and
run down all evil angelical principalities and powers, those wicked spirits,
with all their spiritual wickednesses, in high places, or counterfeit heavenly
appearances; Ephesians. 6. 10, -13. When strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, in the life, armor, or clothing of God's Spirit of Grace (set up
in, and put upon him) then is man able to still the said enemy and avenger;
Psalm. 8. 2. This spirit, in man, is stronger then the strong man of sin, who
therefore cannot enter that House or Person, it possesses, nor spoil his house
or goods; Mat. 12. 29. Man, wise, strong, and honorable in Christ, but by
first-covenant communications (1 Cor. 4. 10.) Satan is too strong for, and can
spoil all he has, or is. All that is in his power; Job 1. 12. So, let Man want
the Spirit, stronger than Satan, he will fall under him, and be led captive at his
will, in and by that very first-covenant life, he reckons to be saved in; 2 Timothy 2. 26. The wisdom of it, cannot discover his snares; nor the strength of
it, withstand his power. All Is but as straw and rotten wood, to his superior
Angelical Wisdom, Strength and Armor; Job 41. 27. Flesh and Blood; Man, at
best, is so far from being fit to wrestle against evil Angels, that they can
make all that, in Man, serviceable to their designs, for destroying him; as on
their side; their friend, in him. In Christ's Spirit of life, are Saints only
fit to fight down both; both Flesh and Blood, the natural spirit, at best, and
evil Angels at the back of it, to strengthen that Foe of their own house, that,
with them, in all its affections and lusts, fights and wars against God, and
the true interest of their own souls. The complete death of this homebred Foe,
but pretending Womanish Friend and Counselor in the Saint's own bosom, (Mic.
7. 5.) is his full deliverance from all Satan's nets and snares. For, then he
finds no part in him, that he can tempt or touch, please or hurt, John 14. 30.
When the Saint is crucified, as to all worldly desires in him, to all worldly
desirables without him, the God of this World finds nothing in him; his
Belial-party, the enemy of God, is extinguished and abolished. The literal
Woman, by her snares and alluring Arts, makes literal; the mystical, by here is,
spiritual and more criminal Sodomites. Twill be easier in the day of Judgment
for the former, then for the latter; Mat. 11. 23, 24. The light of Reason in
all men, may fence against the literal: but the best Wisdom and Strength of
first-Covenant holy Men, is no defense against this mystical Woman's practices,
upon them. Yea, she turn's that very Wisdom and Strength, with the perishing
meats, they feed on, therein, at Christ's earthly table (and fruits, they bring
forth, under Christ's Husbandly influence, as a fleshly Bridegroom) into so
many Snares, by which, she catches them. While she keeps them confident in holy
flesh, or knowledge of Christ after the flesh, she renders them wholly
regardless of his holy Gospel Spirit, and words thereof, save to oppose,
contradict and blaspheme all. When Men give up themselves with Christ's
first-Covenant gift of life, and second-Covenant enlightening gifts, (and
thereby a taste-of his new-Wine (Hos. 2. 8. Heb. 6. 4, 5.) of the the Kingdom)
to Baal, the Devil, they become his most Gigantick opposers and strenuous
fighters against all Gospel, Kingdom-Truths, and all that bring such things to
their ears. When men wilfully deafen themselves to the voice of the true
Shepherd, the said strange Woman fill's her mouth with the most enticing,
persuasive words of her serpentine wisdom, to furnish them for the serving all
her mischievous designs upon themselves and others. The words of Man's and
Satan's wisdom's, jointly hand forth another (pretended) Gospel, in flat
opposition to every word of Christ's; clothing all their falsehoods with the
misapplied letter of his words of truth. This Woman's words are smoother than
Butter, softer then Oil; but, are drawn Swords, wounding Men to eternal death;
Psalm. 55. 21. Many strong Men ( Wise, Strong, and honorable in Christ, by
first-Covenant seize) have bin So slain by her; Prove. 7. 26. The palate
and temper of humane Nature, in general, is, what Ahab discovered, in hating
the one true Prophet, Micaiah, that counseled him, contrary to his own will,
for his good; and rewarding the four hundred false ones, that gratified his
will, to his own destruction; 1 Kin. 22. The language or thought of all natural
hearts, God declar's to be this; Prophecy not unto us, right things: speak
unto us, smooth things; prophecy deceits ( Isa. 30. 10.) and Satan finds false
Prophets enough, in a readiness, to gratify them; so, as to keep true Seers out
of all hearing or regard, all whose words lie cross to the will, palate, and
desire of humane nature, corrupt or righteous, in all mankind. They preach the
Cross and death to it, in all, as necessary to the Salvation of any. This,
Satan represents as the greatest loss and prejudice imaginable, to them;
indeed, their utter ruin. He advises them to hold fast their own, decrying the
pretended advantages of suffering and dying, (even a living and reigning with
Christ) as mere delusive fictions. All men, in their natural principles,
corrupt or righteous, stand ready for receiving Satan's doctrine, the doctrine
of Devils, pleasing to Nature, in all variety of condition, it can be found in.
No man, in that worldly nature and spirit, receives Christ's Gospel-Testimony;
Joh. 3. 22. and 14. 17. This must needs make a vast difference between the
numberless flockers after Satan's Gospel, and the few or next to no listners
after Christ's. When Satan has locked up men in a double prison, the will of
their own fixed spirit of bondage, and his will upon that; in this firm union
of these self-embondaging spirits and wills, are they invincibly hardened
against all the words of God's Wisdom. And then, the whole counsel of the
Devil, in his Mystery of Iniquity, passes current with them, for the whole
Counsel of God, in his mystery of Godliness. Solomon, Paul, and other awakened
spiritual Saints, can find out all these depths, wiles, devices, snares, and
nets of this Woman, that they see their fellow mortals, even the professing
party, so generally involved, entangled, and caught in. This Woman is more
bitter than death; her heart being full of snares and nets, So subtly
contrived and methodiz'd, as most certainly to catch, all that refuse (and so,
are destitute of) the new creation wisdom of God, which alone can enable to
number and find out the name and nature of this first-creation Beast (Rev. 13.
18) with all her natural perfections, disguised and gilded over by her whorish
paint and transforming skill, with counterfeit resemblances of spiritual, in
order to give the utmost shock of opposition to what is so. For this end, does
she vent her Gospel-lies, in hypocrisy, or feigned resemblances of Christ's
Gospel Truths; 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Thus accoutred and furnished with gilded,
painted snares and nets, from the date of her first sin and fall, is she the
Captain General of all her hosts of evil Angels and Men, fixed, with her, in a
spirit of unchangeable darkness and falsehood, against God and his
new-creature-spirit of mavelous Light, and infallible Truth. Under her
powerful witchcrafts and alluring charm's, fell Man, at best. And, what can he
do, that comes after the King? Adam, in the unstained purity of all natural
perfections and excellencies of humane nature? Remember this first battle (in
which, all mankind, with the first, fell dead at the Serpent's feet; dead in
trespasses and sins) and do so no more, Job. 41. 8. Never think of undertaking
him, with success, in but the gradually restored Righteous Life, Wisdom, and
Armor of Man. In the most restored righteous natural Man, is now found actual
enmity to God, but, changeable, pardonable, curable, by the cross; not
otherwise. If Satan render this, unchangeable and unpardonable, his work is
finished. Christ comes with Fire and Sword (speaks War and Death to Nature, at
best) Satan, with flattering kisses and pleasing Words. Who is like to be best
liked by Man? The wounds of the true Friend and Savior, submitted to, will be
Salvation: The kisses and smooth words of the enemy, complied with, Damnation;
Prove. 27. 6. Satan finds in man, a natural inclination to resist the Cross, as
his enemy; and he leaves no means unattempted, conducible to the fixing him,
in such resistance. Then, is he his own true subject, in his kingdom of
darkness: and God swears in wrath, he shall never enter into his Kingdom of
Light. This Woman will not fail to lay her snares and nets before Saints, every
step they are making, under the cross, toward the Kingdom of God, while any
thing of his natural friend in them, is yet about them. He, was at it, with
Christ himself, again and again, while he had any thing of our pure fleshly
Nature and changeable life of the Law, in him; Mat. 4. and 16. 22, 23. and Luke
4. Man, established in his own Righteousness, thinks all safe, for Salvation,
when fast lodged in the very arms of this grand mystical Adulteress, the Devil;
irrecoverably wrapped and bound up in the bundle of death, caught and held fast
in her nets and snares, while pleasing himself with hopeful thoughts, that his
soul is bound up in the bundle of life, with the Lord, as David's, 1 Samuel 25.
29. The persuasive words of Man's and Satan's wisdom, are exactly calculated to
gratify the desires of humane Nature, in order to fix men in enmity to the
unpleasing doctrine of the cross, upon it; and so, perfectly deafen them to the
voice of the true Shepherd; all the words of God's Wisdom, in himself and
Saints; to all spiritual charmers, charm they never so wisely; Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
Man, by willingly giving himself up, in obedience to (and compliance with)
Satan's known lie, against God's known truth, (Heb. 10. 26.) is abhorred of the
Lord, and given up by him to such strong delusion, as holds him fast in the
snares of this bottomless pit, the very spirit of the Devil, that he be damned
with him; 2 These. 2. 10, -12. When men are thus caught in the Snares of this
Woman, her hands are as bands upon them, powerful cords and chains, they can
never break, or get loose from; never get out of this deep Dungeon and
bottomless pit, into which they have plunged themselves.

Who so pleases (or, is good before) God, shall escape her: but, the Sinner
shall be taken by her. Nothing but what is unchangeably good, is properly and
truly good, before God. No man then, that has not some unchangeable good thing,
or goodness in him, can please God. Without a spiritual Faith, (or new creature
principle of life and action, something of the life of the Faith of the Son of
God (Gal. 2. 20.) distinct from, and superior to the most righteous life of
the Sons of Men) it is impossible to please God; Heb. 11. 6. Man, wise, strong,
and honorable in Christ, as a fleshly Bridegroom, that has restored the old,
first-creation righteous life of Nature in him, and rendered him fruitful
there, (1 Cor. 4. 10.) This is not yet the He, that singly as so, pleases or
can please God. For then, what was Paul, that had quitted all the advantages or
privileges, that such knowledge of Christ himself after the flesh, brings along
with it, and includes in it? 2 Cor. 5. 16. He became a fool, weak, and
despicable there, having parted with all that, as dung, for the knowledge of
Christ after the Spirit, in his Gospel-life, into which, risen from the dead;
Phil. 3. 6, -- 10. Romans 7. 1, -- 4. Christ requires his Law or first-Covenant
Spouses, to quit him there, as he, them; die with him, there, in order to meet
him, in the life of the second. First-Covenant Spouses or Children of Christ,
live in him: but, he comes properly to live in them, in the second; Gal. 2. 20.
It Is but the Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of Man, Christ restores, and afresh
sets up in Men, in order to render them his first-Covenant Children and
Spouses. The Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness of God, a spiritual immortal
Gospel-life, he sets up in the second, in the room of their surrendered,
fading, mortal Law-life, in the first. Christ abolished death (or crucified
that Law-life, in himself, that was subject to death) and so, brought a
Gospel-life and Immortality to light; 2 Timothy 1. 10. This is true life, in an
absolute sense: the other, but a shadow. In the infallible Light, or spiritual
Understanding, that accompanies (and is found in) Gospel-life, are true Saints
enabled to discover all the wiles of the mystical Woman, here. All the subtle
practices and falsehoods of evil Angels (coming as false Christ's, and their
false Apostles and Prophets (Mat. 24. 24. and 2 Cor. 11. 13, -- 15.) in the
dress, language, and nearest resemblance of the true Christ and his Prophets or
Apostles) lie open and naked, before that understanding in spiritual Saints,
that judges or discerns all things; 1 Cor. 2. 15. That Spirit, in which they
can discern the deep things of God (ver. 10.) the utmost depths and heigths of
Satan, cannot lie hid, from. All his nets and snares are seen, and all his power
of darkness, overset and mastered, by this Gospel Spirit, and marvelous light
thereof. When the mysterious methods of God's wisdom, for Salvation, are seen,
all the depths and methods of delusion, Satan can use (in the utmost stretch of
his Serpentine Wisdom, to destroy Men) fly open. All Satan's Apostles,
Ministers of his Gospel, in whatever variety of doctrine, form, language, or
way, in the same sandy, fallible, first-Creation Principles, do all center in
this point (whatever their thought or intent be) to run their hearers into the
very arms of the Devil, as their only security, for Salvation. If the Devil can
impose himself upon them, as Christ and God (as he can, 2 These. 2. 4.) This
must needs be the issue and result of all their teaching; 2 Cor. 11. 13, -- 15.
Their end will be, according to their works. All Is earthly, and so, fuel for
the fire of that Wrath, that will be kindled on them and all their earthy
doctrine, life, and works, at the day of the Lord's appearing in that
Gospel Spirit and life, they will be found in unchangeable enmity to; 2 Pet. 3.
10. No wisdom of Man, secures from this Woman, here. Adam, in his unspotted
naturals, clear from all silth of flesh and spirit too, was not fence-proof
against the wiles of this Woman. The womanish, fading, changeable
first-Creation life in the evil Angel, when fallen, was too subtle and
powerful, for man in his inferior womanish-life, of the same kind, to deal
with, before his fall. Satan's first lie to Eve, passes current all along this
World, (with multitudes of professors and high pretenders to the Gospel of
Christ and Kingdom of God) for the very Gospel of Christ; to wit, that the
established righteous life of the first Creation-state of Man, is eternal life;
that man need not ( will not) die at all. Literal Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon,
are made up of Men, sixed in corrupt Nature, given up by themselves, and
therefore also, by God, to the vile affections, enormous lusts, and madnesses
of that; To. 1. 26. Mystical Sodom, Egypt and Babylon, are made up of Evil
Angels and enlight'ned first-Covenant Brethren or Professors, established or
six'd in the (...)-righteousness of Man, and so, in unchangeable enmity to the
Gospel-righteousness of God. These two sorts of Babylonians and Sodomites, in
these last and worst of times, do, or will so fill the scene, with their
super-abounding iniquities, literal and mystical, as to leave no room for any
hearing of Christ's Gospel, at all. The spiritual Saint, by his Gospel-life of
that faith that overcomes the World (1 John 5. 4.) remains secure, amidst this
vast heap, this innumerable multitude of Babylonians (visible and invisible,
evil Men and Angels) under the protecting shadow and comforting influence of
Christ's new name, that is the strong Tower, into which he runs and is safe;
Prove. 18. 10. Heb. is set a-loft; to wit, on that Rock, that is higher then he;
Psalm. 61. 2. But, all incorrigible, wilful haters and refusers of Christ and
his Gospel Truths, will (every one of them) be taken in the snares of the said
Woman. So, it follows; Text. But the sinner shall be taken by her. He that is
abhorred of the Lord, falls into the mouth of this strange Woman, whose heart
is a deep pit, full of snares and nets; and her hands, bands. Who is this
sinner, the Lord abhors? The fixed, incorrigible hater and loather of God, and
his Spirit of Grace (called God's Soul or Spirit; as the spirit of nature,
Man's Soul) Zec. 11. 8. All blind leaders, with their followers, tumble into
this deep ditch or pit, Prove. 23. 27. Luke 6. 39. All, whose minds are
willingly blinded by the God of this World, the Devil, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the supreme creature-image of God, should
shine into, or upon them; all such, embrace Satan's accursed, other, contrary
(...), and his spirit of unchangeable enmity to Christ and his. They are
engaged, what in them (...), to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, (...) off the
(...) of that Kingdom, out of all hearing, or reception; and to (...) open the
Kingdom of the Devil, asserting that, to be the Kingdom of God; and his Gospel,
Christ's. So are they, with their admirers, engaged in (...) of the bottomless
pit of deceits, full of snares and nets, as the very Kingdom of God, and
Salvation to men. And, they (...) others to hope, that they will confirm or
make good their word; Ezekiel. 13. 6. In a (...) spirit of Divination, do Devil
and Man, jointly declare this; and boldly affirm, it is in the Lord's Spirit of
Truth, they say so. They say, the Lord says. They see nothing but vanity, and
preach up nothing but perishing vanities (the natural excellencies or fading
things of Man or Angel, in the first-creation) for eternal Life. They speak
only of the world, this world's vanities, and the world hears them; all the
world wonder's after them; 1 John 4. 5. Rev. 13. 3. All, in the but earthly
spirit of nature, corrupt or righteous, are for such Preaching, or none at all.
Satan's Apostles or Ministers, come forth, in great variety of form, language,
and way; all, making but a universal Babel of confusion, running their hearers
into the very bosom of the Devil (the bottomless-pit of all deceits and
falsehoods) as their only security, for Salvation. Men are deeply concerned, to
take heed who they hear; not such strangers to, and enemies of Christ's Gospel
( Jo. 10. 4, 5.) and then, what, and how they they hear (Mark 4. 24. Luke 8.
18.) that they rightly take the voice or words of the true Shepherd, and his
Spiritual Apostles or Messengers; and obey them. Many may hear right
Gospel-words, and not understand them, Mark 4. 12. And then, they will not follow
or obey them; but, run still after Satan's Law-Gospel. Those that distinguish
not the Words of God's, from those of the Serpent's and Man's Wisdom, how,
should they escape the snares of this grand mystical Adulteress? If they suffer
themselves willingly to be beguiled into a persuasion, that Satan's Gospel, and
that, which true Saints call Christ's, are all one, they are caught in the
snares of the Devil. Satan's Apostles say, those that pretend to be Christ's,
differ from them only in an affected singularity and disguise of words, not
matter. While this shuffle will serve the turn, Satan's Gospellers find it not
needful or convenient, to enter the lists, for a debating the case with
Sion-Saints, about a true Gospel-state. But, if Christ's Gospel come forth, in
such sharp, discriminating language, as to evidence its distinction in the
whole matter of it, from Satan's, and Man's; then, to prevent, yet, any farther
trouble, about it; they sit in their Majesterial Chair; and, in general
(without meddling with any particular in it) decry it for the most dangerous,
destructive blasphemy and falsehood, that ever was invented, or imposed upon
Men; worse then Popery or Mahumetanism; then the grossest Idolatries, or most
brutish practices of any Heathens. This general vilifying Christ's whole
Gospel-doctrine, and assertors of it, as the vilest of doctrines, and men, they
(...) a far easier and safer way, then to meddle with any particulars of it.
Thus far, and at this rate, only, seems the shock of opposition to be given to
it, and managed against it, at this day. But, if matters once grow to that
pass, that some valuable number of awakened Saints, and spiritually convinced
Men, should be the Assertors, Followers and Owners of the very Christ, the very
Gospel, so as to give occasion to Satan's Gospel Ministers, to say (in the same
levened, sour spirit of enmity to God, with the Pharisees) Perceive ye, how ye
prevail nothing? behold, the World is gone after them; when this comes to pass,
enemies will go another way to work. The Jews, when they could not resist, or
bear up against the wisdom and spirit, by which Stephen spoke; they could and
did (through the permission of God, and instigation of the Devil) silence him,
as they reckoned, with stones. But, he being dead, yet speaks, as Abel, and
all other such witnessing Saints, most injuriously slain for the Testimony of
Jesus, in the Spirit of true Prophecy. The regenerating, transforming,
assimilating touch of the Gospel Spirit of Christ, sixes Man's versatile,
changeable Law-spirit, in eternal obedience to, and harmony with God. The
degenerating, transforming, assimilating touch of the spirit of the Devil, on
Man's, fixes it with himself, in unchangeable enmity to God, as the very
principle of his life, desire, thought, word, and action. By one or other of
these unchangeable good or evil spirits, comes man to be lodged up, in a state
of eternal life or death; a bed of true rest, and unspeakable joy ( Isa. 57. 1,
2.) or of everlasting sorrow ( Isa. 50. 11.) torment, and vexation of Spirit.
He that is born of God's unchangeably good Spirit, is secure from the
transforming touch of the unchangeable evilone; 1 John 5. 18. The touch of
spirits is a qualifying, alterative touch; baptizes Man's changeable spirit
into the unchangeable toucher, the Spirit of God, or of the Devil. By the death
of their own spirit, that Satan can touch; and (...) into the life of God's
Spirit, he can (...) touch; by this way and means, and this only, are Saints
(...) and (...) from all the nets and snares of this grand Adulteress, the
Devil. The whole World, all that take up in their worldly, earthly life of
nature, run into them. A babe, a suckling in Christ's Spirit, is too hard for
(...); Psalm. 8. 2. Man, in the highest restored perfections of his own, is no
body in his hands; Job 41. The incorrigible first-creation sinner is taken by
her: the new creation Saint, who alone pleases God, shall escape all her nets,
snares, hands or bands, for ever.

Verse. 27. Behold, this have I found (says the Preacher) counting one by one,
to find out the account,
Solomon, in the Sanctuary-balance, the al-searching New Creation Spirit of
true prophecy, weighed one thing after another, so as to give a clear and full
account of what he was so inquisitive, after; an everlasting state of Truth and
Righteousness. He weighed and tried all parts of the first Creation, the utmost
goodness and excellencies, found in Man and Angels, before their fall; or
restored in Men, since; and, in the total sum of all, found the one thing
necessary for the true blessedness of any, wanting. It Is not in the whole
first-Creation Land of the living (Job 28. 21.) or state of Life. No such
thing, found he, in the whole heap of this World's Vanities. So arrived he, at
this negative satisfaction, that there is no hope of ever finding true
happiness, there. He resolved therefore, no longer to squander away his time,
with others, in seeking for the living amongst the dead; or, true Life and
Happiness, in a Region of Darkness, and of the shadow of Death. No such life,
as will swallow up Death into Victory, is to be found there; nothing, but what
Death will swallow up, into Victory; and triumph over, for ever. This, he
declares,

Verse. 28. Which yet my Soul seeks, but I find not: one Man, among a
thousand, have I found; but, a Woman among all those, have I not found.
No unchangeably good thing, could he find in the first-creation. What then
found he? One Man, among a thousand; but, no Woman, among them all. No true
happiness, to Man or Angel, in the changeable, womanish, first-creation life of
either. What Is not there, can the wisest man never find. It Is folly to seek it,
there. The self-evidencing vanity of all first-creation things, is such, that
all and every one say, it is not in me, in us; no true life, wisdom or goodness,
no manly, unchangeable new creation Wisdom, Life, or Goodness, is to be found
in or amongst us all; seek while you will; (...) 28. 12, -- 22. The
first-creation life of Nature, in the first-covenant spirit, or Law-principle
of action, God always saw defective, as to the true blessedness of Man or Angel.
He had beforehand, therefore, even from everlasting, set up (prepared, and kept
in reserve, to bestow) a creature-life of everlasting Righteousness, in his
New Covenant Gospel Spirit, that is in unchangeable harmony with his infinite
Divine Spirit. Heb. 8. 6, (...). The Law makes nothing perfect; (Heb. 7. 19) no
incorruptible Perfection or unchangeable good, is to be found in the natural,
first-creation make, or Law-life of Angel or Man. The Law never had in it, nor
therefore could give true Life or everlasting Righteousness to any; Gal. 3. 21.
(...) Is it could; no need of Grace, Gospel, New Covenant., New Creation. Man's
and Satan's Gospel says, there is (...) Life, in the first Covenant principle,
the spirit of the Law; or natural, first-creation-state; ye shall not die at
all. What need then of a second? Never look farther, for eternal Life. Adam's
yielding to this Doctrine, slew all his posterity. Yet, abundance of his
posterity, when restored to some measure of the life they had, and lost, in and
with him, are at the very same point. Cannot the universal sad experience of
Mankind, as to the dreadful consequents of their first sin (nor all examples of
like Apostasy, since; nor all the abundant, reiterated Warnings and multiplied
Counsels of God, or Instructions, by the mouth of all his holy Prophets and
Apostles, or Messengers, since the World began; yea, and by the Son himself)
prevent men's running into the same error, sinning after the similitude of
Adam's transgression? What then, can? How current does renewed old
first-creation life, pass, at this day, for new? and the words thereof, for
Gospel? How mad were the righteous Jewish Teachers and Professors, with Christ,
for disturbing their peace, and dashing their hopes, in Satan's Gospel-state?
Whereas it is in God's new creature life and wisdom, only, on the death and loss
of all this, we can receive God's eternal good things, to have, hold, and
enjoy, for ever. These are we to eye, and look at; 2 Cor. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 3,
4. Not one Woman, could Solomon, a true spiritual Preacher, find, in the whole
first-creation; not one Man, or Angel, in that changeable, womanish state, in
whom was any such thing as eternal Life, or everlasting Righteousness; any
unchangeable good thing. From his certain experience, and infallible sight
hereof, he declares, it is never there to be had. But, he leaves not the point,
so. On this Negative testimony, giving a dash on the whole first-creation
state, he proceeds to the Affirmative, showing where the one thing necessary,
unchangeable Goodness, is to be found; in the second or new creation Spirit and
State, signified by the one Man, among a thousand. The manly Spirit of the
second Adam, never sinned; nor can any, born of it, as living and walking
therein; 1 Timothy 2. 14. 1 John 3. 9. Gal. 5. 25. This one Man, the manly
new creation Spirit, Solomon found among the many thousands of blessed Angels
and Saints, yea, in Christ the head, and all the members of his mystical body,
the Church; Col. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 5. 23. Christ, and all his true
thorow-followers, whithersoever he goes, and call's them, make up the one
mystical Man, in unchangeable opposition to the Devil, and all his Babylonish
Party of Angels and Men, fixed in the first-creation, womanish state, the whole
mystical-Whore of Babylon. Not one Man, nothing of the manly new creation
spirit, in all these; nor one Woman, to be found, nothing of the womanish
spirit, in all the completed new creation body of Christ, the one mystical
Man. All these come to be of the same mind and judgment, in every thing, as one
Man. There Is no Female in new creation Life: no Male, in the first. Angel, Man,
and Woman, are all but the mystical Woman, in the first; and, when fixed there,
unchangeably so; and so, an unchangeable Adulteress, against the man Christ, to
whom she ought to have been married, in the second. In a peculiar,
prerogative-sence, Christ himself is the one Man among a thousand, even
thousands of thousands of his Spiritual Saints and Angels, as the fountain of
that Life, they are all partakers of. He never fails to give it, in the
distinct measures and seasons, appointed by his Father, to all, the Father has
given him; Joh. 17. 2. All the things of the Man, here, are eternal: of the
Woman, temporal. Eternal Life and Death are set before us, in these two
Spirits, the manly second, and the womanish first-Creation Spirit. All that
hate Christ, in the second, love and choose their own eternal Death, in the
first; Prove. 8. 36. Christ, the one Man, Solomon found among the thousands of
his Saints (in a headship of pre-eminency over, and above them all)
comprehensively signifies the whole number of elect Angels and Men, in whom his
one Spirit lives; and they, in it. Here then have we the negative and
affirmative Testimony of this Kingly Preacher, in this grand concern of Man;
where eternal Life is to be found; and where, not.

Ver. 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made Man upright; but, they
have sought out many Inventions.
Here Is a farther account, not only of the first-creation state, but man's evil
use thereof. God made him upright, pure, clean, and righteous, without spot,
any filth of slesh or spirit; very good, (Genesis 1. 31.) but, changeably so. So,
soon did he make himself, very evil, by rebellion against him that made him
very Good. This, by following his own many evil inventions. Having once
rebelled, do men set themselves to seek out many inventions, to justify and
fortify themselves, in their self-chosen evil way of rebellion against God, to
their own destruction. This destructive trade, are they at, might and main,
turning the deaf ear to the spiritual charmer, the spirit of Truth, in Christ
and his followers; wholly rejecting all the Counsels of God, against their own
souls; Luke 7. 30. This is the case of all first-covenant Lawyers (in the
renewed righteous life of the Law, in their own spirit of Nature) in enmity to
the newness of life, in Christ's Gospel Spirit of (...), and all the words
thereof. They resolutely and confidently walk in their own invented paths, to
damnation; refusing, resisting, defying, contradicting and blaspheming the only
way of God's invention, and most wise contrivance, for their Salvation. God's
abundantly declared way, from first to last, and all along, is a deathpass to
the spirit of Nature, under the cross, or death-work of his Spirit of Grace,
into its own everlasting righteous Life. It takes down their natural,
sandy-foundation'd Building, to build them up anew, in its rocky-life, that is
(...) then theirs, as the Heavens than the Earth; a Life, a Glory, never to be
done away. Man is grown to have exceedingly contrary thoughts and ways, to
God's, in reference to Salvation. And, he will on, in his own invented way, to
destruction; rather then in God's, to Salvation. Hereby have all Men, (in and
with the first) and many Angels, given many infallible sinful proofs, the wrong
way, of the changeableness of the good and upright state they were (...) in.
The good Angels, with their head, as the Lamb (...) from the foundation of the
World, proved it, the right way, by a death of that, and resurrection into a
life, unchangeably good. (...) the Head looked and went, they looked and went;
turned not, or looked back, as they went. When he was lifted up from the Earth,
or out of the earthy, changeable first-creation life of Nature, these angelical
wheels or chariots were lifted up, by him. For, his spirit was in them; Ezekiel.
1. 12. and, v. 19, -21. and Ezekiel. 10. 11. The spirit of the living creature,
or, spirit of life was in them; v. 16, 17. They followed the Lamb,
whithersoever he went, through the death of the first-creation state, into the
Resurrection-life of the second; in which, he became the firstborn from the
dead; Col. 1. 18. In the utmost reach of those words ( Rev. 14. 4.) the
peculiar Spousal Saints follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, over all the
heads of the highest elect Angels, sitting on the very Throne with him, as his
Bride and Wife; about which they stand ( Rev. 7. 11.) as friends of the
Bridegroom and his choice Bride, from among men.

A sinless power of sinning was in Angel and Man, at best. The exerting this,
in sinful Acts, was their sin and fault; unpardonable, in Angels, at first;
pardonable in Men, till wilfully committed the second time, in their own
persons, after the similitude of Adam's first sin. This amounts to a fixed
preferring the Life, Wisdom, and Nature of Man, to the Life, Wisdom, and Grace
of God; the Creature, to the Creator. The fruit of this their own device and
invention, will Men find a sowrer Grape then Adam, at first ate; unchangeable
Wrath; Prove. 1. 31. Many such do prosper in their own self-chosen way, having
more then heart can wish, in this World. They set their mouth against the
Heavens, or heavenly Spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints. Psalm. 73. 7, --
9. But, what come they to? Desolation, in a moment; they are utterly consumed
with terrors; ver. 18. 19. They spend their days in wealth, or mirth; and, in a
moment, go down to their eternal grave, Job 21. 13. These fat and strong
Cattle, in first-Covenant Life, Strength, and Wisdom, thrust with their
shoulder, and push the diseased with their horns, the lean, feeble, poor and
needy Cattle, Spiritual Saints, whose Natural Man is death-struck by the Cross
or Gospel-sword, plagued and chasten'd continually, thereby; Ezekiel. 34. 20, 21.
Psalm. 73. 14. Those, the Lord is thus disciplining, for Salvation ( Heb. 12. 6,
7.) the poor and needy little ones of Christ's flock, do the sturdy, daring,
stiff-necked, self-confident, proud, fat, full, wise, strong, and honorable (1
Cor. 4. 10.) first-Covenant Cattle, despise, deride, shoot all their revengeful
Arrows, bitter Words, against; Psalm. 50. 20. Their teeth are Spears and
Arrows; their Tongues sharp Swords, against them; Psalm. 57. 4. Thus are they
merrily posting to the Chambers of Death, while the impoverished, needy ones of
Christ, are passing through much Tribulation, into the Kingdom of God; Act. 14.
22. The former make swist steps, in the broad way, to Destruction: the latter,
safe steps in the narrow way (under the Cross, that narrows and shrinks Nature
to death) unto Salvation. The former set their heads awork, to invent what will
gratify their own Wills, in a known contrariety to God's. They fondly and madly
please themselves with hopes of Salvation, in a state, all mankind have
experienced, no such thing was ever to be found in, at best, in innocence. The
Righteousness of it, then, was but a fading Garment; Since the fall, (...)
rags; Isa. 64. 6. Think they, to enter the Kingdom, and sit at the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, in such Garments, where all the Guests are
clothed with everlasting Righteousness? See what is like to become of them;
(...). 22. 11, -- 13. Their life is not of the same kind; nor, their Garments
of the same Cloth, make, or fashion, with the true Saint's. So will they be
thrown out of Christ's Kingdom of Marvelous Light, into Satan's accursed
Darkness, their own proper, deserved place, with Judas; Act. 1. 25.

Angel's first sin rendered them unchangeably evil, because unpardonably wicked,
being a full, noontide, daring, and most presumptuous Sin, against the Holy
Ghost. (...) first sin, rendered him but changeably evil: and if he love that
so well, as to become unchangeable in it, he will sind himself in the same
condition, with evil Angels, even in unchangeable enmity to God. Let God then
be true, and every Man a liar; Romans 3. 4. God made Man upright; Man, by his own
evil choice and invention, has spoiled himself, and is the single and only
demeritorious cause of his own ruin. He seeks out many inventions. Error is
manifold; Truth, one; the Gospel Spirit of Truth, one, in head and members. Men
are tossed to and fro, into variety of Opinions and Ways, from their various
conceptions, in their fluid, wavering, unstable, unconstant spirit, under the
blasts and inspirations of Devils. David aware, of this, prayed for that right
or constant Spirit of God, the evil one cannot touch; Psalm. 51. 10. 1 John 5.
18. Yesterday, to day, and for ever, from everlasting to eternity, is God's
Creature-Spirit of Truth, one and the same. This (...) the one thing, with all
its things of God, awak'ned Spiritual Saints are for, and interpret the
Scriptures of Truth (given by this Spirit of Truth) into. Man's one thing (and
things of that thing) is his own spirit of nature, which, by the Conceptions
and Words of his own Wisdom, he interprets all Scripture into, in favor and
defense of himself, against the cross of Christ, (and all the spiritual Truths
and sense of Scripture, the things of God) as the very sum and substance of all
his humane Divinity. And, he will not endure this one thing of his, should be
called by its right name, a spirit of direct enmity to God, and all his
Gospel Truths. Consequently, as unwilling is he, Christ's one thing, or Spirit
of Truth should be called by its right name; or any name, at all. He denies,
there is any such Holy Ghost, or Spirit, at all, communicable to men. John's
Disciples, and conscientious, faithful followers, in first-covenant holiness,
Paul found at Ephesus, wholly ignorant of any such thing as this Gospel,
new creature Spirit, or Holy Ghost; Act. 19. 2. Men clap all the titles of
Christ's one thing, on the back of their one thing, that is a spirit of
darkness, enmity and death. Their but renewed spirit of Nature, must needs
amount to a state of Grace, Regeneration, New Creature, Heir of the Kingdom of
God. What then must the very Christ, the very Spirit of Grace and Truth, be? a
Blasphemer, a Devil. Thus did the children of the Devil, first-covenant
Professors, baptized into his spirit of unchangeable enmity to God, call the
Holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit, in Christ himself, with all its Words. Joh. 1.
11. and 8. 44. and 10. 20. and, Mat. 12. 24, -- 32. This subtle, Serpentine
trade will not do man's work, when God is Judge himself; Psalm. 50. 6. He will call
every thing by its right name. Man's Wisdom, in Divinity, calls every thing, by
a wrong name; all his natural, God's spiritual things. And, what name, title,
or character, then, God's things must have with him, is easy to guess. If
natural Man or Angel will needs be as Gods, in the proudly and presumptuously
assumed sovereignty, and uncontrolled exercise of their own Wills, they will
certainly judge and call the true Spiritual Man, a Fool, that quits all this as
dung, with Paul, which they ruffle in; Hos. 9. 7. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 10. No remedy
for this, in Man's day, or Judgment. In God's, there will. True Saints ought,
in Faith and Patience, to possess their Souls, quietly waiting for the decision
of all Zion-controversies, at Christ's second appearing, to their Joy, and to
the Confusion of all their self-confident, proud, boasting enemies; Isa. 66. 5.
Your first-Covenant Brethren, that hate you, sit and speak against you (Psalm.
50. 20. Ezekiel. 33. 30.) and cast you out, excommunicate you, as Blasphemers; but
I Will appear, says God, to your Joy; and then, they shall be ashamed. I Will
excommunicate them out of my Church, and lay them under the Anathema Maranatha,
for ever; under my everlasting Curse and Wrath. Let the naturalist then, or
first-Covenant Brother, for a season, wear the title of the second, and allow
him nothing but Blasphemer and Madman: consider the great Lord and Master. Did
not he quietly endure the Contradictions and Reproaches of such Righteous
first-Covenant Sinners against the second, in his own day, and turn, on Earth,
among the only professing People, in the World? All will out, at last; after
all scrambling confounded doings, in this dark World, and Kingdom of Satan. All
shame will be laid at the right door, and God and his true Saints be glorified.
All, in good time. God's time is best. Mean while, the one, uniform truth of
God (most harmoniously represented, all along the Scriptures of Truth, in great
variety of Similitude, Language, and Type) is, in a manner, universally
rejected, even by Professors; and, their one sandy-foundation'd thing, by a
lying Spirit of Divination, set up in the room thereof (which, in the highest
sense, is the abomination that makes desolate Mat. 24. 15.) and, herein, boast
they themselves, as to that great variety of the many Inventions, they stand
here charged with, as their own self-destroying folly and madness. The true
spiritual Church own only one God and Father of all, one Lord, one Faith, one
fire-Baptism, one Spiritual Circumcision, setting fire upon, and cutting off
all fleshly life, holy and profane, in Pharisee and Publican. The Church on the
sand, has many Gods, many Lords of their Faith, which are many Devils, many
Men, in their differing and various teachings or doctrines; all which, in the
same lying spirit of Divination, do tend directly to the Destruction of
themselves and hearers. Such false Christ's and Apostles, evil Angels and Men,
will, in these latter times, more then ever, pass unquestionably for the true,
as coming in the guise, language, dress, and appearance thereof. Has not the
true Christ and his great Apostle foretold all this? Mat. 24. 5. and ver. 23,
-- 25. 2 Cor. 11. 13, -- 15. In such disguise, they would deceive, if possible, the
very Elect. The Worldly Church, on the Sand, boasts of such variety of
Invention, as amounts to but a glorying in their own shame. Such poetical
Creation-Preachers are always liars; Tit. 1. 12. Under all pretense to Gospel,
are they the flattest enemies to it. They come with methodiz'd discourse (in
the contrivances and Words of their own Wisdom) Doctrine, Reasons, Uses,
Motives, ordered and placed rank and file, in Battel-array, with the Armor of
Man, upon them, to fight the Devils Battle against all Spiritual Saints, and
Gospel Truths. These are your Gospel-Merchants, that corrupt ( or deal
deceitfully with) the word of God (2 Cor. 2. 17.) destroying Souls, for
dishonest gain, Ezekiel. 22. 27. They labor to make the truly Righteous sad, by
their reproachful censures; and strengthen the wicked, in their hidden,
mystical uncleanesses and abominable Idolatrys; Ezekiel. 13. 22. They interpret
Scripture into anti-Gospel-Doctrine, and then invent reasons for it, uses of
it, motives and arguments to follow and obey it; all, to encourage people in
their Self-chosen way to the Chambers of death, the congregation of the dead,
or assembly of Giants, the Gigantick sighters against God; Prove. 21. 16. Genesis
6. 4, 5. All their Preaching, Reasons, and Uses, as pretending to show and lead
men into the true Gospel-way of Salvation, runs in a strein of direct enmity to
all the spiritual reasonings and words of Christ's Gospel Spirit; and so, to
the whole Counsel of God, Paul declared; Act. 20. 27. The right opening the
Scriptur's, is an opening the Kingdom of God. This does the true public one
Gospel Spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints. The private natural womanish
changeable spirit of man, shuts out all spiritual, Kingdom-Truths, and in union
with Satan, open's his kingdom or bottomless pit of deceits, and preaches up
that first-creation state he has chosen, as the only true Salvation. When thus
resolutely engaged, they dissuade all people; and frighten them, what they can,
from touching or coming near such doctrine (as indeed opens the Kingdom of
Heaven) as the arrantest Heresy and Blasphemy in the World. This is the old
Pharisaical trade of hypocritical Sinners in Zion; Mat. 23. 13. But true
interpretation of Scripture, in that Spirit and Wisdom, none are able to bear
up against, (Act. 6. 10.) will speak for it self, in the hearts and consciences
of the hearers; and be a savor of life or death to the obedient receivers, or
wilful rejecters thereof. The Cryptick Methods and Arts of man's mercenary
wisdom, are calculated to deceive. All their Elocution, Mymical gestures and
affected tones, look this way. These humane Artifices are not to be used in
uttering the words of God's Wisdom; but clear, powerful, spiritual
demonstration; 1 Cor. 2. 4. This was the way of Christ, and his inspired
Penmen, or Teachers, in the words of his Wisdom, whether speaking to a
multitude, or only in answer to particular inquiries. Convincing evidence, and
demonstration, in the Wisdom and Power of the Holy (...), were they alway's
for. An open (...) to the (...) voice, and too general reception of the
methodiz'd words of man's wisdom, as orthodox-Gospel, does wonderfully disframe
Peoples minds, and prejudice them, as to a right listening to one right
Gospel-word of God's. If the true Gospel-Preacher gratisie not their prurient
or itching ears, their vain, wanton understandings, or fancies, with the humane
methods, they have bin, all along, accustomed to, and habituated in; from
enmity to, and dislike of the matter, they will pretend that occasion, to fly off
from any farther hearing it. The numberless things of the Gospel one thing
(...), the Pearl of great price, the unspeakable gift, the Thoughts,
Affections, Words, Works, Births, Fruits and products thereof, will be sound to
out-number, as well as transcendently to exceed in dignity, all man's
first-creation no-things, shadows, things that are not. Things (...) have their
numerous varieties as well as excellencies, above all first-creation perishing
vanities. The New Creature Gospel Spirit, brings with it, into man, the
New Creature Life, Wisdom, and (...) of God; that is, that creature-life, that
(being in Christ, personally united with the Divine; and, in Saints, in
unchangeable harmony with the Divine) is called the Life of God; and they that
have it, are said to be born of God, and partake of the Divine Nature; 2 Pet.
1. 4. All things are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's; 1 Cor.
3. 22, 23. God, or the infinite Divine Nature is their inheritance, by way of
object, to their sight and enjoyment; not an ingredient into their persons, as
in Christ's. That Is his super-eminent Prerogative. But Saints are Coheirs with
him, of God (Romans 8. 17.) as to the vision of, and feeding on the Divine Glory,
to eternity.

The great design of the whole Scripture, is, to bring Men into the view, love,
and enjoyment of things eternal, (2 Cor. 4. 18.) all which, are comprehended in
the explained one thing necessary. The vast number of things eternal, in the
one eternal Creature-spirit of Christ (Heb. 9. 14.) are handed to us, in great
variety of Expression, Types, Figures, Parables, Similitudes, with most
significant Instructions, about the one thing, or spirit, that comprehends them
all; as the natural spirit in Man and Angel, comprehends all their natural
things, first-Creation Shadows, perishing Vanities. Those that come to any
right frame of mind toward God's Gospel-things, will quit (and rid themselves
of) all those Prejudices and false Conceptions, they have bin crammed with, and
built up in, by worldly-Church-custom's; and freely expose their darling
nature, to be touched and hit, between the joints of the Harness, or Armor of
Man, by the sharp doctrine and discipline of the Gospel-sword and Cross of
Christ. Man, at best, in his own Strength, Wisdom, and Armor, stands ready to
resist, and fight against God; not the Devil. Whose side was Paul engaged on,
when according to Law, blamless? Every right interpretation of Scripture will
be at this work with us, even the darting in mortifying Truths upon Nature's
heart, shooting in the sharp Arrows of the Lord, into the hearts of the King's
Enemies, even in Saints, the foes of their own house, their own very Spirit
(and that, at best) with all the mystical Children, Works, Fruits or Products
thereof, as altogether Vanity, and sinful. All the desires, thoughts, and
reasonings, our own spirit ( the foe of our own house) people's our Souls with,
against God, and his only way of saving us, are a numerous throng of Enemies,
Fighters and Warriers against God, and the true interest, or eternal concerns
of our own Souls. These are all struck at, at every turn, by every right
Gospel-word or doctrine of the Cross. If we come, with but itching Ears, to
gratify our curiosity, by hearing a few Gospel-words of God's Wisdom, as a
novelty among the various Words or Doctrines of Man's, for our understandings to
trade in (to furnish notional Discourse, only; and so, to pride our selves in
over-topping others understandings) we shall find our selves sorely mistaken,
in the case. Such a design may seem akin to Ptolomee's curiosity, in procuring
the Greek translation of the old Testament (by 72 Jews, 6 of each of the twelve
Tribes, called thence, numero rotundo, the Septuagint) to furnish his
new-erected Egyptian library, amongst the learned writings of the wise Greeks
and others, from others parts. God's Word is another-gets thing, and has far
other-gets matters to do, with Men, then to furnish a little overly Discourse.
Where rightly interpreted in the Words of his Wisdom (or of that spirit, which
inspired the holy Penmen thereof) 'twill be a Savor of Life or Death to the
hearers; 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. It Is as a sire in and upon Men's spirits ( Luke 24.
32.) A hammer, that breaks the Rock in pieces; Jer, 23. 29. 'Twill prosper in
the thing whereto he sends it, accomplish that which he pleases; (Isa. 55. 11.)
Life or Death, in and to the respective heedful or regardless hearers thereof.
It Is dangerous dallying with such sharp, two-edged tools. Do we stand trifling,
and lie at catch, with the Pharisees, to see what Gospel-doctrine will be at?
Where it will pitch? Alas, alas! Every Word of it, rightly heard and
considered, makes a home-thrust at Nature's heart, however it slips over Men's
inadvertent heads, while they confusedly wait for they know not what; hoping to
hear some change of voice, in favor to poor. Nature's head, and that the
Righteous Life of the earthly Jerusalem State thereof, need not be surrendered
to the Gospel-sword and Cross. A like vain thought, to that of King Zedekiah,
when he sent privately for Jeremy out of a Dungeon, to speak with him. Is there
any Word from the Lord? Says he, to him. There is, says Jeremy; and this is it.
Thou shall be delivered into the hand of the King of Babylon; Jer. 37. 17. How
Nebuchadnezzar handled him; see, Jer. 52. 8, -- 11. The Word of God is a
steady, constant Word; not off and on; no yea and nay, with it; all is yea, and
amen (2 Cor. 1. 17, -- 20.) Or absolute, infallible Truth.

The mercenary preachers of Satan's accursed other Gospel, in great variety of
opinion and way, flourish in worldly dignities and recompenses, for their
pretended skill in spiritual affairs; the whole world running after them; 1 John
4. 5. Rev. 13. 3. Amidst this self-exalted crew of mercenary Babylonians, with
their many inventions, if the true, spiritual Gospel-Declarer, can but escape
blows, he will think himself tolerably treated. He comes with a Doctrine, that
strikes at the very root and foundation of all their humane self-interests; the
very principle of all their Life, Desire, Thought and Action, at best.

CHAP. VIII.
V. 1. Who is as the wise Man? and, who knows the interpretation of a thing?
(Heb. word) A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness (Heb.
strength) of his face shall be changed.
HEre are too questions; the latter, implying an answer to the former: and
then, a declaration of the valuable privileges of the truly wise man. The
wisdom of man is nothing in the case. The words of God's Wisdom, his oracles,
whether given in Dreams, Visions, or by his true Prophets, are too hard for
that interpreter. The new creature wisdom of God, in Daniel and the three
Children, was ten times better than that, in all the Magicians (or wise men) in
the Realm. Dan. 1. 20. In this, could Daniel tell both the oraculous dream of
Nebuchadnezzar, and the interpretation: those wise men, neither; Dan. 2. The
great prophetical Image of worldly Monarchy, from that day to the end of this
World, Man's day, and Satan's reign, was the matter of the Dream. Then, the
Dream of the great and high Tree, which more particularly related to
Nebuchadnezzar himself, was interpreted by Daniel, also; Dan. 4. 22. And, after
this, in the reign of Belshazzar, grandchild to Nebuchadnezzar, did the same
Daniel interpret the Mean Tekel, on the Palace-Wall, none of the wise Men of
Babylon knew what to make of; Dan. 5. 15. and v. 25, - 28, Daniel, as an
awakened spiritual Saint, knew the interpretation of the thing, or word, no
wisdom of Man could interpret. Yet, does the but restored righteous
first-covenant Saint, Wise, Strong and Honorable in Christ, there, (figured by
the wise Men of Babylon, Egypt, and the King of Tire, presumptuously reckon
himself wiser then Daniel, or Paul; Ezekiel. 28. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 10. The Queen,
recommending Daniel, to frighted, amazed King Belshazzar (when she saw his
thoughts trouble him, and Countenance changed) said, there is a man in thy
Kingdom, in whom is the Spirit of God, an excellent Spirit, having the light,
understanding and wisdom of God in it; by which he had knowledge and
understanding, for interpreting dreams, showing hard sentences, and dissolving
doubts, or untying knots, as the Chaldee reads. Daniel interprets the Mean
Tekel, and the execution was speedy; For, that night was King Belshazzar slain,
by the Medes and Persians, who, after two years siege, then entered the Town,
by diverting the River Euphrates, Dan. 5. 5, -- 31. Here Is the truly (...) man.
His Wisdom consists in, and is evidenced by a right interpreting of Parables
and dark sayings, of important concern, in their significancy, but too obscure
and difficult for man's wisdom, at best, to deal with, or unriddle. Neither
literal, nor mystical Magicians, Men or Angels, in any first-creation
understanding, or learning, can interpret them. Such another as Daniel, was
Joseph, long before. Pharaoh had two Oraculous Dreams, that by their impression
upon his mind, signified, that they signified some important thing, to him and
his people: but what, he could not tell. This was left for the true
interpreting Spirit in Joseph, to declare. Nebuchadnezzar knew, though his Dream
was slipped from him, that 'twas an Oracle from God, and had a concerning
significancy, so his spirit was troubled, as Pharoah's in like case, till they
both knew what their Dreams meant; Dan. 2. 1. Genesis 41. 8. They were both
perfect puzzlers to the wisdom of man. None of the wise men in Egypt or
Babylon, could interpret either of these Kings Dreams. Pharoah's doubled Dream,
in two distinct Sleeps, signified the same things, seven years Plenty, and then
seven of Famine. The fat and lean Kine coming out of the River Nile, signified
the same cause of the Plenty and Famine; of the Plenty, by its wonted
overflowings; and of the Famine, by failing therein. The two Kings, for the
signal benefits they received by the hand of these two choice Saints, advanced
them to great worldly dignities, in their several Kingdoms and days. The Reason
given, was, because the Spirit of God was in them; Genesis 41. 38. Dan. 2. 48. and
5. 11. Is this a qualification for preferment with Kings, now adays, though
called Christian, that these two Heathen Princes preferred Joseph and Daniel
for? Were there true Gospel-Saints in Heathen Cesars household (Phil. 4. 22.) in
Paul's time? Where are such now, in Christian Cesars households?

The Wisdom then, or Understanding that judges, or (...) all things (1 Cor. 2.
15.) and so, can interpret all words (into those things, signified by them, as
God's full intent and meaning in them) this renders the happy (...) thereof,
the wise man, here meant. It makes him a Seer of God; one that can read,
understand, and declare the whole Counsel of God, about the Salvation of men.
Such Wisdom, as reaches the deep things of God's very Divinity, and most
excellent spiritual creature-things of Christ and God; sure, natural, the
lowest general rank of things, in Man and Angel's first-creation-make, cannot
lie hid, from. The divine and spiritual things of God, knows no Man or Angel,
in their single, natural make or state; but in the Spirit of God, the
New Creature Gospel Spirit of Christ, becoming the Principle of their Life and
discerning, by a New Creation of them; 1 Cor. 2. 10, -- 15. Such Wisdom is not
found in the first-creation Land of the living, or State of Life. Visible or
invisible natural things, first-creation Vanities, are the bounding (utmost
immediately discernable) objects of the highest Wisdom, in that state. No fowls
of the Air, Angels, by their mystical Vultur's Eye, or quickest, clearest
natural sight, do so much as reach that place or spiritual state in Christ,
where true Wisdom, and Understanding are found. Job 28. 7, 12, 13, 20, 21.
Spiritual Light, darted on the natural Understanding of Man or Angel, may
convince them both, that there are, not only Divine, but Spiritual,
New Creature things, which are quite out of the reach of their bare natural
Understandings. And, that it is in the awak'ned principle of spiritual Life,
only, they can properly and fully see and enjoy such things. All then, that
undertake to handle the written Oracles or Word of God, without this only Key,
or true interpreting Wisdom of God, communicated to them, in his
Creature-Spirit of Grace, we may easily judge what work they are like to make
on it, or what recompense they will have for their pains. How Men, that handle the
written Word of God, in a Wisdom and Spirit, that is foolishness and enmity to
the living Word, Spirit, and Wisdom of God, will be handled by that living
Word, at last, may easily be guessed. Man, in all first-Covenant Life, Light,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, is but holy flesh: wise, strong, and
honorable in Christ; yet, but the natural Man, that cannot receive the things
of God; for, they are foolishness to him: and Paul, or any true Spiritual
Saint, is reckoned a fool, for owning or asserting any such things; 1 Cor. 2.
14. and 4. 8, 10. They are not the objects of the natural understanding, are
only spiritually discerned. And he is offended, and stumbles at the
cross-doctrine of death to his natural state, as undispensably necessary to his
coming at true Wisdom, or spiritual Understanding. Such doctrine, he reckons
folly and madness; 1 Cor. 1. 23. Joh. 10. 20. Hos. 9. 7, 8. First then,
negatively, where is true Wisdom not to be found? not in the first-Creation
Land of the living. Then, affirmatively, where is it to be had? In the
New Creation Land of the living, or spiritual, Gospel-state of life. The Wisdom
of Man, that cannot discern spiritual Things or Truths, how should it interpret
the words of God's Wisdom, that means only such things, by all first-creation
shadows, figures, and similitudes? All Scripture, as to the true spiritual
intent and meaning of God, is a Book sealed to the highest natural Wisdom of
Angel or Man; Isa. 29. 11. All divine and spiritual things of God, meant in the
Scripture, are mysteries, fast locked up from that sort of Understanding, in
learned, or unlearned Man. Man then, going to work, with that, which discerns
no things of God, shuts out all those things, that are shut up from him, out of
his humane Divinity, so called; and so, shuts up the Kingdom of Heaven, in
stead of opening it, to his Hearers. Let him read, study, and preach, as long
as (...) lived, he comes not one jot nearer the mysteries or Truths of God, in
the Scriptures, then when he lay in his cradle. Yea, worse; he is a direct
enemy to all such Truths or Things, when declared; he hates and detests them,
as blasphemous Fictions. So, shutting up the Kingdom of God, runs down himself
and his blind Followers to the Chambers of death. In a lying humane spirit of
Divination, backed with Satan's lying evil angelical spirit, do Men come forth,
to declare the Truths of God, and say, the Lord says; Ezekiel. 13. 6. God
signifies his divine and spiritual things, to Men (which lie quite out of their
natural discerning and reach) by such earthly shadows and figures, as are
discernable to them; and they lay hold on those shadows, denying all
allegorizing, or interpreting them into God's Spiritual, Heavenly truths, or
things. God's things can be no otherwise spoken to man, then in parables, or by
such things as are discernable to him; Mat. 13. 34. The truly wise spiritual
Saint, only, understands the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, or, mysterious
things of God, signified in the Scripture; v. 11. To others, that stick in the
letter, all is a parable; a (...). And thus do, even Saints themselves, before
the incorruptible Seed or principle of Spiritual Life be actually wakened up in
them. And after that, also, their natural Man (so (...) as unsubdued and
untransform'd into harmony with their spiritual, in life, and light)
understands not such Mysteries. No Man, in his natural state, receives Christ's
Testimony of spiritual, heavenly Truths or things; Joh. 3. 31, 32. Man's very
Wisdom or understanding is the Vail on him, the partition wall, between him and
all spiritual things. The exchange of that, by the obedient death of nature,
for God's unspeakable gift of spiritual Life and Wisdom, is his only possible
way of coming at any right and full understanding of the Scriptures. Man swells
and puffs at any thing, his understanding cannot reach, and his Will hates: so,
scoffs at allegorizing the Scriptures, or interpreting them, into some other,
farther things, then the literal shadow or figure; lest something should, by so
deep dipping into it, be turned up for Truth, that is above his understanding,
and not pleasing to his Will. In love to his own Wisdom, he denies there is any
other but God's purely divine, no spiritual Creature-Wisdom. And, if any
pretend to that, he censures them, for Luciferian Presumption. He denies that
superior Creature-wisdom, Saints are partakers of, which is called also, the
Wisdom of God; and then, most falsely taxes them with pretending to the very
infinite divine Wisdom. The spiritual Saint, only, has the seeing Eye, hearing
Ear, and understanding Heart, the senses suited to the divine and spiritual
things of God. All others, (...), see not; and hearing, hear not, nor
understand; Mat. 13. 13, -15; From Isa. 6. 9, 10. The spiritual wise Man, in
his new erected intellect and life, sees all things, divine and twofold
creaturely, spiritual, and natural, in their very hidden essences, properties,
and naked evidence. The natural wise Man, does but conjecture, guess at the
hidden properties, essences, and occult qualities (as he therefore call's them)
of the very visible, or lower sort of natural things. In the Apocryphal Wisdom
of Solomon, we find words to this purpose; Chap. 9. 13, -- 18. What man knows
the Counsel of God? Or who can think what the Will of the Lord is? The thoughts
of mortal Men are miserable, and our devices uncertain. For, the corruptible
body presses down the Soul; the earthy Tabernacle weighs down the Mind,
which museth on many things. Hardly guess we aright, at things on Earth, that
are before us: but, things in Heaven, who has searched out? Thy Counsel, who
has known, except thou give Wisdom, and send thy holy Spirit from above? For
so, the ways of Men on Earth, are reformed, as taught things, pleasing to thee;
and saved through Wisdom. Lo then, the vast differences of natural and
spiritual Wisdoms, or Understandings! The divine and spiritual creature-things
of Christ and God, are clearly discernable to the one; and not the lower sort
of natural things, to the other. Spiritual Wisdom that sees all the things of
God, can interpret all the words of God; declare the very divine thought,
intent and meaning, in all. They that have this unction from the holy one, know
all things. The said anointing teaches of all things; 1 John 2. 20, 27. That
new creature, Gospel Spirit of Truth, wherewith true Saints are anointed,
guides them into all Truth, and shows them things to come, even all that God
will do with the obedient submitters to, or incorrigible Rebels against, the
said Spirit, for ever, in eternal Life or Death. This Spirit, in the
awaken'd-up seed thereof, will bring to remembrance, words or things past,
also; what their natural Man, in the days of their ignorance, has received the
report of, by the hearing of the (...); and give them the clear, full sight or
understanding of, by the seeing of the spiritual Eye, or new Intellect; Joh 14.
26. Job came to the blessed experience of this, by and after the sufferings of
his natural Man, under the Cross; Job 42. 5. All things the Father has, are
mine, says Christ; and this Spirit of mine in you, shall show you all (Joh 16.
14, 15.) all the things of my new creation Kingdom, in the conjunctive Divine
and Creature-glories of me, the King thereof; all which, are Mysteries, hidden
and shut up from all natural, first-creation understanding of Man or Angel.
They can be spoken to that, only in Parables, figuratively represented to it,
only, by first-creation Shadows, and Similitudes, in dark sayings, till opened
by the spiritual Remembrancer, in Men. This is the Interpreter, Messenger,
Apostle, or sent-one of God, as Elihu calls him, that can show to Man his
Uprightness (Job 33. 23.) Yea, make him unchangeably upright, in God's sight.
He was not made so, by the first-creation. For, then could he not have
miscarried, by his many inventions; as, (...). 7. 29. This Spirit makes the
Saint wiser then all his first-creation Teachers, in the words of Man's Wisdom;
who will yet pretend to teach, and endeavor to reclaim him, from his heretical
and blasphemous Enthusiasms, as they call the very Inspirations of the (...)
(Job 32. 8.) The teachings of God. Does the spiritual Saint need, that any such
Men should teach him, (1 John 2. 27.) who themselves may be, or are the most
criminal Enthusiasts, under the inspirations of seducing Spirits, preaching the
very doctrines of Devils? 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Christ, as our risen Lord, is the
supreme Gospel-Minister, in the said Spirit. And there are no Ministers of his
Gospel, save in and of the same Spirit, given to (and quickened up in) them.
Thus, see we, who is the true Gospel-wise Man. Paul was such an one, when a
fool, weak, and despicable, in the Eye or Judgment of first-covenant Professors
or Brethren, wise, strong, and honorable in Christ, there; 1 Cor. 4. 8, 10.

Having then dispatched the two questions, come we to the declared Privileges
of this wise Man.

t. Such a man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness ( or
strength) of his face shall be changed.

These effects of the Spirit of true Wisdom, in man, were eminently seen upon
the natural Man of Chr'st, in his transfiguration, prefatical to what would be
fully accomplished upon him, in the Resurrection. His Face shone as the Sun,
and his raiment was white as the light; Mat. 17. 2. After his Resurrection, and
Ascent also, he shone brighter then the Sun, to Paul, in his way to Damascus;
Act. 26. 13. The Divine King greatly delights in this beauty, put upon men; and
men, therein; Psalm. 45. 11. This beauty, gives men a holy boldness, in God's
presence. No first-creation beauty or righteousness will do this. Filth of
Spirit, or enmity to God's Divine and Creature-Spirit, renders all that,
deformity and filthy rags; Isa. 64. 6. See what all garments and works in the
but restored natural state of Man, amount unto; Isa. 59. 6, -8. No flesh (or
man in fleshly, first-creation life, and best performances thereof, and in) can
stand with boldness, be justified before God (Gal. 2. 16.) or saved; 1 Cor. 15.
50. In the clean, unspottable, incorruptible life, linen or clothing of the
new creation Spirit of Christ, can men come boldly to the Throne of Grace, or
appear before God, with success, in their addresses and prayers; Heb. 4. 16.

Verse. 2. I counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment; and that, in regard of
the Oath of God.
The strict confining these words to the literal sense, may overthrow the very
advice given, in them. For, literal Kings often require what is contrary to the
Oath of God; yea, to the common light of Nature. Both the moral Heathen,
faithful to his first-Covenant light or Law of rational Nature; and the Jew or
Christian, possessed of first-Covenant Life, also; both these are to keep the
Command of the King, here meant, who gave them both the said Light and Life; as
the enlightner of every man that comes into the World; Joh. 1. 9. As fast as
Christ set up in Paul, one light after another (light of Nature, light and life
of the Law, and then light and life of his Gospel Spirit) he walked faithfully,
in obedience to him; Act. 23. 1. He obeyed him morally, and then legally, in
first-Covenant light; and, then, evangelically, in the light of the second.
Man, in all variety of light, ought to be faithful to that King, that gives
all; following that light, as his Law, in and to him, for directing his steps,
in desire, thought, word, and action. Now, a literal King, often establishes
mischief by an evil Law, or commands things contrary to established good Laws,
and wants not for Flatterers, that will tell him, all are bound to obey such
his personal Commands, under pain of damnation, from that of ( Romans 13. 1, 2.)
most falsely interpreted, in a perfect contrariety to God's meaning, in it.
Zedekiah swore Allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar, who gave him that name,
signifying, the Oath of God, to mind him of his Covenant. His rebelling, and
sending to Egypt for help, against Nebuchadnezzar, God revenges upon him. Shall
he prosper? shall he break the (...), and be delivered? with the King, that
made him King, whose Oath he despised, in Babylon, shall he die; Ezekiel. 17. 14,
-- 16. Yea, v. 19. God calls it his Oath and Covenant, the breach whereof,
therefore, himself would recompense upon his guilty head. Nebuchadnezzar and
his Council of War, at Riblah, cause his Sons and all his Nobles to be (...)
before his eyes: then, put out his eyes, and carry him prisoner to Babylon,
where he dies; 2 King. 25. 4, -- 7. So, Jer. 39. 4, -- 7. and Jer. 52. 8, -11.
This got he, by rebelling against the words of the Lord, by his two eminent
Prophets, Ezekiel in Babylon, and Jeremy in Jerusalem. A passive obedience to
the Civil Magistrate, in suffering for well doing (1 Pet. 2. 20.) is, what God
requires, even from Saints (as acknowledging Civil Government an Ordinance of
God, under which by Providence, they are put) sigurative to a great spiritual
Truth, which is the full meaning of this advice, for keeping the King's
Command, here, in passive obedience, under his Cross, and Spiritual Sword, on
their natural state, however faithfully they have demeaned themselves in it; as
Job.

Not then denying these literal Truths, as to a right stated active or passive
obedience to Civil Magistracies, let us turn our understandings to the ultimate
sense of the counsel, here given. The absolute King, here, is Christ, over all
the Earth; Psalm. 2. 6, -8. This, not in the spirit and life of the Law, as the
Jews would have made him (Joh. 6. 15.) but, of the Gospel, into which he raised
our nature, in himself. In his resurrection-state, is the Man Christ, the
universal Monarch; as Paul interprets Psalm. 2. 7. Act. 13. 33. By love or
force, shall every knee bow to, and tongue confess this King. All friends and
foes must and shall pay homage to him, when he takes to himself his great
reigning Power; (Rev. 11. 17) or actually comes forth in the visible exercise
thereof. None shall be able to hurt or hinder him, or his true subjects, in his
peaceable Reign over all. He will dash enemies in pieces, like a Potters
Vessel, with his Iron Rod or Scepter; Psalm. 2. 9. Isa. 11. 1, -- 9. In that
all-powerful new creation life and name, into which he has raisd our nature,
will he do all this, to foes: Nor is there Salvation in any other name or life,
for friends; not in his partaken-of Law-name or life, by the knowledge of him
after the flesh, or conformity to him in that perfect changeable first-covenant
life of the Law, he took, as born of a Woman; but that, into which raised out
of the death of that; Act. 4. 10, - 12. He says, that of himself, in his
Law-life, he could do nothing. The obedience he had to perform in that, was
passive, as commanded of his Father, John 10. 17, 18. This suffering obedience,
appointed by the Father, when finished, ( Joh. 17. 4.) our nature in him, was
glorified and exalted by the Father, into a life, wherein he can do all the
Father does; Joh. 5. 19, - 27. So, Saints can do nothing of themselves; or, in
their own Law-life, toward Salvation; but, on the obedient surrender of that,
in Christ's Gospel-life can they do all things; Phil. 4. 13. God, then, works
all in or for them, and they work all their works in him. Isa. 26. 12 Phil. 2.
13. Joh. 3. 21. But, consider how great this Man, the King of Saints, and Ruler
of all, is; He is anointed above all his fellow-Brethren ( that are Coheirs
with him, of God) in the transcendent prerogative of his fountain-creature-life
of everlasting righteousness, and also of his infinite divine life; Psalm. 45.
7. Romans 8. 17: Saints, that are Kings and Priests to God, will ever own him as
their (...) King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and High Priest, in a transcendent
supremacy over, and superiority to the highest Saints, and all Saints and
Angels, put together. All are to honor him, as they honor the Father; Jo. 5.
23.

See then the weight of Solomon's Counsel, here, for keeping this. King's
Commandment, to whom God has given all Rule and Authority over both Worlds, as
Heir of all things; Psalm. 2. 6, -- 9. Heb. 1. 2. The Reason he gives for this
Counsel, is, in regard of the Oath of God. This Oath implies the terms between
God and the Man Christ, on which he is to possess all God's Authority over his
creatures. The surrender of the pure and spotless natural Life of the Law, for
that spiritual Gospel-Creature Life, that is in unchangeable personal union with
the divine, entitles him to the exercise of all conjunctive, divine and
creature-power, over all. Christ's own Priestly, Gospel Spirit, offered up his
Law-spirit, in Sacrifice to his Father, as his part of the Covenant of the
Oath, the new and everlasting Covenant. Then, the Father performed his part;
made the Man Christ, Ruler over all, as advanced into the life of his original
priestly Gospel Spirit; and so, made a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec, or in the life of his creature-root, the original (...). And, on
the same account, has he made him King over all; Psalm. 2. 6, 7. All this, has
God confirmed by Oath, to our mystical Lord, Abraham, figured by the literal,
on offering up his mystical Isaac, or spotless natural Life, to him. God swear
by Himself, he would perform his promised part, for advancing the Man, Christ;
and Saints, in their degree, on the like obedient Sacrifice of their natural
State. So have they two immutable things for their strong consolation; his
immutable Counsel, or living Creatureword, and his immutable infinite Divinity;
Heb. 6. 13, -- 18. Here Is the safe anchor-ground for Saints sure and certain
hopes of eternal Life and Blessedness, on surrender of their fading natural
Saints, by following Christ's suffering-steps, into a conformity with him in
his death, are assured by him, they shall reign with him, in that life, he is
risen and ascended into; 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. No other way, can any come to reign
with him. Saints must keep his Command, as he his Father's, that has made him
King; Joh. 14. 15. and 10. 18. These are the true and faithful sayings of his
spiritual Law; all, yea, and amen; of absolute, infallible certainty. The same
way, our changeable nature comes to reign in him, can it, in us; a change by
death, for his unchangeable creature-Life, that is spiritual and eternal. The
Man Christ, the King of Kings, in infinite divine and irresistible
Creature-power, exercises a universal kingly and priestly Authority, in Love or
Wrath, over all Angels and Men, good or bad. He will sacrifice changeable
nature, as to any goodness thereof, in them all; in the incorrigibly wicked, to
God's revenging Justice. No being saved, but as with Christ, obediently
yiedling to the terms of the Covenant by Oath, the new and everlasting
Covenant; even the sacrifice of all, received by us, in the first; Psalm. 50. 5.
This must be done ( in regard of the Oath of God, to Christ) as our duty, in
obedience to this King's command to us; who requires nothing of us herein, but
what himself has done. Father and Son, are herein, obeyed or disobeyed,
together. He that has the Son, has the Father also: and he that obeys the
Son, obeys the Father. 2 John v. 9. Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. Joh. 15. 10. and
ver. 23, 24. and 16. 15, 27.

Verse. 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing; for,
he does whatsoever pleases him.
Here Is a farther reason for obeying this great King. He has full commission to
do whatever he pleases, in both Worlds; to foes, that set up in the first, or
natural; and Friends, that obediently quit that, for the second, or spiritual.
Be not hasty then, to go out of his sight, by wilful turning from that light,
by which he shows and offer's that Life to you, wherein he is King. Think not
to get out of his sight, or reach of his Power. He sees you, whether you will see
him or no. And his Power will reach you, for your wickedness, in refusing to
see, own, and become willingly subject to him. There Is no fleeing from his
presence. His presence in Wrath, will reach you, in Hell it self; Psalm. 139. 7,
8. Yet, will Enemies labor to shuffle themselves out of his presence. They
will bid him, depart from them, as not desiring the Knowledge of his Ways of
saving them; Job 21. 14, 15. Even first-covenant holy Men, desire not to hear
of his Counsels for the saving them, by the destruction of their fleshly life,
or natural state, at best. Yea, true Saints, for a season, are found amongst
these refusers of God's Reproofs and Counsels, for their Salvation; ignorantly,
with Paul. And Job, while frighted at the Death-discipline of the Cross, upon
his righteous natural state, went awhile in company with the workers of
Iniquity, pleading against the equity of it, with strong reasonings and
arguings, as an injurious proceeding of God toward his Creatures; thus (...)
charges him; Job 34. 5, -- 9. Yea, the natural Man, even in awakened spiritual
Saints, will be at such work, as offended and amazed at a being daily plagued
and chast'ned, notwithstanding all their (...) circumspect walking, while
wicked Men have more then heart canwish. See what strange conclusions, an
impetous hurry of carnal reasonings is ready to run them into; Psalm. 73. 1,
-14. Jer. 12. 1, 2. and 20. 14, -- 18. But, the spiritual Principle in the
Saint, lifts up the natural ( Eccle. 4. 10.) into Sanctuary-light, to see the
design of God, in these cryptick Methods of his wonderful Wisdom, dealing with
them, as Sons (Heb. 12. 7.) while those that refuse such Chastisements, perish,
by their very Prosperity, as gratified in their self-chosen way, to their
everlasting Destruction; Psalm. 73. 15, -20. But, thousands depart from Christ
for ever, and walk no more with him, or look after him, as coming with his
Cross-doctrin, or crucifying-work upon their natural State. They desire no
knowledge of him, in such ways of saving them; Joh. 6. 66. The Devil's, and his
Instruments destructive, but pleasing Ways and Counsel, they like better. And
then, in the darkness of his Spirit and Counsels, they think to hide themselves
from this King, saying, no Eye sees them; how does God know what they are
doing? Psalm. 73. 11. They are, for this, called brutish Fools; Psalm. 94. 7, --
11. Brutish Men and Fools know not this, that when the wicked spring as the
grass, and workers of Iniquity flourish, it is, that they shall be destroyed for
ever; Psalm. 92. 6, 7.

T. Stand not in an evil thing. Persist not in this evil Practice of turning
from this King; and in this vain thought of securing your selves from his
sight, and just revenging Power. Ye may soon sin your selves out of the reach
of his mercy; but, never get out of the reach of his Wrath. Your endeavor to
get speedily out of his sight, or out of the hearing of his words, will soon
bring you under his Wrath, that can do what he pleases, with you. If ye will
not have this spiritual King reign over you, he will command his Angels to slay
you; Luke 19. 14, 27. They Will be a (...) fire on all final Resisters of his
Gospel-doctrine and Spirit; 2 These. 1. 7, 8. He will rejoice over all such, to
destroy them, that refuse all his offers of good, to them. Deuteronomy. 28. 63. If
they will not please him, he will please himself, in their destruction. If they will
not give the Glory, due to him, he will take it, by executing his just
Vengeance on them. Actively or passively, by what they do, or shall suffer,
will he be glorified of all. If man agree not with Christ, appearing as an
Adversary (and quietly deliver up his guilty, sinning nature, to his
Gospel-cross, Fire and Sword) he will plead against him, as justly demeriting
final Destruction; Mat. 5. 25, 26. If his Gospel-sword on Man's Law-spirit, be
summitted to, he will be an Advocate, and prevailing Pleader for his final
acceptance with God, the Judge of all; Heb. 12. 23. Let Us deliver up the guilty
Rebel, this mystical Sheba (2 Samuel 20. 16, -- 22.) the natural spirit, to his
spiritual Sword, and all shall be well; everlasting Peace will be proclaimed to
us.

Verse. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power: and who may say unto
him, what do thou?
In the word of this glorious universal King, is Power, to fulfill it, on all
his Subjects, in Love or Wrath; whether submitted to, or rebelled against.
There Is no questioning the reason of his Will, or Authority of his Commands. He
is furnished with absolute Sovereignty to accomplish his unchangeably righteous
Will, on all opposers thereof. He is abundantly qualified ( Isa. 11. 1, -4.) to
exercise God's sovereign Authority, over all. Not in the Law-spirit of Nature,
by the sight of its eyes, or hearing of its ears, will he judge, reprove, or
punish; but, in his everlasting righteous and infallible Gospel Spirit of Grace
and Truth. Man's Law-spirit of restored Nature, is (in effect) warranted by
man's wisdom, to be the Tree of Life; and Christ's Gospel Spirit, that indeed
is so, exploded as an enthusiastical fiction, with all the words thereof. Where
this Gospel takes place, that Satan preached to Eve (and where does it not?)
there is no hearing for Christ's. His Grace and Gospel are made void, and the
declarers thereof reckoned mere no-bodies, with Paul, among rich first-covenant
Professors and Teachers; 1 Cor. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 10. 12. He will abundantly
recompense his meek ones, in love; and his and their Enemies, in wrath; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, -10. All secret wickednesses will lie naked before his
all-penetrating light; Heb. 4. 12, 13. He will be a swift Witness against,
Condemner and Punisher of all incorrigible Adversaries. When he summon's all'
before him ( Eccl. 12. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 10.) 'twill be seen and felt, that in the
word of this King is power. He will accomplish all his words; for, he can do
what pleases him; Isa. 55. 11. And, he will silence, and render most frivolous,
all contradiction or opposition. No Man or Angel, will have any color for
questioning his proceedings with them. He will set up an undeniable Testimony
of the equity of his dealings toward them, in their own consciences. So, every
mouth of iniquity will be stopped. For, who may say to him, what do thou? He
will be found unquestionably just, in doing what he pleases.

Verse. 5. Whosoever keeps the Commandment, shall feel no evil thing: and, a wise
man's heart discerns both time and judgment.
Here Is the comfortable Use and Application of this great Truth; a declaration
of the unexpressible Blessedness and Safety of those that keep this King's
Command. Whosoever hearkens to him, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of
evil; Prove. 1. 33. Those that speak no evil, or blasphemous word against him,
shall hear of no evil or condemning and punishing word from him, against them.
He will set them above the power of all evil, dangers, or enemies, whatsoever.

Quest. But, what is the Commandment, carries so great advantage with it, to the
Observers thereof?

Answ. That, the keeping whereof, imports and implies an universal obedience to
this divine and spiritual King. First-covenant Servants, and People of God,
that may again become no People, yea, a downright Synagogue of Satan; (Rev. 3.
9.) Such (while knowing, wellvers'd, or mighty in the letter of Scripture, and
strict in obedience thereto) may be altogether strangers to the spiritual mind
of their Master, therein; Joh. 15. 15. If, when convincingly showed and offered
Christ's Gospel-life, they finally refuse to part with their Law-life, and all
they have therein, for it; they become a Synagogue of Satan, and perish for
ever. Servants in Christ, God's house, for a season, if, on the utmost trial,
they refuse to become Sons, by losing their servile, Law-life of bondage, for
the glorious Gospel-life and liberty of the Son of God (the King here meant)
they must turn out, and never come in it, more; Joh. 8. 35, 36. Such Children
of the Kingdom will be cast out, and Publicans and Harlots, with Zaccheus and
Mary Magdalen, common sinners of the Gentiles from all parts, lifted over all
their heads, by true Gospel-conversion, and brought, to sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 8. 11, 12. and 21. 31. This
doctrine, or declaration (as to common Sinners, in the corrupt spirit of
nature, being effectually caused to receive the Gospel, while a professing
first-covenant People despise and reject it, are disobedient and gainsaying
to) Paul notes as a holy boldness for God, in the Prophet Isaiah; Romans 10. 19,
-- 21. Isa. 65. 1, 2. A People of God in the first, becoming no People again;
and those that are no People of God, in either Covenant, made, all on a sudden,
a peculiar People, in the second; these are the chops and changes of condition,
incident to Men, under the wonder-working Power and Grace of God, in the King
of Saints; Hos. 1. 6, -- 10. God required Israel to own him King, submit to the
Government of his Spirit in Samuel; the same Spirit, in which Christ is
universal King. All, in that Spirit, are his true obedient Subjects. Any
Person, or any People, that will not have this spiritual, heavenly King reign
over them, and in them (though his earthly Jerusalem Citizens, or
first-covenant People) see how they will be handled by him; Luke 19. 14, 27. This
great universal King, lately offered to set up his Theocratical Fifth-Monarchy,
amongst us. His earthly-Jerusalem-Citizens, in a first-covenant spirit,
pretended to it (as the Corinthian (...) in Paul's Gospel-time, in a spirit,
nor Christ nor he could own, for a reigning principle, 1 Cor. 4. 8.) and a huge
noise they made, of owning the King Jesus, in but a knowledge of him after the
flesh, in a restored Law-life; the very principle and state, the Jews would
have (...) him King, in; Joh. 6. 15. Such first-Covenant first-Monarchists,
Kings, or Princes of this World, crucified the true King Jesus; 1 Cor. 2. 8.
They blasphemed and crucified him, for owning a Kingship and Kingdom, not of
this World (in his Gospel Spirit of Grace and Truth) that would have made him a
King, in that Law-life and spirit, they were of, and in. They cry up their
Heathen. Caesar for their King, rather then such a King Jesus. Shall I crucify
your King? says Pilate. We have no King but Caesar, say they; Joh. 18. 36, 37.
and 19. 12, 15. A plain case; and our's, just. He that was for the right King
Jesus, in his true reigning Spirit, must be shuffled out of the World, with his
great Master, as an Enemy both (...) Caesar and them. (...) and a first-covenant
People, are jointly for the rooting Christ and his true spiritual Anointed
Ones, out of the World, as not sit to live in it; Psalm. 2. 1, -- 3. Act. 22.
22. And, what got Israel by refusing the King Jesus, or Government of God, in
the said Spirit of true Prophecy? grievances enough. What help? none, to remove
them. God would not, as he forethreatned them, when busy about their new
choice of Government. Ye shall cry, because of your King, ye have chosen; but,
the Lord will not hear you, says Samuel. Fair warning. See all this; 1 Samuel 8.
6, -- 18. The law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, comes to strike down
the ruling Power of that spirit in Man, that is but a Law of Sin and of Death;
and so, by setting up his own kingly Rule and Power in him, frees him from all
evil, and bondage. Those that willingly submit to this death-blow of Christ, on
their ruling Law-spirit, cast down their Crowns or ruling Power, at his Feet,
and set the Crown on his Head, in the day of their new covenant Espousals to
him, owning his true Kingly-Spirit, for their Ruler; Cant. 3. 11. Christ struck
down the earthy Law-king in Paul, to the Earth, and instantly set up his
Gospel Spirit, King and Ruler, in, and over him; Act. 9. 3, 4. The Law-spirit,
at best, in fallen man, is but the Amalekite-Ruler, the Agag, which though Saul
spared (in favor to it, in himself, as was implied in his unpardonable sin)
Samuel, in the true Kingly Spirit of Jesus, hewed in pieces; when he said, or
thought (as Man, when the corrupt spirit of Nature is subdued, and a Righteous
Law-spirit set up in ruling authority in him) surely the bitterness of Death is
past; here is no Cross, or Deathwork by a Spiritual, Gospel-Sword, behind, to be
brought upon this Righteous Law-life. 1 Samuel; 15. 32, 33.

Spiritual Friends of Christ, have the whole counsel and mind of God, made
known by him, to them. First-covenant Servants, in their Law-spirit of bondage,
holy flesh, form of Godliness, Righteousness of Man, (though as busy as may be,
in reading, hearing, preaching and obeying the letter of their Lord's Command,
in the Scripture) are wholly strangers to the spiritual design, sense, or
meaning of their Lord, in all. They know not what he does, (Joh. 15. 15.) or
has, now, done himself, with our nature, at best, in his own Person; nor will
consider their duty, in following him therein, by giving it up, at best, in
whatever state, in their persons, as God's required Sacrifice. He that keeps
the spiritual Command of Christ, believes, or obediently submits to the Law of
his Cross, shall feel, hear, see, or know no evil thing, or word against him,
from Christ, at last day, when on his Judgment Seat. But, he that believes
not; quits not his Law-spirit or principle of life and action, under the
Gospel-Cross, or spiritual Sword of Christ, for the Gospel-Life of that very
Sword or living Word of God, will be damned; Mark 16. 16.

t. And a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. The spiritual
wise man discerns an appointed time for the right use of a changeable
first-Covenant Law-life; and then, as an antiquated Law-ceremony, with the
fading things and glory of it, to be done away, by a holy death, as the
Judgment and Command of God, in Sacrifice to himself. This Gospel-Sacrifice of
Man, at best, was figured by the Law-Sacrifices of clean Beasts and Birds.
Spiritual Saints, under the Law, obediently gave up this Gospel-Sacrifice, to
God. And all, save a spiritual Seed, refuse to give it, under the Gospel. When
restored Law-life has served its turn, in man, by his faithful performing
Law-service to God therein, suppressing the vile affections of the corrupt
spirit of Nature; it is to give way to a better guide, Christ's Gospel Spirit,
or quickened up life thereof. A Sentence or Judgment of Death upon the restored
righteous Law-life of man, must be submitted to, by him, with Paul; 2 Cor. 1.
9. Law-life, and the things thereof (the Wisdom, Righteousness, Beauty, Glory,
Fruits, Works, Duties, Desires, Thoughts, Words, Actions and all manner of
performances therein) kept up and finally preferred to Christ's Gospel-Life and
things of God, therein, is the highest and most criminal Adultery and Murder;
Ezekiel. 16. 15, 38.

There Is an appointed time for Man (and Angel too) to die (Heb. 9. 27.) or lose
that first-Covenant Law-life, which was set up in them, by creation. The
obedient loss of it, under the Cross, frees man from all guilt, contracted by
Sins past, and all power of sinning any more, for ever. He, thereby ceases from
Sin, and comes to be justified before God, in a newness of life, wherein he can
never sin. 1 Pet. 4. 1. Romans 6. 7. 1 John 3. 9. A change (by the death of
Nature) of Law-life, for Gospel, under the working power of the Grace of God,
brings Men's matters to that blessed pass, that no enemies will find any
iniquity in them, to charge them with; nor will God himself; Romans 8. 33, 34.
Jer. 50. 20. The guilty sinner, in the Saint, that has committed innumerable
(...), is dead and gone; and a spirit of everlasting Righteousness is become
the single and sole principle of life and operation in his whole person. This,
when the Death of Nature, and Life of Grace are completed, will be found the
true Saints case. How else should men, out of polluted Nature, come to be
spotless before the Throne of God, and chaste Virgins to Christ? The wise Man,
duly considering these things, and discerning time and judgment, rightly uses
and obey's every of God's Gists and Dispensations to him, in their orderly
succession, one after another; first, a restoring the changeable righteous
Law-life of Nature, and then calling it back again, by a holy Death, in
exchange for a Gospel-life of everlasting Righteousness, in his Spirit of
Grace. When this transcendently better life is convincingly showed and offered,
man's choosing his former, in preference thereunto, though good in its kind,
season, and right use, turns it into unchangeable evil, and renders him guilty
of unpardonable folly. If Man wilfully sight against the known will of God, in
any of his Dispensations to him, and finally persist therein, his misery will
be great upon him; as Solomon further argues;

Verse. 6. Because to every purpose, there is time and judgment; therefore the
misery of man is great upon him.
There Is an appointed time and judgment, to all natural things; which therefore
are not to be rested in. Enlightened Heathens, and first-Covenant Jews or
Christians, reckon their various natural seize, an undoubted and
impregnable security, for their happiness; that none can deprive them of. But,
all visible and invisible, outward or inward first-creation goodnesses or
excellencies, have that vanity writ out in the fading nature thereof, which
necessitat's their being brought to a period, as is undeniably clear, from the
Scriptures of Truth. All Man's disquieting himself, in heaping up riches,
literal or mystical, there, is but a (...) in (and pleasing himself with) a
vain show; Psalm. 39. 6. This folly is reproved by Christ himself; ( Mat. 6. 25,
-32.) and all Men counseled by him, to seek the Kingdom of God and his (...),
in his Gospel Spirit of everlasting Righteousness and Truth. If Man submit to
God's Judgment of death, on his natural state, he enters into and is possessed
of the everlasting Righteousness of his Kingdom-spirit: if not, is he found in
unchangeable enmity to God; and then great will his misery be, upon him. When
men, by spiritual light, showed and offered God's excellent, heavenly things,
do turn from that light, in hatred to those things, and love to their own, God
harden's, blind's and deafen's such self-hardning enemies and refusers of his
gracious offers; Isa. 6. 9, 10. By such just judgment on them, come they to
have their hearts, eyes, and understandings perfectly closed up, from any
regard of God, or his offered new creation life and things, for ever. He sends
them strong delusion, that they should believe Satan's self-pleasing lie, and
so, go headlong, in a delusive satisfaction, to the Chambers of Death. God
gives them their hearts desire, as to the fatness, riches, and flourish of
their own nature, as the beginning of his unchangeable Dispensation of wrath
upon them; fitting them, thereby, for destruction. And, thenceforth are they
under an impossibility of ever finding out God's time and Judgment, in this
thing, or relating to that natural state of vanity, they take up, in, for
happiness.

Verse. 7. For, he knows not that which shall be: for, who can tell him, when
(or how) it shall be?
This great misery comes upon Man, on his wilful turning from God's declared
way and means of doing him good. God excludes him, by oath, from true
Blessedness; swears in his Wrath, he shall never enter into his rest; Heb. 3.
11. And then, is he concluded under an unchangeable curse, the grievous nature
whereof cannot be known, till felt or experienced. The terrible things in final
Wrath, provided by God for Enemies, as well as the things, in Love, provided
for Saints, are such as Eye has not seen, Ear heard, nor have entered into the
Heart of Man; 1 Cor. 2. 9. Christ's mystery of Godliness, Satan's mystery of
Iniquity, and the differing recompenses of the Followers of Christ into the
former, or being willingly caught by Satan, in the latter; all these most
concerning things, to be diligently sought after, or most heedfully avoided,
lie clear out of the reach of Man's Understanding or Wisdom. And how then shall
he know, what Misery shall, at last, befall him; or when, how, and by what Hand
it shall be brought upon him?

Verse. 8. There is no Man has Power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit;
neither has he Power in the day of Death: and, there is no discharge in that
War; neither shall Wickedness deliver those that are given to it.
Here Is the reason of what is said in the former Verses, the great Misery Man
brings upon himself, by not observing and submitting to Time and Judgment. No
Man has Power over his Spirit, to secure it from the Wrath and just Judgment
of God. He that made it, challenges all obedience from it; which, disputed and
not performed by Man, renders God's Judgment of Wrath on him, undeniably just;
and, from this, can no Man free himself. For, he can neither retain the fading
Life and Goodness of his own Spirit, nor reduce it to nothing; nor render it an
insensible something. It will ever be kept up, by its Creator, in an exquisite
sensibleness of all evil, and perfect deprivation of all the fading good, it
can ever remember the enjoyment of, for the increase and aggravation of its
Torment. God has given it an immortality of being, and it is not able to bear
up, in its rebellion against him; to secure it self from the Power of evil, or
that just Punishment he will bring upon it. Man has no Power in the day of
Death, either of his Body, or Spirit. Neither of these lives; that, of his
body, or the fading first-covenant Righteous Life of his Spirit, can he secure
from Death, when God's time is come, for giving Judgment, and pouring forth his
Wrath upon him. When God comes, in hostility, upon him, as a provoked Enemy,
there is no discharge from either of these wars; he cannot run away, get out of
the field, and so escape the avenging Justice of God; nor yet stand or bear up
against it, but must certainly fall, and perish under it. There Is an appointed
time of Death and Judgment, on all fading, perishing, mortal life of Man's body
and spirit, his whole natural being and person, be he good or bad. The good, by
an obedient surrender of all, thereto, in a dutiful compliance with the
declared Methods of God's Wisdom, for saving them, are raised into (and
receive) (...) everlasting Gospel-life, which is not diminished, but
marvelously enlarged and perfected, at the death of the Body; cleared from all
disturbances and interruptions, by any Enemies, without or within them, as
entirely at home with Lord, when quite absent or delivered from the mortal Body
and State. They groan therefore after a full deliverance from their whole
earthly Tabernacle and mortal Life, the natural, earthy, fleshly state of their
whole person, Body, Soul, and (...). See all this; 2 Cor. 5. 1, -- 8.

But, quite contrary; the wilfully disobedient to God's Time, Way, and Judgment
of Death to their whole beings, are under an absolute necessity of coming to
the experience of the same twofold Death, as to any natural life or goodness,
in Body or Spirit; and, they will receive in the room thereof, the positive
inflictions of Wrath, upon their whole beings, for ever, in a resurrection of
Damnation; Joh. 5. 29. Dan. 12. 2. The immortality of their beings will hold
them to it in suffering, under the Wrath to come, that will never be gone, or
end. No scaping the temporal death of their mortal Body, or eternal death of
their immortal Spirit, and Body too, as reduced, by a resurrection, into a
fellowship with their Spirit, in Torment, for ever, the Tophet prepared for
them. None of these Deaths, has evil man the least Power to resist or avoid;
the temporal Death of his Body or Soul, as to the mortal Life of both; or the
eternal Death and (...) of both. There Is no discharge from this twofold War of
God, upon him. Fall, he will, most certainly, in both. For, has he an Arm like
God? Job 40. 9. Think thou, by thy wicked and rebellious contending with
him, to escape, or find any thing short of thy eternal confusion?

t. Neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it. Devils, the
supreme rank of enemies, (rendered the highest spiritual wickednesses, and
rebels against God and his new creation Spirit, by fixing in their natural and
first) These grand patrons of wickedness, and most gigantick fighters against
God, with their followers and subjects from amongst men, will fall under the
hand of the living God; (Heb. 10. 31.) his irresistible Gospel-Sword.
Men-rebels, with their proud evil-angelical helpers, the mystical Rocks and
Mountains, or supreme first-creation- Principalities and Powers, will all be
inevitably forced to stoop and fall together, under his all-conquering Sword
and Power; Job 9. 13. Rev. 6. 12, -17. No evil Angel or Man have power over
their own spirit, to preserve any life, light, or comfort therein, against
God's, or his final Wrath to be executed thereby, upon all, and every one of
them. Nor can they, by annihilation, shuffle themselves out of the hands of
God's avenging Justice. No annihilation-Death will ever be found by them; Rev.
9. 6. The misery, therefore, of them all, will be as unavoidable, as
unexpressibly great upon them. And, 'twill be undeniably evident, they have
all, by their wilful obstinacy, brought it upon their own guilty heads. They
have refused so great (...), as was offered them, in God's way! and chosen so
great misery, in their own; Prove. 8. 36. And who, Devil or Man, can imagine, or
take the right measure of God's final punishment upon them both, till they
feel, and are irrecoverably under it? The great, sweeping temporal judgments,
the (...), the storm of Fire and Brimstone on Sodom, etc. are but figures and
shadows of the Vengeance of eternal Fire; Jude 7. The deluge of sinal Wrath,
will drown all incorrigibly wicked Men and Angels, in everlasting destruction
and perdition, for gratifying (and drowning themselves in) their own foolish
and (...) lusts; 1 Timothy 6. 9. And, as an aggravation of man's misery in this
World, he know's not when, or how all this shall be brought upon him. Evil
shall come upon him, he shall not know whence it rises: (...) shall fall upon
him, he shall not be able to put off: and, desolation shall come upon him
suddenly, which he shall not know; Isa. 47. 11. (...) knows not his time; but,
as fishes or birds, shall be taken in an evil net, or snare, falling suddenly
upon him; Eccl. 9. 12. Man knows not the time of his bodily death, to which,
subject, every moment of his life. And, if (...) in enmity, he soon sinds
himself, on such death, under unchangeable wrath. All his days upon Earth, he
fought under Satan's Banner, against God, his Saints and Truths. So was he not
only an Acceslory, but principal Actor, in bringing all his great eternal
misery upon his own guilty head, in a state of everlasting bondage and death.

Ver. 9. All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is
done under the Sun: there is a time, wherein one man rules over another, to
his own hurt.
This observation Solomon gained, by the sad experience of the vanity of all
things under the first-creation Sun, literal or mystical. Here Is (...) a
literal Truth; when the Power of the Ruler is used to encourage wickedness in
the ruled. Such a one most certainly, rules, to his own (...). For, he is
accountable for it. And, the mystical or principal sense is yet more true. So,
the Ruler, here, is the Devil, the permitted Ruler over the whole
first-creation World, from the beginning to the ending thereof. This, though he
be gratified and pleased with, will turn to his great damage, when the Vials of
Wrath come to be poured forth upon him, as the meet recompense of all the
wickedness he has bin instrumental to the practicing of, by Men, in his rule
over them. The more universally he is obeyed and followed, the more has he
(...), and the more will he be tormented, for ever. Both ruling evil-Angels,
and ruled evil-Men, will (...) unspeakable hurt, in conclusion, from all the
wicked rule of the one, and wicked obedience of the other. Both will be covered
with everlasting darkness and death. Concerning such rule and obedience to it,
Solomon declares his farther observations, as follows;

Verse. 10. And so, I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
place of the holy; and they were forgotten in the City where they had so done:
this is also Vanity.
Here Is the sad account of the faulty ruled, from their willing obedience to
the said wicked Ruler, in the whole Progress of their lives, as will be
undeniably evident, in the end. Not Man in the dark, corrupt, but enlightened,
righteous nature (that holy place or state) is here meant. This holy state,
being changeable, will certainly be gone again, as is plain; Ezekiel. 18. 24, -26.
God has provided a means to bring the whole Posterity of Adam, into the
first-covenant holy place or state: but, shows their liableness to apostatize
or fall away from it, again, for ever; and, abundantly warn's them against it,
and of the most dangerous consequence thereof. For then, the guilt of the first
sin, and all the evil done in their own Persons, will be justly charged upon
them. If the Righteous turn from his Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, he
shall die. He that has come to the first-covenant State, or Place of the Holy,
as brought by the Redeemer, thither, out of his corrupt or unholy natural Place
or State, and is gone or departed, thence, back again, into his unholy place,
comes to a final state of Death, in which, buried for ever, in a grave, from
which there is no Redemption; Psalm. 49. 8. The first-covenant holy Place,
wilfully kept up against the second and most holy, turns it into a most unholy
Place, a state of unchangeable enmity to God, and death to Man. 2 Pet. 2. 20,
22. Heb. 10. 26, 27. On this complicated twofold wilful sin against God, and
the distinct lights of his twofold Covenant, as an enemy of all Righteousness,
does God bury, and cover him with a spirit of unchangeable darkness. So comes
he to (...) wholly forgotten in the City, place or state, where he has so
done. The very name and memory of the whole earthly- (...) City, or party of
Men, fixed in the first-covenant holiness, as turned into unchangeable enmity
to God and the second, will (...) for ever. They Will be blotted out of all
favorable regard or remembrance with God, for ever. The very state, by them
rebelliously chosen, will (...) made (...) final prison and burying-place, in
which to (...), for ever. This get they by trusting in lying vanities.

Ver. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily;
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
Here Is a sad Account of the (...) of all hearts, as ready to abuse all the
goodness and patience of God, in deferring the execution of his sentence
against their evil works. God is of purer eyes, than to behold, with
approbation, any iniquity. One time and way or other, all sinners must be
punished for all sorts of sins, pardonable or unpardonable. God punishes every
evil work, in Saints, and puts the evilworker in them, their natural spirit, to
death, at long-run, under the fatherly chastisements of his Cross; as we find
it, in Solomon's own case, and all the posterity of our spiritual Lord David;
Psalm. 89. 26, -36. Then, he quickens and sets up the life of his Spirit of
Grace in them, that never can sin; 1 John 3. 9. In this, can they fully please
God, and overcome the Devil. This get they, by the Gospel exchange-traffick;
God's infallible Gospel Spirit and Wisdom, for their fallible Law-spirit. All
that fix in their Law-spirit, become unchangeable enemies of God and his
Gospel. And, all God's patience toward them, herein, do they abuse to a
farther hardening, and waxing confident in their folly, setting their hearts to
do evil, because his declared Sentence against them, is not speedily executed
upon them; v. 11. and Romans 2. 4, 5. God (...) them line, and opportunities of
manifesting the utmost of their wicked thoughts and intents, against him, and
so, do they ripen themselves for the Sicle of his just Vengeance; Rev. 14. 19,
20.

God will be abundantly cleared and justified in all his ways and dealings
toward them; his long patience with them, and then final severity upon them,
after all. No Men, without the Law, or in the Law (no Heathens, in the rational
light of Nature; no Jews or Christians, in the first-Covenant life of the Law)
will be found destitute of such conviction of the insufficiency of their
natural state, for Salvation, as will expose them to judgment, for their secret
enmity to God, (in staying there) by his infallible Gospel Spirit. Romans 2. 12,
-16. 'Twill then be undeniably evident, that neither from the fashion of being,
or changeable life, given them by a first-creation, nor from want of suitable
helps, for directing them toward eternal blessedness in the second, the
miscarriage of any, to their eternal ruin, has bin necessitated. Their evil
mind, growing worse and worse, under all, a Sentence of unchangeable Death
comes at length to be, most justly, executed upon them. Under all the favor of
a first-Covenant life, a-fresh restored in them, (and the life of the second,
in its own light, showed and offered them) in such a Land or State of
Uprightness, do they deal wickedly, in enmity to God and the second; Isa. 26.
10. Pharaoh, under all the wonders in Egypt, hardened himself more and more,
against the messages of God, presumptuously calling them vain (or lying) Words;
Exodus 5. 9. The Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and professing Jews, in the view of
all Christ's Miracles, grew more wilfully hardened against his Gospel-doctrin,
and murdered his Person. Thus did they, in a Land of Uprightness, the holy
Place, or first-covenant State of their enlightened, righteous natural Spirit.
Man's just demeaning himself therein, is an obedient submitting to God's doing
Judgment on it, out of love to his mercy, or unspeakable Gospel- gift of
eternal Life; Mic. 6. 8. By humbling himself, with Christ (Phil. 2. 8.) to the
Death of the former, comes Man to walk, for ever with God, as Enoch, (Genesis 5.
24.) in the latter. A surrender of all our own, in the first-creation, for
God's own, in the second, is a doing righteously in and with our Land or State
of Uprightness. This answers the very end, for which God restores unto Man (or
brings him, again, into) his first-creation (...) or Land of Uprightness. If
Man will not, then, honor God with his substance, (Prove. 3. 9.) by giving it
all up, in sacrifice to his Will, but rebelliously keep it up, in a known
enmity to him, his destruction is, undeniably of himself, as fully setting his
heart to do evil.

Ver. 12. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged;
yet surely, I know that it shall be well with them thatf ear God, which fear
before him.
In this and the next (...), Solomon positively asserts a twofold truth,
concerning the obedient Saint, and the incorrigible Sinner. The Saint, who
alone truly sears God, it shall be well with. And, as certain is it, it shall
not be well with the wicked, because he does not fear before (...). This fear
of God (that carries such great and certain good in it, to the Saint, and the
want whereof causes great, unchangeable misery to the incorrigible Sinner) can
import no less than an universal obedience to God, and compliance with every of
his (...). Such obedience is seen by God, in the incorruptible Seed of
spiritual life and true Holmess, before quickened into life or motion, in the
Saint. This holy Seed secretly disposes men to obey the Lord, according to
their various degrees of natural and legal light, as honest moral Heathens, or
first-covenant Believers. Cornelius an Heathen Captain, was owned as such a
fearer of God, with all his Family, under his conduct and example, ( Act. 10.
2, and 22.) and, as so, accepted with him, v. 35. This Fear consisted in a
faithfulness to his present light, against the workings of corrupt nature; and
a readiness to receive and obey a greater light, when offered, as by Peter's
Ministry. So, (...), before his Gospel-conversion, was faithful to his
Law-light (under that higher dispensation of God, then Cornelius was, before
his Gospel conversion) and forthwith obedient to Christ's Gospel Light, as soon
as shining upon him, and made God's new dispensation to him; Gal. 1. 16. Act.
9. 6. and 26. 19. Both Cornelius and Paul, walked according to their light, yet
not so resolutely confident or fixed under the conduct thereof, as not
immediately to quit it for a better Guide, the Light of Christ's Gospel Spirit.
Every one that thus fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with God,
all along, under his various dispensations to them, as seeing, at first, where
he shall find them, and they him, at last; even in unchangeable harmony of mind
with himself, and universal obedience to him, in all things. By following on,
to know the Lord, from light to light, dispensation to dispensation, come they,
at length, to a firm indissoluble Union with him. With such fearers of God,
Solomon declares, it shall be well. They are, all along, accepted with God, and
in the same certainty for true Blessedness, under the first and second, as when
under the third and last dispensation, actually estated in new creation
principles of everlasting Righteousness. In God's sight, and purpose, it is sure
to be well with them that so fear him, that fear before him. The doubling the
words, imports the certainty of both their truly fearing him, and its being
well with them, for ever, that are found to have the incorruptible Seed (1 Pet.
1. 23.) of true Holiness and everlasting Righteousness, in them; They fear
before him, or are seen by him, true fearers of him, when but under the light
of Nature, or of the Law; tho they have but obscure, uncertain thoughts of him
or themselves, as to his purposes toward them, or how it shall be with them,
for ever; or in what spirit and life they can be truly blessed. And so, come we
to the second thing, here, as positively declared by Solomon, in the Spirit of
Christ, concerning the incorrigibly wicked; that it shall, as certainly, be ill
with them, as well with the true fearers of God.

Verse. 13. But, it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God.
Though the wicked do evil a hundred times, and his days be prolonged in this
World, and that, in great outward or inward Prosperity and flourish, so that he
has more then heart can wish, while the true fearer of God is continually
plagued and chastned under the sharp discipline of the Cross, ( Psalm. 73. 1,
-24.) Yet, at winding up of all, it is certain, it shall be well, for ever, with
the obedient Saint; and ill, for ever, with the incorrigible Sinner. By wicked,
here, are not chiefly, nor properly, meant, such as are dead, in the corrupt,
but made alive, in some degree, in the enlightened state of Nature; and so,
brought actually under God's trial, how they will demean themselves, in following
on to know and obey him, till they do all, in his Gospel Spirit of Truth. Under
every dispensation, are they found in a directly contrary frame of Spirit, to
the true Saint and Fearer of the Lord. They fail, in the main point, a ready
quitting inferior dispensations, and all their light, life and seize
therein, for the third and last, a Gospel-state of everlasting Righteousness.
God requires the exchange of all restored natural Principles of Light, Life, or
Operation, for his spiritual, Gospel Principles. They are no true Fearers of
the Lord, from first to last, that finally refuse this change of Life, Food,
and Raiment. Hence, though they do evil a hundred times, in their enlight'ned
natural state, against the highest and greatest, spiritual, Gospel Light, and
are permitted (and gratified with) a long flourish in all worldly Prosperity,
it will be ill with them, at last, for ever. God's permitting all this,
signifies the utmost extent of his Patience, and their trial; after all which,
they will find themselves bound up in the bundle of Death, in and with the very
spirit of the Devil, in unchangeable enmity to God. This house or state of
everlasting mourning, will conclude their most prolonged day of Jollity and
Mirth, in their Wickedness. The said Sinner, being a hundred years old, shall
be accursed, for ever; Isa. 65. 20. Solomon, in a holy scorning contradiction
to what he had said of the Sinner's prolonging his days (ver. 12.) says, here,
he shall not prolong his days, which are as a shadow. This implies, that the
longest day such sinners against the Holy Ghost, or Gospel Spirit, are
permitted to live, on Earth, will appear but as a transient shadow, to the
endless day of their Misery and Sufferings, in Hell. Their permitted larger
time, and more abundantly multiplied Wickednesses, on Earth, will increase
their Torments, for ever, in Hell. Woe unto them: It shall be ill with them: for
the reward of their Hands shall be given them. Isa. 3. 11. But, with the
Righteous, it shall be well, for ever: for they shall eat the Fruit of their
doings, (ver. 10.) in all their obedience to, and fearing of God, under every
of his dispensations, to them. They have brought forth never-perishing fruits
unto God, in his newness of Life. The incorrigible Sinner shall eat the Fruit
of his rebellious doings, in his oldness of Letter, against God's newness of
Life, and be filled with his own devices, or many inventions. Prove. 1 31.
Eccles. 7. 29. Thus will it fare, for ever, with the Saint and Sinner,
according to the several ways they have walked in, and course they have
steered, in their own Spirit and Will, or God's. The Sinner shall go into
everlasting Punishment; and the Righteous, into Life Eternal; Mat. 25. 46. To
these vastly differing ends, do their as vastly differing ways lead. Though the
wicked, not only prolong his days on Earth; but, be in great Power, spreading
himself like a green Bay Tree, he will pass away, and never find himself, or be
found more, to his advantage and comfort; Psalm. 37. 35, 36. Hold out as long as
he can, in his mortal body; his end is to be out off, and destroyed for ever;
v. 38. But, the end of the spiritual, upright Man, is everlasting peace, with
God; v. 37. A brutish fool understands not this; that when the workers of
iniquity flourish; it is, that they shall be destroyed, for ever Psalm. 92. 6, 7.
In new creation Sanctuary-light, the Spiritual Saint understands and unriddles
all; 1 Cor. 2. 15. He sees the dreadful end of the wicked's utmost flourish,
and longest day of prosperity; and the blessed end of the Saints utmost
tribulations, in this world. Psalm. 73. 17, -20. Job 21. 7, -20.

Verse. 14. There is a Vanity which is done upon the Earth, that there be just
Men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the Wicked: again, there
be wicked Men, to whom it happens according to the work of the Righteous: I
said, that this also is Vanity.
This accords with Eccles. 9. 1. God's love or hatred to Men, cannot be known by
his outward dispensations to them, or dealings with them, in this World.
Who-e'r goes this way, to spell out, or judge of his Love or Hatred; Approbation
of them, or displeasure toward them, will miss their mark, and be dangerously
deceived. For, in the wise Methods of God, the truly righteous are daily
thundered upon, plagued and chast'ned; and the incorrigibly wicked gratified
with more then heart can wish; Psalm. 73. 3, -- 14. So, happens it to the just,
according to the work of the wicked; and, to the wicked, according to the work
of the Righteous. This puzzles and confounds the Saint, is a wonder and offense
to him, while he goes to work in the reasonings of his own Wisdom, to judge of
God's love or hatred, by outward dispensations. (...) too painful, or
difficult, yea, impossible for them, in that short-sighted Wisdom, to interpret
the Riddle. Psalm. 73. 16. Jer. 12. 1, 2. They lay down a safe preliminary
Truth, as their firm persuasion, that God is good to his true Israel, and
Righteous, though they plead with him, and expostulate the case, with
submission. For outward flourish in this World, see the case of Paul and Nero,
an eminent Apostle, and, a brutish Heathen Tyrant. Paul wrought with his hands,
to supply his own, and others Necessities; (Act. 20. 34.) Nero, a universal
Emperor. And, at, length also, Paul must pass under his Sword, out of the
World, as not fit to live in it. Are not here amazing Prodigies,
uninterpretable Riddles, to man's day, or judgment? Saints are therefore
cautioned, not to fret at, or envy workers of Iniquity; Psalm. 37. 1. Why not?
Why, because they shall soon be cut down like Grass, and (...) as the green
Herb; ver. 2. What though they always prosper in this World; and the truly
Righteous be under continual crosses, and disappointments? Mark the end of
both; ver. 35, -- 38. This difference of outward dispensations to Saints and
Sinners, is one of the Vanities Solomon saw done upon the Earth, that is very
hard to understand. And, in the mystical sense, are these Words, yet, more
true. The wicked here, is the cleans'd righteous natural Man, in a resto'rd
first-covenant life, fixed in unchangeable enmity to God and the second. To
these most criminal Sinners, happens it, in God's dealings with them, as if
they were his spiritual Favorites. They thrive in that righteous Life,
prosper, and flourish in the fruitfulness thereof, after their own hearts.
These mystical rich ones, reckon all their own, this world and next too. As to
this, they reckon it their right, when, able to take it, or any part of it, out
of the hands of Heathen Magistrates. As for the next, they say of Christ, and
his followers, come, lets kill them, and the inheritance (even the Kingdom of
Heaven) shall be ours; Mat. 21. 38. and, Luke 20. 14. These are the most
fastuous, presumptuous, insolent, high-flown, Luciferian sinners. They set
their mouth against the Heavens; mouth it, in blasphemous reproaches, and great
words, against all Spiritual Saints and Heavenly Truths; Psalm. 73. 7, -9. Dan.
7. 25. Rev. 13. 5, 6. They are possessed of the highest delights of the Sons of
men; and perfectly hate and despise the Sons of God and their peculiar
delights. Christ's never perishing Meats, and all words about them, are an
abomination to them. They trample them under their seet, in indignation; Ezekiel.
34. 18, 19. They push at (and speak as (...) and (...) as they can, in their
oppressive practices, against) the poor and needy Sheep of Christ, run down by
the Cross, as to all, they flourish in; v. 20, 22. and 1 Cor. 4. 10. 13. God's
afflicting Saints, and crossing them, is a dealing with them as Sons, he is
preparing for the Glory that excells; while Bastards are fatting under his
seeming favors and blessings, for destruction; Heb. 12. 5, -8. Romans 8. 18. 2
Cor. 3. 10. 'Because Sentence against their evil doing, is not speedily
executed (but in stead thereof, such things as they desire, are accumulated)
upon them, they conclude themselves to be truly blessed, as the only Righteous,
under God's final approbation and acceptance; Psalm. 49. 18, 19. On the
contrary, as to the righteous natural state of their own Spirits, Saints do
seem, with Job, and Christ himself, to be abandoned and forsaken of God; Mat.
27. 46. In their impoverished spirits, are. they rendered spectacles of scorn
and wonder, to the whole world of (fixed) natural Angels and Men; 1 Cor. 4. 9.
Thus, all natural beholders (and their own natural man) judge of them. But, God
has quite other thoughts of them, which all these natural Judges are ignorant
of. He esteems one broken-spirited Saint, beyond millions of his fat,
flourishing, natural enemies; Isa. 66. 1, 2. He forsakes them, in a life, they
can never please him, in; that with everlasting Mercy he may have compassion on
them (Isa. 54. 7, 8.) and show them the highest favor, in the gift of a life,
they can never displease him, in. This was evident, in the result of all Job's
trials, and sufferings; by which, brought to be an object of God's everlasting
delight.

Verse. 15. Then I commended Mirth, because a man has no better thing under the
Sun, then to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for, that shall abide with him
of his labor, the days of his life, which God gives him under the Sun.
In the literal sense, here is an account of the greatest blessing, relating to
outward things; viz. a contented mind in every providential Dispensation of
God, to a man. He eats, drinks, and is merry, free from carking sollicitudes
about to morrow, in a quiet dependence on God's Provision; Mat. 6. 25, etc.
And, this sets up any Man in an equality with those that have the greatest
abundance of this worlds outward Goods, in case they also be found in a like
dependence on, and quiet resignation to God's providential Provisions; else,
abundantly above them. Such a contented mind, resigned to God, in a mean
outward condition, is beyond the greatest Possessions, without it.

But, in the mystical sense, a much deeper Truth is here signified. The Mirth,
Solomon commends, in eating and drinking (then which there is no better thing
can fall to Man's lot under the Sun) relates to the peculiar delights of the
Sons of God, things eternal, things of God. Neither the sensual (...), nor the
mystical rich first-Covenant Professor, will have any cause to triumph, when
they hear the true Interpretation of these Words. For, it is an eating and
drinking at Christ's heavenly Table, ( a feeding on his never-perishing Meats,
his Divine and Creature-Glories, suited to the Belly or Desire, Appetite, and
Palate of the true Saint's spiritual, never-perishing Life) that is here chiesly
meant. And so, the Mirth in such eating and drinking, amounts to the (...)
(...) and glorious. Such eating, and drinking, and being merry, is the best
thing any Man can find, under the Sun. All other Joy, but in the Lord, is
delusive, sinful, and destructive. There Is no right using this World's
Vanities, but as not abusing them; (1 Cor. 7. 31.) no (...) the (...), or
taking in the usual Nourishments of (...) (...), with gladness and singleness
of heart, but as rightly praising and (...) in the Lord (Act. 2. 46, 47) or
doing all to the glory of God; 1 Cor. 10. 31. Where spiritual Life is the
Principle, in which Man does all, he rejoices in a (...) with the very Divine
Mind, and obedience to the Divine Will, in all things. t. For that shall abide
with him, etc. His labor in the Lord, or in his Spirit, shall not be in vain;
1 Cor. 15. 58. All Fruits, brought forth therein, shall abide with him, and
speak for his everlasting acceptance with God; Rev. 14. 13.

Verse. 16. When I applied mine Heart to know Wisdom, and to see the business,
that is done upon the Earth: (for also there is that neither Day nor Night
sees sleep with his Eyes.)
Solomon (from the said Vanity done upon Earth, (verse. 14.) or in the earthy
state of Saints and Sinners, under the differing Dispensations of God, to them)
proceeds to consider, thence, the business done upon the Earth. In spiritual
Wisdom, he clearly sees what is in Man, ( John 2. v. 25. and 1 Cor. 2. 15.)
even the whole Life, Desire, Thought, and Work of Humane Nature; the business
it is doing, in the (...), first-creation make and state thereof, (all Man's
tormoil, in (...) Vain Show, or shadowy Life, in the Image of the earthy) which
he seems to inform us of, in the following Parenthesis, ( for also there is,
that neither Day nor Night sees sleep with his Eyes.) Here Is a character of
Man's earthy nature, and unprofitable Labors, therein. Man is in an
embondaging continual solicitude, to keep what he knows will be gone, when
all is done. Yet, places he his hopes of Blessedness, in such a state. No Joy,
Peace, or Mirth can he have, but what is merely delusive, and destructive,
unless extinguished by the Cross, and so, the Man delivered. He never sees
Sleep with his eyes; never has any true rest, or peace. His spirit has an
indeleble bottom-thought and sense of the immortality of its being, and
mortality of its best natural life, and all its fruits or possessions, therein;
which will therefore be gone, and leave his naked being, in the lurch,
exquisitly sensible under the wrath to come, for refusing the Grace offered,
while it was called, to day; Heb. 3. 7, 8. So, find's he himself, under an
impossibility of finding true rest, therein, or scaping unexpressible torment
and vexation of spirit, for ever; be, or do what he can, in that state. True
sleep, or the Saints everlasting rest, can never be found or had in a fading
life of vanity, and enmity to God, and that very Spirit of Grace, in which
alone it is to be found. True rest, can man find, only in that newness of life,
that qualifies to see and enjoy the very Divine Glory of God, for ever. Without
this, neither day nor night (in the enlightened, righteous; nor dark, corrupt
state of nature; or, neither in his day, upon earth, or night of everlasting
darkness in Hell) can or will he find rest, or see sleep. Solomon, in the
infallible Spirit of truth, saw and declared where true rest is to be found;
and where, not. Hence, turns he from that natural state of vanity, wherein Man
is laboring for, and seeking what he can never attain or find; and applies his
heart wholly to that spiritual life and true wisdom, wherein he is sure to find
this desirable thing, a state of sleep or true rest and satisfaction to the
intellectual eye and utmost desires of his Immortal spirit; Psalm. 37. 4.

Verse. 17. Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the
work that is done under the Sun: because, though a man labor to seek it out;
yea, further, though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to
find it.
Man, neither in the dark, corrupt; nor most wise, enlightened state of nature,
can find out the work of God, done under the Sun; or, the end and design of
God, in all the first-creation works of his hands. It Is Man's wilful error, to
think, by the utmost labor of his natural mind, to understand God's Divine and
spiritual creature mind, herein. He labors under an utter impossibility of
finding what he seeks. Solomon would lead his fellow-Mortals, into that
infallible and immortal Gospel-state, where they may find and understand all,
(1 Cor 2. 15.) even the deep divine and spiritual things of God, the whole
Counsel of God, the Methods and Contrivances of his infinite Wisdom, about his
Creature's true Happiness. They that will not rest from the unprofitable Works
of their own Spirit, under the Law and Work of the Cross, will never find rest
in God's; and, will for ever, lose all the fading good and comfort they have,
for a season, found and enjoyed in their own. No Man (or Angel) finally
refusing and turning from God's offered spiritual Light, can, ever, in their
single natural Wisdom, at best, find out the finishing work of God; or end, by
him, put to the first-Creation State, in, by, and for a second. Whoever will
not surrender and lose their own Wisdom, in the first, for God's in the second,
though they think to know and find all, out, can never do it; nor find true
Rest. If Man prefer himself to his Creator; his Life, Wisdom, Righteousness,
to God's; he will never find out all the work of God, by a first and second
Creation; but, grossly mistake and abuse the first, and himself therein; and
never come within sight of the second, do what he can. Pretend he does, to the
interpreting the words of God's Wisdom; but, what work is he like to make on it?
All things spiritual, heavenly, and eternal, lie clear out of his reach. He is
brutishly absurd, unreasonable, and untreatable, about such most concerning
things; Jer. 10. 14. 2 These. 3. 2. And, what other Wisdom, but Man's, in the
more refined sort of Teachers, has bin the Undertaker, at interpreting the
Words of God's, with any sort of public reception, owning, and approbation,
for many hundred years?

CHAP. IX.
V. 1. For all this I considered in my Heart, ( Heb. gave or set my Heart) even
to declare all this; that the Righteous, and the Wise, and their works are in
the hand of God: no Man knows either Love, or Hatred, by all that is before
them.
SOlomon considered, or set his Heart, in the spiritual Wisdom of God, wherein
a true Preacher and Seer of God, to declare his whole Mind and Counsel, about
Men. He saw the privileges of the truly Wise and Righteous; that their
Persons, Ways, and Works are in the hand of God, with whom they find Praise,
Commendation, and a blessed Reward; let Men despise them, and say, or do what
they will or can, against them. Then he declares, concerning them and all other
Men, that, no Man knows either Love, or Hatred, by all that is before him. But,
who are the Wise and Righteous, here? And, what is meant by their Works being in
the hand of God? To the 1st. To Spiritual Saints, only, does this character
belong. For, they only have that Spirit, that is everlastingly righteous, and
infallibly wise. To the 2d. Their Persons and Works in that Spirit, are after a
peculiar manner, in the hand of God, or under his peculiar regard, care, and
approbation, as obedient to him, in all things. Yet, by any outward
dispensations, his Love to them, or Hatred to his and their implacable Enemies,
cannot be known. For, the natural Man or State is gratified, in Enemies, with
more then heart can wish; and, in Saints or Friends, under continual
Chastisements, Crosses, and Disappointments. In this cryptick Method, or
mysterious Course of God's dealing with Friends, as Foes; and Foes, as Friends
(in all discernable appearances to Man's Wisdom) will Man judge enemies the only
Favorites of God; and Friends, rejected cast-aways, hated by him for ever, as
Job's enlightened Friends did seem to reckon him, when under the Cross; Job. 4.
7, -9. Psalm. 73. 7, -14. Heb. 12. 6, -8. Solomon, in the Wisdom of God, and
true Spirit of Prophecy, farther declares.

Verse. 2. All things come alike to all; there is one Event to the righteous and
to the wicked; to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner;
and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath.
In God's dispensations to the outward Man of Saints and Sinners, all things
come alike to all, righteous and wicked, good and bad, clean and unclean. So,
God's Love or Hatred cannot thereby be known. God causes his Sun to shine, and
Rain to fall, on the evil and good, just and unjust; Mat. 5. 45. From the
afflicting or gratifying dispensations of God, to the whole natural Man, is the
Wisdom of Man apt to take the measures of God's Anger or Love. God affords
invisible as well as visible good things of this World, to the inner, as well
as outer natural Man, the Spirit as well as Body, of the rebellious, as also,
of those who will prove obedient Saints. This, as one fruit of Christ's
Redemption-work; Psalm. 68. 18. As to a first-covenant Benefit' of Christ's
death ( the common or general Salvation, all Men are capable of) may they be
made wise, strong, and honorable in Christ; yea, by new or second-Covenant
Light, also, showed, offered ( and brought to taste and see how good and
gracious the Lord is, in) his new-Covenant-life; and after all, irrecoverably
apostatize, and perish for ever; 1 Cor. 4. 10. Heb. 6. 4, -6. If man finally
keep up his restored first-creation changeable righteous Life, in enmity to God
and his second, he perishes for ever. If he prefer the Knowledge of Christ after
the flesh, in the restored righteous Life of the Law (or conformity to him, as
born of a Woman, under the Law) to Christ after the Spirit, or in his spiritual
resurrection-Life; he perishes for ever. In this evil, self-chosen life and
way, does God, in Judgment gratify Men, with invisible fading or natural good
things, beyond all they can wish; Psalm. 73. 7. The literal wicked, in the
corrupt; and mystically wicked, in the resin'd spirit of Nature, may be
gratified with all worldly desirables outward or inward, to their bodies or
spirits; and perish for ever, after all, under the Wrath to come. All this,
Solomon understood, and declared. The natural Understanding, even in the
spiritual Saint, cannot reach these mysteries of Providence, in the promiscuous
dispensations of God, to good and bad, as to all worldly desirables, visible or
invisible. Psalm. 73. The truly righteous, good and clean, (...) his natural
Life to God, as fearing an Oath, or the swearing an everlasting Covenant with
the Devil, in the first-creation state, against God and the second. So comes
his heart, in a newness of life, to be set in him to do good, in God's sight,
for ever. He that swears that Covenant with the Devil, is fully set to do Evil,
for ever; Eccl. 8. 11. However undiscerned the Saint's condition be, to his
Enemies, under the love of God, in this life; God will, at last, manifest the
difference between them that serve him, and those that serve him not, but swear
everlasting Allegiance to the Devil, ( Mal. 3. 18.) whose Servants they are;
Romans 6. 16.

Verse. 3. This is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun' that
there is one Event unto all: yea, also the heart of the Sons of Men is full of
evil, and madness is in their Heart while they live, and after that they go to
the dead.
The death of Nature, as to the mortal life of Body and Soul, is the one Event
to all Men. This fatal Period comes nature to, in the wise and fool, righteous
and wicked. The spiritual wise Man only, is an unspeakeable gainer, by all such
losses, as befalls his nature, with his fellows. Out of the darkness and death,
brought on his natural state, is he raised into the spiritual light and life of
God. The same darkness and death, brought upon others, in Wrath, for refusing
it, in Love, becomes their dreadful condition and portion, for ever, under
Wrath. This exceedingly differing Event of the said same event, the Death of
nature, in all Men, is not considered or discerned by Man's Wisdom. Hence,
Solomon says, how dies the wise Man? As the Fool; there is no remembrance of the
one, more then of the other, for ever, (Eccles. 2. 16.) in Man's day, or
Judgment. The differing event of the Cross, in Love or Wrath, turning all
first-creation Wisdom, Light, and Life, into foolishness, darkness, and death,
Man's Wisdom sees not. All wisdom, beauty or desirableness in nature, will
perish, and be forgotten, in all Men, for ever. On this account, as to any
thing in nature, the truly wise dies as the Fool. For, both, by death lose all
the changeable Life and fading Glory of their own nature. But, the said wise,
(...) obedient surrender of all, receive a more excellent Life and Glory, for
ever; and those that rebelliously keep it, lose all for ever, under Wrath, in
everlasting darkness. So, though the same Event happen to all, as to the death
of nature; the event of that event, is exceedingly different, eternal life or
death. Those that do not obediently part with their own first-creation Life and
Wisdom, for God's in the second, seem charact'red here, by a heart full of
evil, and madness, while they live, and after that they go to the dead. Yea,
they are dead while they live, as (...) in enmity to God, which must needs be
eternal death to them. The best Works of righteous Nature, fixed in enmity (to
the Righteousness of God, in his Spirit of Grace) are but dead Works, performed
in a spirit of Enmity and Death. True Repentance from dead Works (Heb. 6. 1.)
imports Law-Conversion, from nature dead in Trespasses and Sins (Ephesians. 2. 1.) to
the righteous life of a Man. But, this second death of righteous nature, by a
fixure in enmity, is worse then the former, and exposes to the second death, as
the due punishment thereof, the vengeance of eternal fire; Rev. 20. 14. This is
the latter end, worse then any beginning, which many self-confident,
first-covenant righteous, wise, strong, and honorable in Christ, come to, for
refusing to part with all that, for Christ, in the spirit of the second, as
risen out of the death of the first; Romans 7. 1, -4. These Sons of Men, whose
heart is full of evil and madness, in this World, while they live, go, after
this life, to the dead; remain for ever in the Congregation of the dead, (Prove.
21. 16.) in eternal darkness, and never see Light. This come they to, with
their Predecessors in the same obstinate madness and folly, whose false
doctrine or sayings they have praised, owned, and followed, against God and his
Spirit of Truth. Psalm. 49. 13, 19.

Verse. 4. For, to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope: for, a
living Dog is better then a dead Lion.
The living Dog, that being joined to all the living, has hope, is the natural
man of the spiritual Saint, under the Cross, rendered a fool, weak, and
despicable, as to all first-creation Wisdom, Power, and Glory, with Paul (1
Cor. 4. 10.) but is in an unchangeable union with all living, for ever, in the
Spirit of Grace; and so, rich, wise, strong, and honorable in God. Though the
Saint, then, in his broken, impoverished natural man (the barren, disconsolate
state of his desolate crucified (...)) be counted a Dog, the filth of the
world, the offscouring of all things (by the Rich, Full, Wise, Strong, and
Honorable in Christ; (1 Cor. 4. 8, 10, 13.) as to first-covenant seize,
in and from him) through a new and better life, springing up, in him, however hid
from them, is he in a better condition then the dead Lion. Who is this? Man, in
all the riches, wisdom, and glory of a restored first-Covenant life, figured by
Dives; as the crucified Saint's natural man, by Lazarus. All this Lion-like
strength and power of nature, fixed in enmity, renders Man, but a dead Lion.
Fixed enmity to God, is everlasting death to Man. This, will all Lions, in the
boistrous, blustering spirit, and unbroken strength of nature, find to be their
condition, as highly as they think of themselves. Nothing of true spiritual,
everlasting life or strength, have they, about them. This dead Lion, scorns the
living Dog, as not seeing him in another spirit, joined to all the truly
living; Christ, and all spiritual Saints, and Angels. The natural Man, as a
fleshly mystical Tree, in the fruitful exercise of a restored first-Covenant
righteous life, when cut down, (spoil d and marred by the spiritual-Sword or
Gospel-Cross, Tree and Fruit, Leaf, Root and Branch) yet is there hope, through
the scent of water, even of Christ's Spiritual Water of Life, that it will
sprout up again, in another life; bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant (Job
14. 7, 8.) of God's right hand planting, by a new creation, the fruits and
leaves whereof shall never wither or fade; Psalm. 1. 3. And so, is the living
Dog (living with Christ, in God) better in himself, and therefore in God's
infallible sight, then the said dead Lion, ruffling in all the unbroken life
and power of that restored natural state, that is crucified in the true Saint.
Such Lions have but a name to live. They are dead; Rev. 3. 1. as being the very
mystical Law-Widows, left by Christ, in the first-Covenant, and waxing wanton
against him, in the second; choosing rather to be married again in the first, to
that other Man (1 Timothy 5. 6, 11, 12. Romans 7. 3.) the Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition, the Devil. This brings Damnation, or unchangeable Death, upon them.

Ver. 5. For the Living know that they shall die; but the Dead know not any
thing; neither have they any more a reward; for, the memory of them is
forgotten.
Living spiritual Saints know, their whole natural Man must die, in conformity
to Christ, and the Will of God. But, the said dead Lion knows nothing; has no
right knowledge of the mind of God, in obedience to his Will, as to the
appointed Death-pass, out of his crucified nature, into God's Spirit of Grace.
He sees not, or knows this spiritual life, in which risen Angels and Saints are
everlastingly blessed. The dead Lion, in all his flourish, being in a state of
unchangeable Death, will have no more any reward, to his comfort; only the meet
recompense of his error, madness and folly, eternal darkness and death, under
which, his memory will, for ever, be forgotten. He knows nothing that is truly
good, or desirable, unchangeably, good; and, he shall have nothing that is
changably or unchangeably good or desirable, but, only unchangeable evil, for
his everlasting portion. Through the impassable Gulf, (...) between them, and
blessed Angels and Saints, will such see those they unchangeably hate, to be
the objects of God's unchangeable Love; and themselves, of his unchangable
Wrath. They Will know nothing, but what will aggravate their boundless misery, and
unexpressible torment, for ever. On the contrary, the truly living know every
thing, (1 Cor. 2. 15.) to the increase of their unspeakable Joy. They know,
that by the obedient death of nature, they shall live, for ever, in God's
spirit of Grace; as the method of God's Wisdom, whose whole Counsel, about
Salvation, they fully comply with. They glory, with Paul, in the Cross of
Christ, by which all worldly life and desire in them, is crucified to all
worldly vanities, or desirables, without them; Gal. 6. 14. And so, are they
made alive to the World to come, and have a new spiritual belly, desire or
appetite, and palate, springing up in their newness of life, to savor, relish,
desire and feed on things divine, spiritual, heavenly, and eternal; things of
God, only; the peculiar delights of the Sons of God. The said dead know none of
these things, in their dead state of unchangeable Union with the Prince of
death, the Devil, wherein they are cast out of God's favorable Remembrance, or
regard, for ever, into outer darkness, where will be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth.

Verse. 6. Also their Love, and their Hatred, and their Envy is now perished;
neither have they any more a Portion for ever, in any thing that is done under
the Sun.
Here Is a lively description of the deplorable state of the mystical dead,
whose Love, Hatred, and Envy perish. All delight and satisfaction in the
restored fading life and good things of their own nature, evilly chosen and
rested in, by them, for happiness, shall perish. Belly and meats, desires and
desirables, all will be gone. And then, the Wrath of God will be upon them, for
ever. All the goodly dainties they lusted after, will depart from them, and
never be found, more; Rev. 18. 8, 14. For choosing their perishing things of
Man, not only in a preference, but, unchangeable enmity to the things of God,
in his New Creation Life, fall they under his unchangeable Wrath. So, all their
false, evil, destructive Love (of any the best things in this World, the
Righteousness, Wisdom and Glory of their own restored nature, with the Fruits
or Works thereof, in enmity to God and his spiritual, heavenly, eternal life
and things) with all the things by them loved, perish, for ever; nor have they
any more a Portion in any thing under the Sun; any fading good thing, done or
found, in the whole first-creation World of vanities. And, as their Love, their
Hatred and Envy shall also perish. All their Envy and Hatred (expressed by
them, in all ways imaginable, against God, and his everlasting creature-life,
the object of his divine Love and Delight, in Christ, blessed Angels and
Saints) shall perish. It remains in them, for ever, for the increase of their
Torment, under Wrath: but, they will be deprived of all power of expressing it,
for ever. The life and things of their own nature, which they have chosen to be
the object of their fixed Love, in preference to God's, render them the objects
of God's final Wrath.

Verse. 7. Go thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry
Heart; for, God now accepts thy Works.
To the Saint, as passing through the House of mourning and death to his spirit
of nature, under the Cross, into the life of God's spirit of Grace, wherein
joined to all truly living, is this message of Life and Peace, sent from God.
Eat thy Bread with joy, etc. Bread and Wine here, are the hidden Manna and Wine
of the Kingdom, in Christ's Person, even his divine and creatures-Glories, his
never-perishing meats, Saints are to feed on, in their spiritual, when their
natural Man or Spirit, under the sharp discipline and death-work of the Cross,
is reduced to the utmost straits, eating no pleasant Food, or finding any more
delight in the forbidden perishing first-creation life, works, or fruits, and
meats thereof. Their spiritual, hidden Man, feeds on what is incorruptible,
which renders them more beautiful in God's sight, with Daniel and the three
Children, then any that feed on the choicest perishing Dainties of the mystical
evil King's Table. They feed on the never-perishing meats, at their heavenly
King's Table, which nourish them up in his communicated never-perishing Life.
So, do they eat and drink, with a merry heart; Joy unspeakable and glorious in
the Holy Ghost. The reason. For God now accepts thy Works. This shows, in
what Spirit, and on what Bread they feed, and what Wine they drink, with such a
merry Heart. All Is done, in a spirit, a newness of life, all the Works or
Fruits whereof, are accepted of God. Their feeding on Christ's heavenly meats,
renders them abundantly more glad, then the utmost fruits and increase of Corn
and Wine (figures of the choicest mystical, first-creation diet) can render the
natural feeders on them. Ps. 4. 7. True Saints dwell between Christ's
Shoulders, in absolute safety (Deuteronomy. 33. 12.) Peace and Comfort, above all
Enemies reach; all evil, or danger. They have a Joy, no Stranger or Enemy can
intermeddle with, or interrupt; Prove. 14. 10. It Is a Joy, a Peace, the World
cannot give, nor take from them. Joh. 16. 22, 33.

Verse. 8. Let thy Garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.
Saints, waiting for Christ's clear manifesting or revealing himself in his
Divine and Spritual Glories, as object of their Faith and Hope, are here called
on, to keep their Garments white and clean, from all filth of flesh and spirit;
(2 Cor. 7. 1.) that they may be fit to meet Christ at his coming, as grown up
into a compleatness and full purity of spiritual life, in him; purified, as he
is pure, (1 John 3. 3.) in all holy Conversation and Godliness (...) 2 Pet. 3.
11, 12. and 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. And, let thy head lack no ointment. Let thy
Spiritual Man, that is head to thy natural, be found in such a diligent
performing its ruling authority over the natural, and keeping thy whole person
in obedience to Christ, as not to provoke him to withdraw, but more abundantly
pour forth his holy anointing upon thee, the most precious ointment of his
new creature spirit. 1 John 2. 20, 27.

Verse. 9. Live joyfully with the Wife whom thou love, all the days of the
life of thy Vanity, which he has given thee under the Sun, all the days thy
Vanity: for, that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou
take under the Sun.
Solomon continues his advice to the spiritual man of the Saint, as Husband,
Head and Guide to his natural. By reducing it to (and keeping it in) a
universal obedience to Christ (the Lord, Husband and Head to the whole Man) can
he live joyfully in a loving union of mind with it. David, Paul, and other
Saints have found the natural spirit (in its untransform'd, unsubjected,
uncrucified state, life, will and way) a prison, an enemy, a perpetual
disturber of the spiritual mind of Christ in them, through a universal
contrary-mindedness thereto; Psalm. 120. 5, -- 7. Romans 7. 18, -- 23. Sarah's
obedience to Abraham, calling him Lord, types out this twofold Truth; the
obedience of the whole Church to Christ, and of the natural to the spiritual
Man in every Saint. The natural, when by way of death and resurrection, brought
into Union of mind with the spiritual (and so, the whole person of the Saint,
with Christ) then, as Heirs together of the Grace of life, their Prayers will not
be hindered (1 Pet. 3. 6, 7.) as they must needs be, while the natural mind is
contrary (instead of being subject) to the spiritual, in every thing. Hence
arise all discords, inconsistencies, and confusions, found in Saints, most of
the days of the life of their Vanity, under the Sun. The nearer their natural
is brought into a conformity with Christ, in his death and resurrection (Phil.
3. 10.) the more pleasing grows their life and service to God, and the more
comfortable to themselves. (...) with the Wife of thy Youth; Prove. 5. 18. This,
in mystery, cannot be, but so far as the said mystical Wife, in the Saint, is,
by suffering, taught obedience (Heb. 5. 8.) to the spiritual. 'The natural
Spirit, corrupt or righteous, in its own earthy Life, Will, and Way, is a like
prison to the spiritual mind or man, in the Saint; as the fleshly body to his
natural spirit. So his whole natural Man, in the uncrucified spirit of it, is
an uneasy, irksome habitation to his spiritual; directly contrary to the mind,
and interest thereof, in every thing, desire, and thought.

Verse. 10. Whatsoever thine Hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for,
there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave whither
thou go.
Solomon advises not man, here, to do his own will, that is found in enmity to
God, in both the corrupt and righteous Life thereof; but, as by death and
resurrection, brought into that newness of Life, in which, as a (...)
yoke fellow to his spiritual, to be serviceable to his Generation ( Act. 13.
36.) as to their eternal concerns, by using all ways and means, for laying
before them the whole Counsel of God, about their Salvation; and discovering
the whole counsel, devices, and practices of Men and Devils, in opposition
thereunto.

Verse. 11. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the
swift, nor the Battle to the strong; neither yet Bread to the wise, nor yet
Riches to Men of understanding; nor yet favor to Men of skill; but, time and
chance happens to them all.
God reserves to himself the Prerogative of giving success, or disappointment,
as to outward things and events, where, when, and to whom he pleases, as the
supreme and (...) cause, overruling all second. By time and chance, happening
to all, is meant, such events as Providence often gives, in a direct contrariety
and disappointment to Man's thoughts and expectations, from second causes. In
mystery, here is signified, that Man, in the utmost Power, Skill or Wisdom of
his restored natural state, cannot win the Race, or Battle; cannot get true
Riches, Food, or Clothing. He cannot so run and fight, in his corruptible,
natural, mortal Life and State, as to vanquish all Enemies, and obtain the
incorruptible Crown. Neither is the favor of God, or his unchangeable love, to
Men or Angels, in the highest Skill and Wisdom of that state. The death and
loss of all, there, is undispensably necessary to the finding a Life, Spirit,
Wisdom, Strength and Power, to do, gain, and win all things; more then conquer
World and Devil, be universally obedient and pleasing to God, in every thing;
and wear the incorruptible Crown. They that run and fight in but their own
renewed naturals, are uncertain, unsteddy runners and fighters; run at an
all-adventures, and, (if they confidently fix there) in a direct contrariety to
the Command and Will of God; Levit. 26. 21. Such Runners are certain of
nothing, but missing the great Prize. So, will prove cast-aways, as Paul had,
if he had not brought under his body, or that holy natural state, wherein he
was fighting against God's holy Gospel Spirit and Life; 1 Cor. 9. 24, -- 27.
Solomon, with Paul, returning from the Light and Wisdom of his own Spirit, to
Christ's, declares, the Crown of Life, durable Riches, Food and Clothing,
victory over all Enemies, and the peculiar favor of God, for ever, not
attainable under the Sun, or in the power, and under the conduct of the natural
spirit, in the most heightened, sublime Wisdom and Skill thereof. Time and (...)
happens to all, that strive in that spirit, for the said great things. All the
fading good and comfort, therein, will pass away; and so, will they find
uncertainty and chance, to have bin inseparable from the nature thereof, as
they had bin abundantly warned in their mortal day, on Earth.

Verse. 12. For, Man also knows not his time: as the Fishes that are taken in
an evil net, and as the Birds that are caught in a snare; so are the Sons of
Men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.
Here are the sad and certain consequents of Man's standing, running, or
fighting, in unsteady, wavering first-Covenant Principles. The Sons of Men, at
best, in that life and state, are but like Fishes and Birds, sure to be caught
in Satan's evil nets and snares, Eccles. 7. 26. And God, in his just Wrath,
will spread his net upon them, as on King Zedekiah; Ezekiel. 12. 13. and 17. 20.
They choose that very life and state, for their Portion, that is the very snare,
through their fond, wilful dotage upon, and overvalue of it, in and by which
Satan catches them, at his will, and leads them into the same everlasting
destruction, with himself. True Saints, by Gospel-labours, endeavor to waken
Men out of this dreamish life, and vain-shew, in and by which, Satan is drawing
them into eternal Death, as (...) willing Captives, and obedient Servants; and
so strongly deluding them, as to make them verily believe they are making safe
steps toward eternal Life, in the very way of Salvation. Saints labor to waken
them out of this mistaking Dream; that is the very snare, the Devil catches and
holds them in, as therein taken alive by him; 2 Timothy 2. 24, -26. Man know's not
the time, God will deliver him up to Satan, for ever, yea send him strong
delusion, for being so wilfully deluded by the Devil, and believing his lie,
rather, then God's Truth, that he may be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. Under
Satan's spirit of unchangeable darkness, is Man kept ignorant of these dreadful
consequents of his evil choice, till there is no remedy, (2 Chro. 36. 16.) till
all the threatened evils, come upon him, suddenly, in an (...) time, that he is
no more aware of, then Birds and Fishes of the evil net and snare, they are
caught in, and made a Prey of. The final Wrath of God will be upon them, and
the state by them chosen, from which, no escape for ever. They shall not know
how it comes, what it is, till upon them; nor ever be able to put it off; Isa.
47. 11.

Verse. 13. This Wisdom have I seen also under the Sun, and it seemed great unto
me.
Verse. 14. There was a little City, and few Men within it: and there came a
great King against it, and besieged it, and built great Bulwarks against it.
Verse. 15. Now, there was found in it a poor wise Man; and he, by his Wisdom,
delivered the City; yet, no Man remembered that same poor Man.
Christ is the poor wise Man, in a spirit that is in personal Union with his
divine. His little City are his little (...) of true Saints, delivered, by his
Wisdom, from the great King, the Devil, that comes with all his power, to
besiege and build great Bulwarks against them. He frustrates all the designs,
polices and practices of evil Angels and Men, against them. All this, by taking
our nature, and impoverishing it, even to a total abolition of all that Wisdom,
Glory, Power, and Excellency, in which the great evil King and his Forces come
against the little City, he undertakes the defense of, against them all. By the
death of that nature, in himself and little City, or flock (which the Enemy can
touch, deceive, and destroy Men, by, as the very snare they are caught in) and
raising himself and them, into a life, above their reach and power, does he
deliver them. All his true Soldiers must follow this great Captain's suffering
steps, for this conquest; Heb. 2. 10, 14. A being made fools weak and (...), as
to all worldly, first-Covenant life, strength, and wisdom; yea, as nothing, or
nobody, things that are not; this is the only way to overcome all these wise,
strong and honorable, therein, the strong Bulls of Bashan, (Psalm 22. 12.) all
enemies whatsoever; 1 Cor. 1. 25, 28. When Saints, by obedience to the Cross on
their nature, are so totally impoverished, and run down, as to become
spectacles of scorn, to the whole world, all evil Angels and Men, (1 Cor. 4.
9.) fixed in their own worldly natural state, even then and thereby, are they
fitted, to trample them all under their feet, in a life, wisdom, and power,
they dream not of; the Power of God. This is the strange method of God's
Wisdom, for his despised little ones to be found more than Conquerers of all
their proud, self-exalting despisers and enemies. The abolishing the worldly
life of Nature out of Christ and his Army, is the way to their being all found
in that life and power of the World to come, in which they overcome all that
obstinatly set up in this. This way, the Man Christ triumphed over all evil
angelical, and humane Principalities and Powers, the Princes of this World;
Col. 2. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 6. All Men, that finally take up in the
first-creation, are Satan's Subjects: all that pass out of that, by death, into
the life of the second, are God's. The poor wise Man, that does all these
wonderful things, for his little City, has infinite divine and infallible
creature-wisdom and power, in him. And, what can all the visible and invisible
Powers of this World, with all their Strength, Devices and Bulwarks, be, before
him? He was made a poor Man, by the death of our nature, that he might make
many rich in his spirit of Grace, on the like obedient death of nature in them.
2 Cor. 6. 10. and 8. 9. Phil. 2. 6, -- 8. Yet, no Man remembers this poor wise
Man. No man, in his own Wisdom, receives his Gospel-Testimony, (Joh. 3. 32.)
takes his Counsel, follows his Example. Under the sinking weight of this
charge, will evil Men and Angels lie, for ever. They Will not remember, hearken
to, or follow this poor Man, under his Cross, into the like poverty and death
of nature in them, the only way into his everlasting Rest.

Verse. 16. Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless, the poor
Man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
The everlasting Wisdom of God's New Creation, Gospel Spirit, is better then
all the fading strength, wisdom and power of Man and Angel, in the first, or
old. But the voice and words of this Wisdom, from the impoverished natural man,
in Christ and his followers, is not heard, heeded, or regarded, by those that
resolve to set up in that state of Nature, for happiness, which they preach
death to, as the only (...) way and means, for their being truly happy. All
such reproofs of death on the spirit of Nature; and instructions of life, in
God's Spirit of Grace, are despised and rejected, by the wisdom of Man, in
first-Covenant Righteousness. Even such are found, all along this world, a
disobedient, gainsaying People; Isa. 65. 2. Romans 10. 21. See the dismal and
blessed consequents of not harkening, or harkening to this poor wise Man's
Counsels, reproofs and instructions; Prove. 1. 20, -33. Somethere are, amongst
the vast multitude of self-confident righteous men, and also profane, who, at
last, are brought to regard this poor wise man's voice; and his, only; the
voice of his Spirit, in himself and Saints. (...), still, God has, a little
flock, that are content to be made his little ones in Nature, that he may make
them his great ones and worthies, too big and too many for all his and their
enemies, in his Wisdom and Spirit of Grace. All do not finally provoke him.
Heb. 3. 16. Romans 11. 1, -5. Christ then and his followers are not without all
hearing, from Men. For,

Verse. 17. The words of wise Men are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him
that rules among fools.
The words of Christ and his awakened Spiritual Saints, the words of God's
Wisdom, which the Holy Ghost teaches, and utters in both, and all, will be
heard or obeyed by a spiritual Seed of Christ, in meek, broken-spirited, quiet,
peaceable men, Sons of Peace. Their meek, broken, silenced natural spirit, is
of great price, with God, (1 Pet. 3. 4.) as quitting its own vain corruptible
life, for that which is not corruptible, but everlasting. They instruct those
that oppose them, in meekness of Wisdom, (not returning railing for railing, in
the wrathful, wrangling spirit and earthly wisdom of Nature, that is from
beneath) waiting with patience, if God peradventure will give them Repentance,
or change of mind, from Satan's lie, to his Gospel Truth; 2 Timothy 2. 24, -26.
See the different demeanor, conversation and fruits of Saints, in God's
Heavenly, Spiritual wisdom, communicated to them; and of incorrigible sinners,
in Man's and Satan's earthly devilish wisdom, from beneath; Jam. 3. 13, -18.
Men, in their wisdom, rendered devilish, by fixure in enmity to God's, are the
loud, clamorous, boasting, self-exalting undertakers at teaching the way of
Salvation; who, by their great cry, and confused noise of their (...) Cymbals,
their uncertain-sounding false Trumpet, gain a ruling power amongst fools, to
the final destruction of blind foolish rulers and ruled, leaders and followers.
All fall into the ditch, or bottomless pit of deceits and destruction ( nets,
snares, and death) together; Eccle. 7. 26. Mat. 15. 14. Such Rulers or Teachers
and Leaders, as a demonstration of their utmost folly and madness, despise, are
offended at, and absolutely reject all the words of God's Wisdom, as folly and
madness; ver. 12. and Hos. 9. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Joh. 10. 20. and 7. 45, --
49. The quiet-spirited Saint (in whom, this self-confident spirit of enmity to
God and all his Words of Counsel, is broken down and silenced by the Cross)
listen to the Words of the true Shepherd or Teacher, in himself and messengers,
and follow not, but flee from the Stranger's voice; Joh. 10. 4, 5. The
spiritual Feet or Principles, on which Christ's true Messengers or Apostles
come to them, are beautiful, and all their right Words of reproof and
instruction, most welcome and desirable. They esteem, hear and obey the words
of the truly wise, as incomparably beyond all the cry and noise of Rulers among
fools, that presumptuously undertake an absolute impossibility, even to declare
the Mysteries of God's Wisdom, in that wisdom of Man, that is foolishness to
God's; and all the words of God's, to it. Yet, is their voice and cry, readily
heard, and followed, by Fools, to the everlasting destruction of both, and all.

Verse. 18. Wisdom is better then Weapons of War: but, one sinner destroys
much good.
True Wisdom, or the Spirit of Christ, in Man, is better then all the Wisdom,
Srength, Power and Armor of Man or Angel, in the first creation; and yet more,
when all these are turned into (and used in) enmity to God. For so, became they
the one sinner, that, from first to last, (...) against God, Christ, and
Saints, who must needs be unspeakably too hard for them. All wicked Angels and
Men, in the finally abused first-creation state or spirit and life of nature,
make up, and are the one sinner, or uniform fighter against God, in and with
their first-creation Strength, Armor, and weapons of War. And, thus does this
one comprehensive Sinner (or perverted first-creation Spirit, in all evil
Angels and Men) destroy much good, even all the changeable goodness in that
state, which had they obediently returned it back, in sacrifice to God, they
might have received much good, thereby; even the promised gift of an
everlasting righteous Life; and so, all their own fading good, again, with
usury. The Law (or law-life, in Man or Angel) used unlawfully; as kept up for
Weapons of War, in rebellion, against Christ's Gospel-life, is destroyed by the
said Sinner, in evil Angels and Men. They thus destroy and frustrate all the
good, intended, in and by their first-creation State; and, for ever, exclude
themselves from the immutable good of the second. So, destroy they much good;
even the whole good of the first and second Creation. By the lawful use of the
first, they might have had all the good of both. By the unlawful use thereof,
they spoil and lose all; all the good, given them in the former; and offered
them, in the latter. Then, as six'd in unchangeable enmity to God, they must
fall, and lie down, for ever, under the unchangeable Wrath of God, as their
undeniably just portion.

CHAP. X.
V. 1. Dead Flies (Heb. flies of death) cause the Ointment of the Apothecary,
to send forth a stinking savor: so does a little Folly, him that is in
reputation for Wisdom and Honor.
THe dead flies, or flies of death, found in Men, since the fall, (that cause
the first-covenant precious Ointment of Christ, the great mystical Apothecary
(or perfumer) of Man's filthy, loathsome, corrupt, polluted nature, dead in
trespasses and sins) are a character of the (...) to God's divine and
creature-spirit, which is filth of spirit, in Man. This enmity, as the single
product of the first sin, is called the little folly, in eminently restored,
righteous Man, that, with Job, is, there, in great reputation for Wisdom and
Honor; Job 29. 7, -10, This little folly, (a changeable, pardonable, curable
enmity to God, in all) comparatively with the great folly (the incurable,
unpardonable, great transgression, or presumptuous sin unto death, as through
Man's wilful madness, this changeable is turned into a fixed unchangeable
enmity to God, in many) this little folly, what a noise it made, in Job,
against the dispensation of the Cross, when under it, as we find, at large, by
the reproofs, Elihu and Christ himself came upon him, with? Job 32, to almost
the end of that Book. Man, in the honor, he was created in, not understanding
or duly considering the changeable nature of that honor, and slipperiness of
his standing in it, soon fell, and became as the Beasts that perish (Psalm. 49.
12, 20.) a brutified, mere sensual creature, as 'twere, having forfeited the
righteous life of a Man. And when restored by the redeemer, out of that
polluted, bloody condition, into the same kind of changeable, first-covenant
righteous life of a Man, again ( Ezekiel. 16. 6.) so as to remove and take off the
punishment of the first sin; the first sin it self is not hereby cured, but
through this very fresh coming of the command, or Christ's setting up his
first-covenant Law-life in him, again, does this sin of Enmity revive also,
(which, with, and in dead nature, lay, as dead) into an active, bold,
confident, daring, presumptuous resisting of God and his Gospel Spirit, as Paul
experienced; Romans 7. 9, -11. And, had he obstinately persisted in that course,
when convinced of his duty, it had slain him, for ever. But, he yielded to the
death of that restored (...)-covenant law-life, as the known means of
abolishing that (...), which revived and sprang up with it, and is inseparable
from it. No way, then, to be rid of that enmity, but by being rid of that life,
under the Cross. And, no other way, or on no other or lower and (...) (...),
can God's Gospel-life of (...) Righteousness be (...) by, or set up in us. He
therefore gloried in nothing save the (...) (...) (...), that (by its twofold
death and life-operation, runs down the (...)-covenant life, and (...) up the
second) crucified all (...) life and desire in his spirit, to all this World's
desirables, and (...) (...) it; (Gal. 6. 14.) and set up a life in him, the
Palate, Belly or (...) and Desire whereof, wholly and only savored (...)
(...), desired and (...) after) the things of God, things eternal, delights of
the (...) (...) God. He so became alive only to the World to come, and that to
him; a mere Pilgrim and Stranger, in and to this, to the delights of the Sons
of Men, things seen, temporal; 1 Pet. 2. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 18. The dead Fly or
little solly, here, is the same with the little leaven that leavens the whole
lump (Gal. 5. 9, of mankind); which can be purged out of any, no otherwise then
by the death and Sacrifice of Nature, at best; from which, inseparable. And
then, with our sacrificed spotless Nature, in Christ our Passover, shall we
find, that the destroying Angel (even Christ with the same spiritual-Sword or
Gospel-Cross) will pass over us, as to that use he will make of it, in Wrath,
upon all fixed incorrigible enemies, Angels or Men. This fixed leaven or
Doctrine of the Pharisees, in a sowr'd, leavened spirit of unchangeable enmity,
(in a (...)-Covenant righteous life, against the second; Law, against Gospel)
is that, Christ warned his Disciples to beware of; Mat. 16. 6, 11, 12. For this
cause, did Christ sanctify our nature, by the death thereof, in himself, that
by the like death-sanctification, the same fire-Baptism of his heavenly Spirit
of Truth, on our earthy-spirit of enmity and falsehood, he might sanctify it, in
us. Joh. 17. 17, 19. The enmity, or Fly of death, becoming unchangeable in Men,
renders them a most stinking abomination to God, for ever. Their Soul
unchangeably loathes God's Soul, or Spirit of Grace; and his, them. Then
Christ's fresh first-Covenant Gift, that was, for a season, as salt, to dry up
the fleshly filth of their polluted nature, loses its savor; and, the whole
person becomes a stinking, loathsome thing, as all-over polluted with a
spreading incurable Leprosy, or most noisome Disease.

Verse. 2. A wise Man's heart is at his right hand; but, a fool's heart, at his
left.
Here Is a description of the truly wise, and of the greatest fool. The heart of
the former, is at his right hand, fixed and set to follow those right counsels
of God, in the life, activity, desire and thought of the incorruptible Seed of
God's right-hand-planting in him, by a new creation, which will set him at
Christ's right hand; when fools or lustful Goats, in the activity, life, and
desire of the corruptible seed of his left-hand-planting in them, by a
first-creation (in which wholly set upon this worlds vanities) will be found at
his left hand, and doomed to eternal punishment. Mat. 25. 33, 46. Saints give
up their fleshly Tree, with the fruits or works thereof, their left hand
first-Covenant life, to the death of the Cross, that they may receive that
right hand, second Covenant, Gospel-life, wherein to be wise unto Salvation.
Others, of a perfectly contrary mind, fool themselves into eternal damnation.

Verse. 3. Yea also, when he that is a fool, walks by the way, his Wisdom
(Heb. heart) fails him; and he says to every one, that he is a fool.
Man's own Wisdom is Folly, not able to direct his steps, in (or so much as
into) the way everlasting; Jer. 10. 23. Trusting therein and to, renders him an
enemy to true spiritual Wisdom, that can do all. And, this manifests him to
every one, to be fool. God will set up that Light in all, that they and all
others shall see them, Fools; as having wilfully chosen that Life and Wisdom,
they knew would fail them; and consequently, excluded themselves, for ever,
from that, which would have done their Work. Thus become they everlasting
monuments of their own madness and folly, in eternal darkness and death, under
Wrath.

Verse. 4, If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place;
for, yielding pacifieth great offenses.
The acknowledged literal, gives aim at the mystical sense. In letter, Man
ought not to leave his place of subjection to worldly Rulers; but acknowledge
the ruling Power, by God's Providence, permitted any to exercise over him,
however ill used. This may and ought to be, without any sinful compliance with
such abused Power. Even Saints must suffer, as a passive owning that power, so
ill managed, they cannot actively obey. All ought to keep their place of
subjection to it, so as not to rise up against, dispute, or deny the Rulers
place and office, however abused. Such demeanor is the only safe way, to
pacify the Ruler's unjust wrath, against them. t. For yielding pacifieth great
offenses. Yea, Devils are not to be denied their invisible evil Angelical
Principality and Power, permissively given them, in and over this World; Luke
4. 5, 6. The Devil's evil place of Rule and Power, is not to be denied. Even
Michael, the Archangel, Christ himself, contending or disputing with the
Devil, about the body of Moses; durst not bring against him a railing
Accusation, but, said; the Lord rebuke thee; Jud. 9. So, Zec. 3. 2. About
Joshua, another Type of himself. The Devil contends or disputes, by himself and
Apostles, for the body of Moses, or life of the Law, as eternal Life and
Salvation; according to his first short comprehensive lying Sermon to Eve; ye
shall not die. This is eternal Life, ye are already possessed of, by the first
Creation. A due demeanor toward the very evil Angels, is an owning our place
of inferiority to them, in the life of but humane nature, or our natural state,
at best. It Is acknowledged so, in Christ himself; Heb. 2. 7. The leaving our
place of Subjection or Inferiority to evil visible or invisible Powers of this
World, is a leaving our place of right subjection and obedience to God, and a
giving advantage to the Devil, to make us pay it him. And, so come we to the
mystery, here. Christ, of right, is always the chief Magistrate and Supreme
Ruler, over all, in his very passive season, and Satan's active Reign. If his
Spirit rise up against the guilty natural spirit of Man, if he come with his
spiritual Sword and Gospel-fire, to slay and sacrifice it to God; Obedience
ought to be given to him, herein, by yielding subjection to this Supreme Ruler,
over all, as our true interest, and safety. This is the way to pacify God's
provoked Wrath against us, even the delivering up that spirit, to death, that is
found guilty of all sorts of offenses against him; and this undeniably,
evidenced by the all-discovering light of the two-edged flaming Sword that
slays us; Heb. 4. 12, 13. No absolute reconciliation, but by the death of the
guilty Sinner, in us; the foe of our own house. We ought to agree with this
true Ruler (in the way of his Cross, the only way to Salvation) when his Spirit
rises against (and he comes in the posture of an Adversary, upon) his and our
enemy, in us; Mat. 5. 25. Such yielding up the perpetual Offender to death, (in
order to be brought to live under the peaceable Rule of that Spirit of Life and
Love, that slays our spirit of Enmity and Death) pacifies the Wrath of our most
righteous Judge, and brings this wonder to pass, that we, who in our own
spirits, have bin guilty of innumerable and unutterably aggravated follies and
madnesses, shall have no Iniquity found in us, by Friends or Foes. The guilty
Sinner, our natural spirit, that always rebelled, in its life, has obediently
suffered death, and there is an end of all Iniquity. By this means, come we to
be filled with a spirit of Life, that is in eternal union of mind, will, desire,
thought, love, and hatred, with the infinite divine spirit. Then, let enemies,
that love nothing but such Iniquities they would charge us with, search and
accuse us while they will; yea, and let God, that infinitely hates all
Iniquity, search us, to the bottom (by the joint beamings forth of his infinite
divine and all-searching infallible New Creation Sun-lights) still, still, no
Iniquity will be found in us, when filled with his own Spirit of everlasting
Righteousness and Truth.

Verse. 5. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, as an error which
proceeds from the ruler.
Verse. 6. Folly is set in great dignity; and, the rich sit in low place.
Here Is just matter of complaint, relating to the invisible or visible
Magistrates of this World, evil Angels or Men. Nothing more familiar to
observation, in the visible, then their encouraging and advancing folly it
self, or grossly wicked and unworthy persons, and thrusting down the rich in
true wisdom, the truly worthy, into low place, or no place, out of all place;
yea, and out of the World, as not fit or worthy to live, by reason of his
unalterably contrary principle (temper and spirit) to such wicked Gamsters, as
resolve to make a prey of the People. All discouragements, injuries, and
oppressions imaginable, are, on this ground, exercised on the most worthy
Patriots, whose Consciences permit them not to gratify and serve their corrupt
wills, interests, and unruly lusts. These are the things practiced by wicked
visible Rulers, in a flat contrariety to their duty; Romans 13. 3, 4.

The invisible Rulers of this World, evil Angels, prefer the rich, wise-fools,
in a first-Covenant righteous life, as their choicest and most useful subjects,
before, above, and against the mystical poor or impoverished there, in order to
become wise, rich, strong, and honorable in God, or in a spiritual,
New Covenant life, hid with Christ in God. Christ pronounces Woe to the former;
and says, Blessed are the latter; Luke 6. 20, 24. That that is highly esteemed
of Men, in the first Covenant, is abominable to God (Luke 16. 15.) as set up in
a fixed enmity to him, and the second. And, the broken, contrite, impoverished
natural Spirit of the Saint (as to all, others trust and glory in) seems
abominable and contemptible to them, the fat, full, rich, wise, strong and
honorable in the first; 1 Cor. 4. 8, 10. The rich, in the first-Covenant, are
sigur'd by the Man with a gold Ring and goodly apparel, whereas the poor and
needy natural man of the Saint, causes him as a poor man, in vile raiment, to
be bidden by man, to sit here, under his footstool, importing the very height
of contempt, toward him; while there is a huge bussle, for the giving the other
a high place, in honor and respect to him, or rather to his mystical gay
clothing, kept on, in enmity to the Cross; but, put off by the Spiritual Saint,
and refused ever to be put on, again; let men take it how they will. Jam. 2. 1,
-3. Cant. 5. 3. God requir's the putting off those first-Covenant Ornaments,
Devils and Men put such a preferring value upon, that he may know what to do
with us, by setting up the life, and clothing us with the everlasting
Righteousness, Beauty, Glory, and ornaments of the second. Exodus 33. 5. Wise,
Holy, first-Covenant righteous Men, and God, are of a directly contrary
judgment, in this case; Romans 2. 29. Those, God highly esteems and loves, they
scorn and hate, as the filth of the World, the offscouring of all things; 1
Cor. 4. 13. Thus are they found in harmony with the invisible Principalities
and Powers of this world, the evil Angels. They both and all center in this
point, a resolution, in the earthly principle or natural spirit, to despise
(and contend against) the impoverished natural man of the truly wise, rich,
strong and honorable spiritual Saint. They shoot all their malicious,
revengeful arrows at him. So are true Saints, by their true Gospel-life,
Conversation, words and way, rendered, with Jeremy, Men of contention with the
whole earth, or whole earthy party of evil Angels and Men. This evil, Solomon
saw, practiced under the first-creation Sun, or in the first-Covenant spirit,
the Law-principle of life and action, as an error, both visible and invisible
Rulers of this world, are jointly guilty of, in using their utmost power, for
discouraging, persecuting, and suppressing the truly wise and rich spiritual
Saint; the only sort of men in this world, that God highly esteem's and loves.
On all these accounts, as to the errors of the visible and invisible Rulers of
this World, he farther says,

Verse. 7. I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking as Servants
upon the Earth.
The chief sense of these words, is; that evil Angels are permitted the
exercise of a ruling power over this World, fulfilling their pleasure, both in
the corrupt and refined spirit and principles of Nature, in men. Both evil
Angels and Men in the said spirit of Bondage, are but servants and slaves in
God's sight; objects of his everlasting contempt, and wrath. When Christ, whose
Right it is, takes to himself his great Power, and reign's, he will take away
all their power, and tread them under his and his Saints feet, for ever. But,
all along this World, are these evil Angelical Principalities and Powers, in,
with, and by evil visible ones, jointly riding over Saints heads, (Psalm. 66.
12.) under Christ's overtopping spiritual Power, ordering all, for the carrying
on his designed work of the Cross, on the natural spirit of the Saint, that is a
spirit of Bondage, in them. For this reason, are the true Princes, or
spiritual, heaven born Sons, walking on the Earth, (in an inferiority and
subjection to these slavish servile-spirited Rulers) that, in their true
Princely life, they may come to ride over all those Servants heads, that have
bin their Masters. All along this World, the said Servants are on Horseback,
and true Princes a-foot. At entrance of the Reign of Christ, or beginning of
the next, such Princes will tread all such Servants, for ever, under their
feet, and ride in triumph, with their Lord and Master, the great Captain of
their Salvation, over all their heads; Col. 2. 15. Heb. 2. 10, 14. The very
Prince of Life, when he had taken our slesh, suffered death therein, under the
visible and invisible Princes of this world; Act. 3. 15. True Saints, following
his suffering steps, will be found on their mystical white Horses, with their
Lord, at last; Rev. 19. 11, -14. Christ refused any ruling Power, as a Judge or
King, in that earthly life of the Law, wherein he was to suffer, and did, in
obedience to his Father, under the horsed Princes of this World, in the said
earthly life and worldly power. He walked as a Servant on the earth, under
them; and so, must Saints, in obedience to the will of God, and conformity to
his example, Joh. 10. 17, 18. They must lay down their natural, wherein they
are Servants, that they may take up his spiritual life, wherein, Sons of God,
and to be Princes on (...). Saints are spiritual chaste Doves, that know not
where to set their foot, or sind any visible relief or support, in this World;
Genesis 8. 8, 9. As kept for their Heavenly Country, are they not suffered to find
any rest, short of it. They are hunted out of all false rests, by their evil
Rulers, who intend their utter destruction. But, they find the new Name of the
Lord, a strong Tower, and Ark of safety, both from enemies, and the flood of
God's final Wrath, that will overflow the whole first-creation Land of the
living; all, fixed in their earthly life of enmity to his Heavenly.

Verse. 8. He that diggeth a Pit, shall fall into it; and, whosoever breaks an
Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.
The pit, here, is the same, blind Leaders with their followers, fall into;
Mat. 15. 14. Psalm. 7. 15. Many that are reckoned to dig deep in Scripture, all
their interpreting thereof amounts to no more then the digging this dangerous
and destructive pit; an opening the very bottomless pit of the Devil, and
asserting it to be the Kingdom of God; a teaching unchangeable union with the
evil one, as God, sitting in the Temple of God, and showing himself, that he is
God. And, in all their Ministry, to this purpose, seeing nothing but vanity and
lying (...), they say, The Lord says, and make others hope, they will confirm the
word; that they have true peace with God, when indeed, in unchangable union
with the Devil. Thus do evil Men, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils, cry up a fixure and establishment in the first-creation
state of enlightened, Righteous Nature, in unchangeable opposition to God and
his new creation Spirit of Grace. They prefer their Law-Spirit, to his
Gospel Spirit, which renders it the very bottomless pit they fall into, under
the final Wrath of God; a deep ditch of stinking mire and silth, for evermore.
Out of it, there is no redemption. It Is very Hell. Evil Angels and Man's
conclusive choice of that state, makes it a pit of their own digging. David
found his own nature, a deep mire, where there is no standing; crying for
deliverance out of it, by a lifting him up out of his earthy spirit of nature,
into God's heavenly Spirit of Grace; Psalm. 69. 1, -- 3. The death of Nature,
under the Cross, is our only way out of this miry pit of corruption, into the
life, Christ will reign in.

t. And, who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him. First-Covenant
Life, and second-Covenant Light, are a twofold hedge of defense, to secure Man
from all dangers, on his right hand and left. The restored life of the Law, is
a hedge of defense, for a season, against the vile affections and lusts of
corrupt nature, dangers on the left hand. Spiritual Light (by which, Christ, in
his spiritual Life is showed and offered Men, as their absolute Salvation) is a
hedge of defense, to secure Men from the most dangerous sinning against that
Supreme Right Hand Mercy, and gracious offer of it, from God. The first
mystical hedge, or fence against the workings of corrupt nature, kept up, in
opposition to the second, (so as finally to turn from and reject the second,
which would secure from all sin, in corrupt or righteous nature, filth of flesh
or spirit, for ever) this is Man's wilful breaking down the chief hedge for his
security. And then, Satan, the old poisonous Serpent, breaks in upon him, and
bites, or mortally wounds him, to eternal death. This, by persuading Men, to
set up nature, with him, in an eternal opposition to God, and his Grace.

Verse. 9. Whosoever removes stones, shall be hurt therewith: and, he that cleaves
Wood, shall be endangered thereby.
Stones, here, are the same with the hedge, in the former Verse, figuring the
New Creation Spirit, and Light thereof. This rocky-spirit of Christ, in Saints,
renders them Rocks, or living Stones in his spiritual house; Mat. 16. 18. 1
Pet. 2. 5. Man's wilful refusing, hating, and turning from this rocky life,
showed and offered him, is a removing these stones, decrying, and (what in him
lies) pulling down this spiritual Temple, and persecuting or scattering Christ
and spiritual Saints, the living Stone and lively Stones thereof. This will
bring the greatest hurt upon himself. For, this Stone or Spirit, in Christ and
Saints, will fall upon him, in wrath, and grind him to powder; Mat. 21. 44. t.
And he that cleaves wood, shall be endangered thereby. By cleaving wood, is
meant a separating the first benefit of the Cross or death of Christ, a
restored first-Covenant life, from the second; and consequently, a setting up
the first, in unchangeable opposition to the second, a Gospel-life of
everlasting Righteousness and true Holiness. God's Wisdom has found a way, by
the death of the former, to join these two together, in the new life of the
latter. By the obedient death of Nature, corrupt or righteous, is the
changeableness and enmity of the former, done away; and so, is it brought into
unchangeable union with the latter, and harmony of mind and will, with God most
high. These, that God requires a yiedling to his way of putting together, as
(...) in Unity (Psalm. 133. 1.) let no man presume to keep or put asunder; as
first-covenant Brethren do, when they sit and speak against the second, in
despite to them, and that spirit of Grace, they are of, and in; Psalm. 50. 20.
Ezekiel. 33. 30, -- 32. Heb. 10. 29. Such cleavers, or dividers of Wood, the first
benefit of the Cross, from the second, (after a clear discovery of the whole
design of the Cross, to them) will not only be endangered thereby, but bring
final destruction upon their own heads.

Verse. 10. If the Iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edg, then must he put
to more Strength: but, Wisdom is profitable to direct.
Man's natural spirit, fallen into sin and enmity (whether in the corrupt or
restored righteous Life thereof) is the mystical blunt Iron, here; heavy and
dull, as to any right understanding of, or obedience to the commands of God's
spiritual Law. It Is more difficult to yield any obedience thereto, then before
the fall. For, now there is positive enmity in it; then, not. It therefore
greatly needs the sharpning work of Christ's spiritual convictions, to bring
the blunted, dull nature thereof, so much as to see its unspeakeable concern,
in listening and submitting to the hard sayings and sharp discipline of his
spiritual Law. Those that ( finding themselves, weary, and heavy laden, or
overset, as to such important concerns) come to Christ for his spiritual life
and senses, for which, willing to take up (or submit to the death of their
natural, under) his Cross, will find all easy and plain, both to understand
and do. Mat. 11. 28, -- 30. His yoke is easy, and burden light; Yea, such
yoke and burden (amounting only to our unchangeable subjection to his will,
that is unchangeably subject to the divine) is the very glorious liberty of the
Sons of God. And so, also, their sufferings (in submitting to the yoke and
burden of his Cross, on their natural will and spirit) will, in the prospect
and certain sight of such glorious advantages, not be reckoned upon, in any
comparison therewith. Romans 8. 18.

Scripture is a Parable, or sharp saying, and requires a sharp Wit, that is,
spiritual understanding, to discover the mysterious Things, Truths, or meaning
of God's Spirit, therein. It Is too painful, yea, impossible for Man's natural
understanding, to interpret and rightly understand so much as the providential
dispensations of God, to friends as foes, and foes as friends,; Psalm. 73. 3,
-16. Spiritual understanding, or, Sanctuary-light discover's all; (v. 17.) the
voice of all Providence, and the dark sayings or parables of all Scripture. It
can interpret oraculous dreams, show hard sentences, dissolve doubts; Dan. 5.
12. Take the total sum of its objects. It discern's or judges all things, (1
Cor. 2. 15.) divine, and twofold creaturely, natural and spiritual; the deep
things of God's Infinite Divinity (v. 10.) his whole Counsel, about the
Salvation of his Creatures, ( Act. 20. 27.) and the whole counsel of the Devil,
for their Damnation; the whole mystery of Godliness, the whole mystery of
Iniquity, the mysteries of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom of marvelous light, in
his Gospel Spirit; the mysteries of Satan's accursed kingdom of marvelous
darkness, in his Law-Spirit; 2 Cor. 2. 11. As God, gradually, more and more
runs down the wisdom or understanding of the natural Man in the Saint, into
darkness, by the demolishing operation of the Spirit of the Cross, he raises it
up more and more into the new, all-discovering light or discerning of his
spiritual; which, James calls his giving more Grace; Jam. 4. 6. So, the natural
man, or spiritual Prophets Servant in the Saint, comes to see what the Prophet
sees (as in type, 2 King. 6. 17.) Thus is man's understanding or spirit, (as
more brought, by way of Death and Resurrection, into union of mind with the
spiritual) more and more whetted, sharpn'd, and enabled more clearly to discern
the whole mind, and do the whole will of God. Paul found even Gospel-profelling
Jews, so dull of hearing or understanding, so defective as to the right hearing
ear, reception, or capacity for spiritual mysteries, that he (...) to have
forborne the declaration of many things, he otherwise would have said to them;
Heb. 5. 11. He clearly saw their darkness and incapacity, as to spiritual,
Gospel-matters. The most highly enlightened and restored understanding of Man,
is but dull, blunt Iron, till whetted by spiritual light, utterly unable to
discern or do the Will of God, in any thing, to his wel-pleasing. It cannot
direct his steps, aright, toward God, or his own Salvation; Jer. 10. 23. It Is
spiritual Wisdom only, is profitable to direct in the way everlasting; Psalm.
139. 24. This renders a Man an infallible Seer and Doer of the whole mind and
will of God. And, this renders him the certain overcomer of his own contrary
natural mind and lust. 'Twill crucify the worldly mind in him, to the World
without him; and so, the World to him; and bring the God of this World, under
his feet. Flesh, World, and Devil will all flee before, and fall under him. God
will be fully pleased with him; he fully saved, and absolutely blessed, for
ever.

Verse. 11. Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment, and a Babbler is
no better.
The natural spirit of fallen Angel and Man, is poisoned with enmity;
changeable, in man; unchangeable in evil Angels or Devils. Devils, being all
absolutely fixed in enmity, and resolutely using all their angelical Wisdom, in
their superiority of nature to Man, go clear beyond him, in subtilty, as well
as power. The Devil, when fallen, was too hard for man unfallen; over-reached
him with his subtilty; overset him with his power; and so, sowed his evil seed
of enmity to God's spiritual Law, in all mankind. This mystical deadly poison,
has laid them all dead in trespasses and sins. The old Serpent is more subtle
then but gradually restored Man; and still, all along this World, is upon him
with the same lying suggestion (and wicked, but pleasing Counsel) as to Eve,
that restored righteous nature is a state of eternal life, and (...) shall not
die; neither under the Cross, here; nor eternally, hereafter. Genesis 3. 1, -- 5.
2 Cor. 11. 3. It must needs be much easier for Satan to prevail with restored
righteous man, since the fall, then in his first (...) on humane nature, in the
primitive purity and perfection thereof. For now, he finds the same poisonous
enmity to God, in men, with himself, as even in Paul, after all his
Law-conversion and Righteouness of man; but, before his Gospel-conversion into
the Life and Righteousness of God. His work, now, is only to put his confirming
Paw, upon man, for rendering his changeable enmity to God, and Union with him,
unchangeable. Then his work's done; and man, undone, for ever. And, in carrying
on this, is he pleasing to man. His Counsels are all, after man's own heart.
The old Serpent, now, in biting, poisoning, and wounding men to eternal death,
is, all along, pleasing to them. He licks them to death, with his flattering
harlot-kisses, in the practice of the highest and most criminal strumpetry,
seducing them from Christ, the true spiritual Lord and Husband, they ought to
be chaste, single-ey'd, and hearted, in their love, to. The enchanting alluring
Words of this grand mystical Adulteress, are smoother then Butter, when war is
in her heart: softer then Oil, yet are drawn Swords; Psalm. 55. 21. Grand
Adulteress, the supreme Whore of Babylon, (influencing and drawing into the
same guilt, innumerable Men, who, with all Devils, or evil Angels, make up the
comprehensive and complete mystical Whore of Babylon, in an unchangeable
murdering mind of enmity to Christ, and his true spiritual Israel, or
new-Jerusalem Saints) Man of Sin, Son of Perdition (2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.) roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour (1 Pet. 5, 8.) great bloody red Dragon (Rev.
12. 3.) Abaddon, Apollyon, (...) destroyer (Rev. 9. 11.) Devil, Satan,
old-Serpent (Rev. 20. 2.) and the like; all these are charactering titles and
distinguishing badges of one and the same Beel-zebub, or Prince of Devils;
Mark. 3. 22. Without Enchantment, or such listening to the charming voice and
counsels of the Spirit of Christ, the true Shepherd and Teacher, as will turn
them from the voice of all flattering Strangers (Joh. 10. 4, 5.) Will Men be
charmed and seduced by this old Serpent, and mortally bitten, stung, and
poisoned by him, to eternal death. All this was figured out, in the bitings of
(...) literal fiery Serpents, and cure of such bitten Israelites, only, as
looked up by Faith, to the fiery Serpent on a pole; Number. 21. 6, -- 9. This
brazen Serpent on a pole, was a figure of Christ, as in our nature crucified
and raised into his spiritual, New Creation Life; Joh. 3. 14. whoever so look
up to him, herein (as to be made willingly conformable to his death, that they
may partake of his resurrection-Life) are certainly cured, for ever, as to the
poisonous bitings of the mystical old fiery Serpent (or Serpents, the Devil and
his Angels; all, Devils) figured by the literal. Enmity to God, is inseparable
from Man, save by the total death of his natural state. A Leopard's spots may
as soon be done away, or a Blackmoor's skin washed white (Jer. 13. 23.) as man
(save by a right obedient death of his natural spirit, at best) be cleans'd
from all evil, filth of spirit, or enmity to God. If Men listen not to the
Counsels of true Wisdom, they will be pleased with the old Serpents adding to his
first poisonous biting them, in and with the first man, such a farther biting
of them, as will render their enmity to God, as unchangeable in them, as in
himself. All his words are natural, and welcome to them. They reject Christ's,
and wholly choose and delight in his Counsels; Isa. 30. 9, -- 11. Here Is the
dangerous posture, mankind are in. And, a Babbler is no better. Man, in his own
Wisdom, undertaking to expound Scripture, and counsel his fellow-mortals, about
Salvation, is a Babbler, a tinkling Cymbal, makes only a confused noise, an
uncertain sound of Words; in all which, he is no better, then the old Serpent
himself; that is, gives no better, but indeed the self-same Counsel, he gives;
preaches his Gospel, that men will find the restored righteous life of nature,
to be eternal, and everlasting Salvation. Thus do babbling men, carry on
Satan's poisoning doctrine and work, in a lying spirit of Divination, for
poisoning themselves and Hearers, beyond cure, to eternal death. None are sit
to teach Christ's Gospel to others, but such as are wise unto Salvation,
themselves. Who else, can show the way of Salvation?

Verse. 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but, the lips of a
Fool will swallow up himself.
All thoughts and words (inward and outward Words) of the truly wise man, are
gracious, good, and pleasing in God's sight. A spirit of everlasting
Righteousness is the principle and root of all. He turns from the life, light,
understanding, will, desire, thought, word, and action of his own Spirit, to
live wholly in and to God, after his heart, in his spirit. So, God (or his
creature-spirit) works all his works in him; and he, in God; Isa. 26. 12. Phil.
2. 13. Joh. 3. 21.

On the contrary; the Lips of a Fool will swallow up himself. Man, in corrupt
or enlightened nature, is but a fool, and as the Beasts that perish, as to all
his eternal Concerns, Gospel Things or Truths; Psalm. 49. 12, 20. Jer. 10. 23. 1
Cor. 2. 14. All such things are (or seem) foolishness to him, because he is a
fool. All words or fruits, uttered or brought forth, in his own nature, at
best, which he trusts, and advises others to trust in, are lying vanities,
perishing, transient shadows. He walks in a vain show; sees, teaches, is,
nothing but vanity, altogether vanity; Psalm. 39. 5, 6. Ezekiel. 13. 6. He neither
consider's the fading nature of all he is possessed of, nor the everlasting
Life, Righteousness and things of God, he wants. He hugg's himself as rich and
happy, when, in truth, miserable, poor, blind and naked. Such fools were the
Laodiceans, (Rev. 3. 17.) and the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 8, 10. Both these
mistake's, in embracing and waxing confident in false, and in rejecting true
riches, Christ found the young Man, in; Mat. 19. 20, -22. Men reckon, they want
nothing, for true blessedness, when they want every thing. Thus, foolish Men's
words, swallow up themselves, or expose themselves and others to be swallowed
up, in a spirit of unchangeable darkness and death. God will take all such wise
fools in their own craftiness; as knowing all their thoughts, vain; 1 Cor. 3.
19, 20. They think of, trust in, rely upon, and teach nothing but vanity: and
this, in unchangeable enmity to God, and all the reproofs and instructions of
true Wisdom; Prove. 1. 20, -- 32. They craftily and subtily defend themselves,
and secure nature's head, from his spiritual Cross, Gospel-fire, and Sword, and
so, swallow up, sink and drown themselves, and all that follow their words of
Counsel, into everlasting destruction and perdition.

Verse. 13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and, the end
of his talk is mischievous madness.
From first to last, he sets up, and pleads for a life that is changeable in it
self, and enmity to God, as true happiness. He begins, sets out, and (...) in
this folly, till fixed in enmity, and so, guilty of mischievous madness; (...),
might and main, to render others, Children of (...), with himself; Mat. 23. 15.

Verse. 14. A Fool also is full of words; a Man cannot tell what shall be: and,
what shall be after him, who can tell him?
Abounding in words, is a (...) of both literal and mystical Fools, as highly
(...) in (...) false (...) measures of (...). The mystical (or wise) Fool, is
in total darkness, as to his (...) concerns; is wholly ignorant of the obedient
Saints true (...); or life and state, (...) to be for ever blessed. And, as
ignorant is he, as to the (...) most deplorable state of himself and followers,
incorrigible haters of God, in eternal Death. This unutterable distress,
confusion and (...) (that comes after all the mirth and jollity, in his
self-pleasing thought and foolish way) will be an absolute amazing surprise and
disappointment to him. Who can tell (...) of (...), (...) shall come to (...),
after his life and race, in this world? The truly wise spiritual Saint can.
But, he will not hear, believe, or regard his words.

Verse. 15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he
knows not how to go to the City.
All the labor of (...) wise-Fool, in the restored righteous life and wisdom
of man, for Salvation, is termed in Scripture but bodily exercise, that
profits little, or but for a little time, in suppressing the vile affections
of corrupt nature: but, when once knowingly kept up, in wilful, unchangeable
(...) to God, most highly displeasing to God; and, not only unprofitable, but
utterly destructive to man. After, or by all such (...), he will find it
impossible for him to go, or get into the City, New-(...). All such will be
found those mystical Dogs, (...), (...), Murderers, and Idolaters, that have
loved and made, or (...) on Satan's lie, from first to last, against God's
truth; Rev. 22. 15. So will they be shut out of the said City, for ever; and
(...) their portion in the lake of fire (Rev. 21. 8.) among damned Angels and
Men; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. Mat. 25. 41.

Ver. 16. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in
the morning.
In letter, a sore punishment to a Nation, is a childish Ruler or King, unfit
for Government, as given up to all sorts of evil and misgovernment, in his own
Person, implied by eating in the morning, as voluptuous, in gratifying his evil
sensual appetites or lusts. This is Woe to him, and the Land, under his
Government. For, instead of being a praise and encouragement to good works and
workers, and a terror to evil, as he ought, ( Romans 13. 3.) he will be found in
a directly contrary practice. But the mystical and principal sense, here, is
this: When the mystical Land, or natural State of Man, is cleans'd or swept
from (...) of flesh, and Satan rather received into this cleans'd house (Mat.
12. 43, 45.) then Christ, as Ruler and King, very great will be the Woe to the
said Land. For then is Man a slave to the Prince of darkness; to do his will,
in all things. This ruling Child, or birth of the spirit of the Devil in Man,
will be found eating in the morning, or gratifying his sinful love, lust and
desire, with (...) perishing meats, and so will be established with him, in
unchangeable enmity to God; which brings him under the unchangeable wrath of
God.

Verse. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and
thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.
In (...), where Governors are of a noble, meetly qualified temper for Rule,
in a spirit of Justice and Wisdom, the Land or people are happy. The mystery,
or spiritual sense, is this. Those that are born of the spirit of Christ, are
of the Heavenly extraction and Pedigree, Sons of Nobles (as begotten by his
Gospel Ministers, Apostles, or messengers, in which sense, Paul calls Timothy,
his Son, in the Gospel-life of Faith, 1 Timothy 1. 2.) and indeed, Sons of the
great King himself, the only Potentate, to whom, of right, all Rule belongs.
His one Spirit of everlasting Righteousness and true Wisdom, sits them to be
steady doers of the divine Will, in all things. So under Christ's and their
peaceable, righteous Government, will the whole Land, Earth, or World, be
blessed; Isa. 32. 1. And the mystical Land, Spirit, and whole person of every
Saint will be blessed, under the Government of this Spirit of Christ, in
himself, and themselves.

Verse. 18. By much slothfulness the building decays; and, through idleness of
the hands, the house droppeth through.
Here Is a reproof of Man's negligence or sloth, under spiritual convictions of
his interest, in having the new-building of him carried on a-main; and a
discovery of the great danger thereof. All favoring, or keeping up the old,
hinders the new; and so, any happy proficiency, progress, or advance toward
the Kingdom of God, which the new would sit us for. If spiritual Light (that
convinces Man of his great concern, to have the new-building, the heavenly
house, life and clothing go on successfully and cheerily) be wholly turned
from, despised, hated and rejected, (with all, thereby showed, and offered him)
then the whole design of the new-building is absolutely frustrated, though some
loss, as to the old, has bin suffered and yielded to, and there has bin some
little running well, in following spiritual conviction-light. This Apostasy
renders all, done or suffered (in obedience to such light, for a season) vain,
wholly void, and of none effect; Gal. 3. 4. and 5. 7. But, there is a
negligence, short of absolute quitting the designed new building, which, those,
that, at bottom, are true Saints, may be found guilty of, so as to need a fresh
minding them of, and laying in them, the foundation or first principles,
toward spiritual knowledge, and the new building. Such negligence renders them
scarce so much as spiritual Babes, that otherwise might have been strong, grown
Men, in the Grace and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, fit to teach others;
Heb. 5. 11, -- 14. Total Apostasy from the seen, and, as 'twere, begun
new-building, razes the foundation, and puts Man under an impossibility of ever
obediently looking that way, more; Heb. 6. 4, -- 6. And then, if the old
building in Man's own restored nature, holy flesh, be run down, and quitted
also, (as often it is, by a return to his old sins in the corrupt spirit of
nature, with the Dog to the vomit) then does the mystical house of Man's
immortal spirit drop through, and become totally and irreparably ruined, for
ever; 2 Pet. 2. 20, -- 22.

Verse. 19. A Feast is made for laughter, and Wine makes merry; but Money
answers all things.
The restored righteous life, riches, fruitfulness and food of Man's natural
state, is a Feast of Joy and Delight, as delivered out of the dismal, dark,
dead state of fallen nature. But, this cheering, merrymaking Feast and Wine, is
but for a season, and will cease. All, in it, is perishing vanity, and the joy
in it, therefore, but as the crackling of thorns under a pot, a confused noise,
a short blaze, a flash of heat and light, and away goes all.

But now, distinct from this, Money answers all things. This Money is the true
tried Gold, the durable Riches of Spiritual Life, which supplies all the needs
of Man's immortal spirit, all that he can want or desire, for a Feast of
everlasting Rejoicing, and true Blessedness. Neither his life, food, or
clothing, in this state, will ever decay, or wax old; all will be ever new,
fresh, green, and flourishing. All old things are past away, and gone. Here Is
the Money, answer's all.

Verse. 20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought; and curse not the Rich
in thy Bedchamber: for, a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter.
Not denying a literal; in the mystical and chief sense, the King not to be
cursed, so much as in thought, is Christ, that knows thoughts, yea, the
bottom-principles, intents, and deepest, most hidden secrets of all hearts;
Heb. 4. 12, 13. There Is no hiding the mere imaginings of Treason against this
King, nor any escaping his justly revenging hand, for it. He is God's decreed
and declared universal Monarch of the World; Psalm. 2. 6, -- 9. A cursing this
spiritual King, in thought, is the universal practice, all mankind is found
guilty of, in their natural spirit of enmity to him, corrupt or righteous,
since the fall of Adam. Paul, when eminent in the restored righteous life of
nature, was at it, in ouvert acts of Treason and Rebellion, against this King
and his true obedient Subjects, Gospel-Saints. He breathed out threatenings and
slaughter against them; Act. 9. 1. In them, he persecuted this great universal
King; ver. 4. Under plausible shows in holy (...), form of (...), Righteousness
of Man, (good words and fair speeches, as if Friends, I overs, Owners,
Professors, and most dutiful obedient Subjects of this King) does (...) enmity,
and thence, cursing of this spiritual King, lurk and (...) it self. All
obstinate persisters herein, will this King force, at last, to see themselves,
to have bin, all along, despisers, haters, and opposers of him, and all his
spiritual Counsels and Saints. This King is also the mystical rich one ( whose
unchangeable divine and creature-riches, Paul preached, Ephesians. 3. 8.) that is not
to be cursed in thy Bedchamber, in the inmost thought of thy heart, hid under
self-flattering (...) of greatest love to his person, words, and ways. His
infinite divine, and al (...) spiritual creature-understanding discovers all.
And, he has, under him, invisible Watchers (...) Observers of all the ways and
actions of Men, the holy Angels, called here, Birds of the Air, who are able to
carry a true report of the voice, or of all (...) words and demeanor, toward
this unsecarchably rich and glorious King. And, that which has Wings, shall
tell the matter. The good Angels, from the spiritualty of their nature, swist
motion, and penetrating sight (by which, eminently sitted for Christ's service)
are, in Scripture, charactred as having Wings, and being full of eyes, within,
before and behind, Ezekiel. 10. 12. Rev. 4. 6, 8. They are, hence, called Fowls of
Heaven, and Birds of the Air, as sitted to live and move in a heavenly region,
above this humane, earthly, (...) World. As Friends and Servantsto Christ and
his Saints, they communicate their spiritual Visions or sights of Christ, to
them; and their spiritual obedience, to him, however clouded and blended with
the weakness and sinfulness of their natural Man, in the whole course, way,
thought, and action thereof. They also find out and report the hidden enmity,
and cursing thought of implacable enemies, under whatever beautiful disguises
of pretended friendship to this rich divine and spiritual King: and
accordingly, tell the whole matter. These holy (...) Watchers and Observers of
Men, will, at last, out down the great Tree of all evil worldly Monarchy, and
so make way for the active Reign of Christ, over all; Dan. 4. 13, 17. This,
(...) (...) forth the vials of Wrath on all the invisible and visible powers of
this World, evil Angels and Men; Rev. 16. And even then, will they have the
(...) of the (...) thereof in the Earth, for Satan and his (...) earthy party
of Rebellious Angels and Men (aster Christ's Sabbatical day or thousand
years-Reign, upon Earth, when seven times, even the full season of the old
Serpent's confinement in the bottomless pit, is over) to appear and make a new
show of daring opposition, as their last attempt, in laying Siege to the
New-Jerusalem City, to fight against Christ and his Followers, in the very
Resurrection. What will become of Satan and his whole party of innumerable evil
Angels and Men, on this last (rather show, then) fight, we find; Rev. 20. 9.
Fire, from God, out of Heaven, devour's them.

CHAP. XI.
V. 1. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters: for thou shall find it, after many days.
Here Is an Admonition to the universal practice of Charity, in doing good to
all, (but specially to the household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10.) As having a
compassionate fellow-feeling with our Fellow Creatures and Brethren, in the
same nature, by a free-hearted distribution of this World's goods. As
contriving opportunities for the practice of this duty, has God given some, a
super-abounding overflow of such things, while others are destitute of the
very necessaries of Life. To a faithful answering his design and our duty,
herein, a Blessing is promised. He that has pity on the Poor, lends to the
Lord; and, that which he gives, will he repay; Prove. 19. 17. See also the
contrary, threat'ned; Prove. 21. 13. Whosoever stops his Ears at the cry of the
Poor, he also shall cry himself, and not be heard. As for the peculiar charity
to the household of Faith, Christ's little ones, as his spiritual Disciples,
this will not miss of the great reward; Mat. 10. 42. and 25. 34, -- 40. But, we
should extend our charity, also, to all; which, though it seem but as a casting
our Bread upon the Waters, 'twill through God's promised Blessing, be found,
again; Deuteronomy. 15. 10.

Verse. 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for, thou know not
what evil shall be upon the Earth.
The practice of the said duty toward others, is often made a seedstime to
ones-self, in such an unfore-known time of evil, wherein we may be reduced to
the like want. Give, and it shall be given you. The same measure ye mete with,
shall it be measured to you again; Luke 6. 38. Such retaliation, in distress,
will be comfortable, when the said duty has bin well performed, in prosperity.
So much, of the literal sense of these two Verses. In the spiritual or
mystical, what is casting Bread upon the Waters? Obedience to the Cross, the
spiritual Law whereof calls for mystical charity, even the free giving up of
all the Life, Riches and fading Glory, Wisdom and Strength of our own Spirit,
so as to become poor and dead with Christ, there, in order to live and reign
with (...), in that life, he has raised our Nature into. Here Is the recompense
of such Love, Obedience, and Conformity to Christ; a quitting our perishing
life, meats and riches, for his never-perishing. Christ himself was made poor
in our Nature, as to the mortal, first-Creation (...) and State thereof, that,
through his exemplary poverty he might make many (all followers of his suffering
steps) rich in God, or in the everlasting righteous life of the second; 2 Cor.
8. 9. The kindly suffering of the natural, is the mystical seeds-time, that
will bring in a blessed harvest to the spiritual Man, through an abounding
fruitfulness in a newness of life; Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Gal. 6. 7, 8. He that sow's
to the flesh; builds his Faith, hope, and expectation, for Blessedness, on the
corruptible life and fruitfulness of his but restored earthy natural state,
will reap corruption, and eternal death. He that sows to the Spirit, shall, of
the Spirit, reap Life everlasting. All, in spiritual life, principle and
fruits, the mystical Births and Children therein, have Holiness to the Lord,
written in all their foreheads. The spirit of bondage, and her Sons, (all
Fruits, Births or Works, producible or performable in the most restored
righteous natural state or life of the Law) have, all of them, vanity and
vexation to the Worker; enmity and rebellion against the Lord, writ out upon
them. All the Children there, then, are Children of death. Except the (...)
seed of God's left hand planting, by a first-creation, die in us, (1 Cor. 15.
36, -- 38. 1 Pet. 1. 23, -- 25.) as obedient to the husbandry and plough of
Christ's spiritual Cross; the incorruptible seed of an everlasting righteous
life, of God's right hand planting in us, has no room or way made, for a
springing up into its own life, activity, and fruitfulness, under the powerful,
quickening influence of the same Spirit of Christ, that destroys all our earthly
life and fruit, the mystical (...) tree of good and evil, root and branch, tree
and fruit. This spiritual Love or Charity, is the Saint to show to Christ (as
the full and right payment of all mystical tithes and offerings to the true
Melchisedec or High Priest of God) in a universal surrender of all changeable
good things in his nature, for all unchangeable good things in his Spirit of
Grace; as raised out of the death of his slain, sacrificed Nature, into the
life of the very Priest that slay's him. But, why should he be thus charitable
and obedient to Christ? Because he know's not what evil may be, or come upon
the earth (even on all that rebelliously remain in their earthly life) under
final Wrath, in everlasting poverty, want and nakedness, as to any goodness,
changeable or unchangeable. A being willingly made poor there, intitles to the
true durable Riches, and secures from all want, for evermore, in eternal life.

Verse. 3. If the Clouds be full of Rain, they empty themselves upon the Earth:
and, if the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North; in the place
where the Tree falls, there it shall be.
Man's natural spirit, how everfill'd with the fading life, riches, fruits, and
products thereof, at best, must be emptied of, and lose all again, or never
receives an everlasting life, with the never-perishing meats, fruits, riches,
and clothing thereof; Mat. 16. 25. North and South, here, may signify the
first and second, or old and new creation state. Man, in the first, corrupt or
righteous, falls toward the North, into a cold, barren, desolate, starveling
condition, for ever: In the second, toward the South; has everlasting warmth
and blessedness, under the joint shinings forth of the Divine and Creature-Sun
of (...) and everlasting Righteousness. As the Tree falls, or Man dies, (in a
six'd enmity to God; as established in his own life, corrupt or righteous; or
in a spiritual life of everlasting union with (and obedience) to God) there he
shall be; in Hell, or Heaven. Cold comfort in the former; none at all, under
the scorching flames of unquenchable Wrath, which will be found to make up to
incorrigibly wicked Angels and Men, a state of eternal darkness and death.

Verse. 4. He that observes the Wind, shall not sow; and, he that regards
the Clouds, shall not reap.
The slothful Man, that looks upon Winds and Clouds, that are nothing but
uncertainty itself, in their motions, omit's the diligent husbanding his
Ground, and will not so sow, as to reap any true profit or advantage to
himself. In the mystical sense; he that neglect's Christ's voice and convincing
discoveries (not submitting to the spiritual husbandry of his Cross, on his
earthy, natural state, to make way for the springing up of a spiritual Seed)
and listen's to the stranger's voice, the uncertain words or reasonings of
Nature, in himself or others (signified, here, by Winds and Clouds) for sparing
that life, the true Shepherd call's for the surrender of, by death, in
Sacrifice; he, and all that so do, will find no harvest of true joy and
comfort, to be reaped by them, at last.

Verse. 5. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones
do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child: even so, thou know not the
works of God, who makes all.
In explaining his former words, Solomon here uses the hidden ways of God, in
forming the fleshly body of Man, and uniting his immortal Spirit with it, in
the Womb. These common things, in the first creation, (over-setting Man's
understanding, as to the discerning, or giving any certain account of) are but
typical to the yet far more mysterious and hidden things of Christ's
new-creation-workmanship, in Saints. None know, by the utmost improvement and
skill of their own understanding, how the Body, is formed in the Womb of the
literal Mother, or how the Spirit (that had its radical creation and existence,
from the beginning, in the mystical Womb of the Parent of Spirits) comes, in
its appointed time, to be united with its Body, in the Womb. And, how much
shorter must Men come, of discerning the yet more undiscernable, mysterious
works of God (who makes all things, in both Creations or Worlds, Heb. 1. 2.)
as forming and setting up his Spiritual, Heavenly, Eternal things, in Man, by
his new-creation-workmanship? The effects of the literal Wind are seen, though
not known whence it comes, or whither it goes; so are the effects of the
new-creating Spirit of Christ, in, and upon all, born of it; Joh. 3. 8. As an
irresistible Whirlwind, it tear's down the earthly building; and blow's up by
the roots, the fleshly tree of a perishing life, in Saints; andthen, by the
second, new-building-operation of it, does it make them new Vessels, fill them
with new-Wine, even its own Spiritual, Kingdom-Life of everlasting
Righteousness, through which, they become meet habitations of God; Ephesians. 2. 22.
Now, if Man be ignorant of his natural make, or how the distinct parts of his
being are brought together, into a personal union in him, by a first-creation;
much more, is he, of the abundantly more mysterious way and things of his
new creation birth.

Verse. 6. In the morning sow thy Seed, and in the evening withhold not thine
hand: for, thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be a like good.
Here Is a confirmation of the said spiritual Truth. In the morning (or, under
Christ's first and earliest spiritual Convictions, and Revelations or
Discoveries of himself to thee, in his spiritual Life) sow thy Seed; or,
readily use all diligence to make way for Christ's speedy influencing and
quickening up his own Incorruptible Seed of Spiritual Life in thee. Let not thy
earthy, natural, carnal mind, be hardened against Christ, but break, and kindly
melt away under him; that what hinders, being removed, his spiritual Seed may
spring up, in thee. This, done by us, is called our sowing that spiritual Seed,
as the works wrought in the quickened up life thereof, are called our works in
God, and God's in us, ( Isa. 26. 12. Joh. 3. 31.) works of Grace, in the
second-Covenant life; not of Nature, in the first. And, in the evening,
withhold not thine hand, or natural spirit, from sacrifice. For, this is it,
hinders the spiritual Seed from springing up, toward an hopeful Harvest. And
so, will the evening state of darkness and death to Nature, be turned into an
everlasting morning-light and life, in the spirit of Grace. For, thou know
not, etc. Man's receiving spiritual Light, by which, Christ, in his spiritual
life, is showed and offered him, is called a beginning in the Spirit, a
partaking of the Holy Ghost, and tasting of the good (living) Word of God; Gal.
3. 3. Heb. 6. 4, 5. Then is he upon his trial, for Eternal Life or Death, as
obedient or disobedient to the said spiritual Light. And accordingly, will he
be evil or good, barren or fruitful to God. Delivering up the natural spirit,
to death, is the only way to its becoming fruitful to God, in a newness of
life; Romans 6. 4. and 7. 4. So, as raised into the life of the spiritual Man, do
both the natural and spiritual become a like good, in a life of everlasting
Righteousness. While Man is doubtful, under the darkning, demolishing
death-work of the Spirit or Cross of Christ, on his Nature, what will be the
issue, (as Job for some time, was) whether everlasting blessedness or misery;
the Light or Voice of the Spirit, listened to, will inform, that both will
prosper, and be a like good, both natural and spiritual Man, through the death
and resurrection of the former into the quickened up life of the latter. So,
there will be a joint birth of life, springing up in the whole person of the
Saint, from the quickened spiritual Seed, and both crucified and quickened
earthly. But, spiritual Light resisted, and life rejected, Man's earthly state,
however righteous, becomes that cursed mystical Earth, whose end is to be
burned; Heb. 6. 7, 8.

Verse. 7. Truly, the Light is sweet; and, a pleasant thing it is, for the eyes
to behold the Sun.
The light of the literal Sun, is pleasant to the bodily eye: But the days of
darkness will be many, after Man is cut off, by the death of the body, from
such sight and pleasure. The certain foresight of this, cannot but much allay
his present delight. In mystery, Christ is the Sun, or original of all
(...)-creation intellectual light and life. By his shining into Man, does he
render him wise, strong, and honorable in his own restored nature. So becomes
Man joyful and fruitful therein. Yet, all this light, life, and joy therein,
will pass away, also; as well as that of the bodily state. And, the succeeding
days of darkness will be many, even to all eternity, as to those that never
submit to the way of coming to experience Christ, in an higher and better light
and life, showed and offered them. The cross of Christ, in love or wrath,
seizes and takes away all fading first-creation light or goodness, from every
Angel and Man, good or bad. This Solomon farther declares,

Verse. 8. But, if a Man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him
remember the days of darkness; for, they shall be many. All that comes, is
vanity.
Let a Man live never so long in the light and joy of a first-Covenant state,
under the mystical first-creation Sun, or first-Covenant spirit and
communications from Christ, or shinings forth upon his Tabernacle, there; ( Job
29. 2, -4.) he must consider and remember, that all this will be gone, and
everlasting darkness succeed, if Christ be not received in that spiritual life,
which will situate him under his beamings forth, as a Divine and spiritual
new creation Sun of infinite, eternal and everlasting Righteousness, Light,
Brightness, and Glory.

Verse. 9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes: but, know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into
judgment.
Solomon, here, farther confirms his needful Caution, for duly remembering the
many days of darkness, that will succeed in the room of all fading
first-creation light, literal or mystical; and all delight, or rejoicing
therein: Know, that for all this, God will bring thee into judgment. This word
is directed to two sorts of People; such as live wholly in the corrupt spirit
of nature, gratifying only their bodily life, lust, eye, and other senses, with
the visible objects and comforts of this world, represented by the light of the
literal Sun. After the largest experience hereof, he bids them, at their peril,
go on; but, be sure, God will bring them into judgment, for all such things.
And, his judgment on them, will bring those days of darkness upon them, which
will be many, even eternal darkness and death. But, the young man, here,
chiefly meant, is Man, in the youthful flourish of his own restored nature, and
fruitful exercise of it, in a first-Covenant life. If he refuse to part with
all this, under the Cross, to live and walk with God (under the yet more
excellent new creation Spirit of Christ, or mystical Sun of everlasting
Righteousness) eternal darkness and death will come upon him, also, in
conclusion, as well as on the other. When such provoke God, to give them up to
their own self-chosen way (so that he will no longer deal with them, in Mercy, or
wait to be gracious to them; but swear in Wrath, they shall never enter into
his rest) they have nothing certain, to expect, but fiery indignation, for
ever, (Heb. 10. 26, 27) which will turn all their light, life, and comforts,
into unchangeable darkness and death.

Verse. 10. Therefore remove Sorrow (Heb. anger) from thy heart, and put away
evil from thy flesh; for Childhood and Youth are vanity.
To prevent the said sad Judgment, Solomon advises Man, to remove Sorrow or
Anger from his heart, under, and against the death-work of the Cross, upon
nature. Be not offended or grieved at this dispensation of God, which is the
only way, in the methods of his Wisdom, for Salvation. Put away such Sorrow or
Anger, and be quietly, yea, gladly, with Paul (Gal. 16. 14.) obedient thereto,
as the only way to everlasting Joy. Joh. 16. 21, 22. The pangs of Death to the
natural Spirit, figured by the Woman in travel, will vanish, on the birth of
the spiritual Manchild in it, and its quickening up into the new life of the
said Child, the true manly New Creation life of Christ and God. Our natural
man, under the Cross, ought to put away Sorrow and Anger, not reckoning its
present sufferings fit to be compared with the joy of spiritual life, set
before us, the exceeding weight of Glory, that is to follow. Thus did Christ
himself, and Paul reckon; Heb. 12. 2. Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17. All struggling,
Sorrow, and Anger, under the Cross, makes it more uneasy. Obediently submit to
Christ, herein, and his Yoke will be found easy; and Burden, light. Mat. 11.
28, -- 30. Those that learn of him, will be meek, lowly, and quietly submit to
his Cross, and Father's Will and Command, therein, as he did. It Is the
rebellious (...) mind, that is troubled, cries out, and is angry and offended at
this dispensation, as unwilling to submit to this spiritual Law of the Cross;
is ready to say to Christ, for this spiritual, as Zipporah to Moses for the
literal circumcision, a bloody Husband art thou unto me. Exodus 4. 25, 26. t.
For, Childhood and Youth are vanity. All the time of Man's nonage, in
first-Creation life, at best, the mind is carnal or (...), which is enmity to
God ( Romans 8. 7.) as found in a contrariety to the spiritual Law and mind of
Christ. Hence, man's whole work, desire, thought, design, and counsels therein,
are nothing but folly and vanity. In the but restored first-Covenant righteous
life of the Law, and utmost youthful Vigor, Activity, Flourish, and
Fruitfulness thereof, is even the true Saint, but as a Servant, in Childhood,
nonage and minority, ignorant of any such life he has the incorruptible seed
of in him, wherein to be Heir of all; Gal. 4. 1. All, Job, Paul, or any Saint
has had, but in that restored Spirit of bondage or of the Law, has bin found
Vanity; and they themselves, at best, therein, altogether vanity; Psalm. 39. 5.
Such Childhood and Youth are vanity it self; has nothing but vanity in it. Its
Life, Works, Fruits, Wisdom, Righteousness, are nothing but vanishing shadows
of the Creature-life, Wisdom, Righteousness, and things of God.

CHAP. XII.
V. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days
come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them.
Here Is a farther reason, for Man's remembering his Creator, in the youthful
season of his bodily life; and, as figured by that, the youthful vigor and
flourish of his Spirit, in the restored righteous first-Covenant life thereof.
Christ is a twofold Creator of blessed Angels and Saints, by a first and
second-Creation-workmanship, upon them; of all other Men, Angels, and things, a
single Creator, by a first-Creation-workmanship, only: The former, Ephesians. 2. 10.
Col. 1. 18. the latter; 16. As firstborn of every Creature (ver. 15.) fountain
of all creature-being and life, did he comprehend the immortal Spirits of all
Angels and Men, as radically existing in him, ( v. 17.) which are (...) forth
by him into a personal subsisting, at their appointed seasons. He that created
all things, is God; God the Mediator, in his conjunctive divine and
creature-nature; Joh. 1. 1, 3. Heb. 1. 2. and 3. 4. His creature-spirit is the
fountain of all other creature-beings, and the immediate hand, by which,
brought forth in their distinct subsistencies and visibilities. In all, does he
fulfill the will of the infinite Divinity, who said, Let there be this, that,
and the other, and accordingly were all things created, visible and invisible,
answering the existing beings, given them in the Womb of the Mediator's vast
original creature-being. And, as Angels and Men have their natural beings, so,
that natural first-covenant light and life, from Christ, which fits them for
the right exercise of their beings. As perfect natural beings, with a perfect
natural life, breathed into, and set up in their (...), were they the product
of Christ's (...)-creation-workmanship, upon them. They received their Beings,
Light, and Life, from him. Saints, over and above all this, receive from him, a
spiritual, everlasting righteous life, and are made spiritual Vessels, or
sitted receptions thereof, by his second or new-Creation-workmanship. The
fountain of this being and life, is also in himself, as head of the Church;
Col. 1. 18. The incorruptible seed (1 Pet. 1. 23.) of this new life, was cast
into their Spirits, from the date of their radical existing in the invisible
creature-womb of himself, the parent of Spirits, in pursuance of the free
thought and purpose of the divine mind. The actual quickening up this Seed, or
giving them eternal Life, is, what Christ purchased for them, (by the obedient
death and sacrifice of his own assumed perfect, spotless, but changeable
first-creation state) and is the builder of them up, in. So, in all things,
has (...) an everlasting pre-eminence, over them.

In reference to both these Creations, or Worlds, first and second, natural and
spiritual ( Heb. 1. 2.) Solomon says, remember Christ, as both thy natural and
spiritual Creator, bringing thee forth, according to the methods of God's
Wisdom, first, in a natural state, by a first-creation; and afterward, in a
spiritual, by a second; 1 Cor. 15. 46. This twofold Creation, David
acknowledged, too wonderful and oversetting to his understanding, as to the
taking any right measures thereof, or putting any meet value, upon. When he
considered the thoughts of God, in reference to the single first-creation of
all; and then, his twofold-creation of Saints; he concludes the sum of them to
be too great, to take or give a distinct and full account of. They are more in
number then the sand; Psalm. 139. 14, -18. Man's due remembering his Creator,
that has done such wonderful things for him, imports an obedient submitting to
his dispensations, for the accomplishing his designs, and rendering him truly
blessed, in a state of unchangeable union with him, and welpleasing obedience
to him. Since the fall, has Christ, as Redeemer, laid a yet farther and greater
Weight of obligation upon Men, to remember him, as their Creator, so as to
yield a ready, universal obedience to his spiritual Law, which always was the
undispensable duty of Angel and Man, before the fall, as well as since. By that
Law, is the life of Nature, at best, or in whatever condition, to be given up
in sacrifice to God, by his priestly hand, that has, from all the said rights
and obligations, a title thereunto. Since our fall, we receive our lost
righteous natural Life or State, afresh, by his Redemption-Work, as a first
benefit of his death. So are we bound to use our whole beings, bodies and
spirits, in such restored Life, and then death and loss of it for a better, in
obedience to his command, and conformity to his example. We must not live in,
or do our own will, but his (that died for us) by the death of ours; 1 Cor. 6.
19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Christ, now, is to be remembered as Redeemer, as well
as Creator; 2 Timothy 2. 8. By the death of nature in himself, he has purchased
the lost righteous life of it, for us. Hereby are we anew put on the trial,
for obedient surrender thereof, for his spiritual, Resurrection-life, as the
full benefit, and principal design of his death. Man, then, is so to remember
his Creator and Redeemer, as to make the right use of his restored natural
State, by yiedling up his old, for Christ's newness of Life. This is the only
way of putting away all evil from his flesh, or rooting out all enmity to God's
Spirit, that is now inseparable from the life of nature, at best.

t. While the evil day's come not, etc. That is, before God, in Wrath, blast
the most fruitful, youthful, vigorous, joyful state of thy natural spirit,
bringing mystical decays, gray hairs and old age upon it, so as to make thee
find or take, no longer, any pleasure therein. All the beauty and desirableness
thereof, shall fade away, and be consumed; as all the goodliness or
desirableness of the body, in the literal grave. See both, as one is the figure
of the other; Psalm. 49. 14. And, then also, as fixed in enmity, will men find
themselves not only stripped and deprived of all good or comfort, but under the
positive inflictions of unchangeable wrath. Of this most sad condition, and
God's most (...) proceedings toward them therein, have we a full account in
the following-words,

Verse. 2. While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the Rain:
Ver. 3. In the day when the Keepers of the House shall tremble, and the strong
Men shall bow themselves, and the Grinders cease, because they are few; and
those that look out of the windows, be darkened:
Ver. 4. And the Doors shall be shut in the Streets; when the sound of the
grinding is low; and he shall rise up at the voice of the Bird, and all the
Daughters of 'Musick shall be brought low.
These expressions do represent the weak, decayed state of Man, in old age,
which brings sorrow and darkness upon him, and, at length, a period to his
bodily life, and all sensual delights. And, this figuratively points at the
like mystical decay, gray hairs, old age, and death, brought, as God's
displeasure, on the most righteous, fruitful life of Man's spirit, under the
Cross. But, all these marks of God's displeasure, on our natural body and
spirit, as found in enmity to him, are the effects of his everlasting kindness
to obedient Saints, as the very means and way of translating them into his
everlasting righteous, spiritual creature life. For a season, Saints rejoice in
their enlightened nature, as Law-servants, finding delight in the literal and
mystical Sun, Moon, and Stars of this World. But, they are made obedient to
God's dispensation of turning the light of this mystical Sun, Moon, and Stars,
as well as literal, into darkness, to their spirits, as well as bodies, in both
which, there is a time appointed for all Men once to die; Heb. 9. 27. The
mystical death of the spirit, and all decays, of a tendency thereunto, does
Solomon figure out, here, by the decays of the body, in the declining age
thereof. The keepers of the House that will tremble; and the strong Men, that
shall bow themselves, outward limbs and parts of the Body, sigure out the
inward Senses and intellectual Powers of the natural spirit, as operating by
the Organs of the Body. The decays of bodily life, in all the parts and powers
thereof, are felt and experienced also by the inward faculties and powers of
the Spirit, that are exercised by them. Hence, old Men grow weak, feeble, and
imperfect in the operations thereof; and so, are brought back again, into the
condition of Children. Inward and outward Powers and Senses of body and spirit,
tremble and bow themselves, in the literal and mystical old age of both. The
Grinders will cease; and, those that look out of the Windows, be darkn'd. The
outward and inward senses and instruments (by which, man has taken in the
supplies of Light and Comfort, from the suitable objects of both, in the visible
and invible parts of this World) will fail, and become altogether unfit for
such use and service. Then the Doors shall be shut in the Streets, etc. ver. 4.
And all the Daughters of Music shall be brought low. All the joy and delight
of Man's youthful flourish in mind and body, shall be turned into a painful,
restless, comfortless, wearisom condition; all former pleasures and delights,
into labor and sorrow; Psalm. 90. 10. Man's most concerning duty then, is, to
listen to God's way, for the receiving his fresh Oil, or holy Anointing, that
will give an everlasting newness of Life, Vigor, Strength, and Beauty, to his
whole person, wherein to feed upon never-perishing Meats, the delights of the
Sons of God. If the rain of spiritual convictions, and beamings-forth of
spiritual Light, be disobediently rejected and turned from; after them, will
the clouds of God's final Wrath come upon Men, from the same hand or spirit of
Christ, that caused the Rain thereof to fall, and the Sun to shine upon them,
while it was, to day, with them; Mat. 5. 45. Heb. 3. 15.

Verse. 5. Also, when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears
shall be in the way, and the Almond-tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper
shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because Man goes to his long home,
and the Mourners go about the Streets.
Here Is an account of the deplorable condition of the incorrigibly wicked,
under the Cross, in final wrath. They shall be afraid of that which is high,
that is, of Christ, the high and Almighty King, coming forth in the brightness,
glory, and irresistible power of his Divine and Spiritual creature-life, to
destroy all Rebels against his Kingly Gospel Spirit. In such his appearance,
will he be everlasting destruction to foes, and Salvation to friends; 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, -10. This high Lord, the man Christ Jesus, will manifest himself in the
infinite (...) of his Divinity, and summon all Men and Angels before him, to
receive, answerable to the things (...) by them, in obedience to, or rebellion
against his Gospel Spirit, and divine Will, in the Body, or earthly State, in
their day, on earth. What a maze and consternation, enemies will be then found
in, see, Rev. 6. 15, -- 17. Self-exalting Men, with the mystical Rocks and
Mountains, they will have recourse to (the supreme evil Powers of this World, the
Devil and his Angels) must both and all, proud helpers, (Job 9. 13.) And
helped, stoop, bow, and inevitably fall under the great Wrath of this universal
Monarch. Then will they be filled with fears, in (...) self-chosen way, as
undeniably discovered in the evil thereof. And then, the Almond-tree shall
flourish, and the Grasshopper be a (...). The state they have chosen, in enmity
to God, shall be their curse and punishment, in the most flourishing life
thereof, represented by the fruitful Almond-tree, and that Grasshopper, which
shall be a (...), as a sign and remembrancer of the warm Summer or flourishing
season, they once enjoyed in the said natural State. All this will increase
(...) (...), because they will find all the goodliness thereof, faded away; and,
all their desire toward, or delight in it, (...), and (...), because it can
(...), no longer, any comfort or satisfaction to them. All objects of desire
and delight to the natural life of body or spirit, shall, by the wrath and
curse of God, cease and (...) them, for ever; Rev. 18. 14. And then, as their
sorrowful complaint, shall they go to their long home, and the Mourners go
about the Streets. To their eternal home, the Tophet, Place, or State of
everlasting torment, under wrath, must they go, where to go mourning and
weeping, for ever, about (...) streets of that accursed Babylonish City, made
up of innumerable Angels and Men, unchangeably set to do and be evil, in their
earthly life of nature, as fixed in unchangeable enmity to God and his heavenly
Spirit of Grace.

Verse. 6. Or ever the silver Cord be loosed, or the golden Bowl be broken, or
the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the Wheel broken at the Cistern.
In these dark, mystical Words, the said Truth is farther signified. The four
obscure literal expressions, here, may fitly signify the dreadful Judgments of
God, on every part of Man's immortal being, (figured by the dissolved parts and
powers of bodily life) when once their Trial, and his Patience toward them,
are come to a period. Christ's convincing discoveries of himself, by spiritual
Light, in the (...) and (...), Riches, Glories, and Fulnesses (...) his blessed
Person, were as silver Cords of love, by which, they should have bin drawn and
bound fast to him, in (...) Spirit or Principle of the new and everlasting
Covenant, which is called Love; 1 Cor. 13. Romans 13. 8, -- 10. This Love, this
Gospel-(...) is the fulfiller of the Law of God, in everypoint, in every sense
of (...), literal and mystical; in the utmost extent, and to all intents and
purposes, to God's well-pleasing, and man's Salvation. Out of the golden Bowl
of his heavenly creature-spirit ( Zech. 4. 2.) has Christ poured forth the holy
Oil of spiritual Light, into the mystical Pitcher of Man's natural spirit;
which, abused and turned from, the said Silver Cord is broken, spiritual Light
withdrawn; all sight of Christ, and converse with, or knowledge of God, therein
and by, cut off. So, the said Pitcher is broken, rendered incapable of
receiving or holding such spiritual Waters or Convictions, any more. And, the
Fountain, whence they flowed, shall be stopped up, against them. And then, the
Wheel, by which, in mercy, the said Waters were drawn forth and conveyed to
them, will be broken at the Cistern, and turned into a Wheel or dispensation of
Wrath, to them; God having put an end to his dealing with them, in a way of
Mercy, and Trial. By the same hand or Spirit of Christ, by which Grace is
showed and offered, will God pour forth his Wrath on all wilful, obstinate
despisers of his Love. The same thing seems signified by the Prophets breaking
the staff of beauty, and the staff of bands, as tokens of God's refusing to
have any more to do, with that rebellious house of Israel, that by playing the
harlot with their own Beauty, (Ezekiel. 16. 15.) or doting on their own fading
Glory, in the restored righteous life of the first-Covenant, despised and
rejected Christ, as, by the light of the second, showed and offered (as a
spiritual Lord and Husband) to them, in an everlasting Life and Union,
signified by Bands; Zech. 11. 10, 14. On this, God refuses to have any more to
do with them, in either Covenant, having set up themselves, with the Devil, in
the first, in unchangeable enmity to him and the second.

Verse. 7. Then shall the dust return to the Earth, as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it.
See Chap. 3. 20. Dust, here, (...) the mortal earthy life of the, natural
spirit, as well as body of man. As deprived of all the fading goodness thereof,
must the immortal beings of incorrigibly wicked (...) and Men, return to God,
and stand before him, to receive his (...) sentence and full execution thereof,
as subjects of his unquenchable wrath. From the deep sense hereof, Solomon
cries out (...), as in the beginning of his Book, Chap. 1. 2.

Verse. 8. Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity.
All, in the first-creation, worldly state of Angel and Man, is vanity; no
life, beauty, (...), glory, wisdom, (...), thoughts, belly or meats, desires or
desirables, words, works, etc. but what are perishing vanities. Man (and Angel
too) in the highest honor and seize of their natural make and state, are
altogether vanity; Psalm. 39. 5, 6. It Is then inexcusable madness and folly in
both, to pitch, by their final choice, for true happiness, short of the
convincingly showed, and graciously offered new covenant life of Christ and
God. Doting on their own glory, will render them vessels of dishonor and (...)
contempt.

Verse. 9. And moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the
people Knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many
Proverbs. 1 King. 4. 32.
Solomon, in the infallible Spirit of Truth, declared the deep, hidden things,
and Spiritual Truths (...) God. All Divine and Spiritual things are Mysteries,
Parables, and dark-sayings, to the highest natural capacity of Angel or Man.
It Is only in the infallible light or spiritual wisdom and understanding of
Christ, (communicated to, and set up in Man or Angel, by his
new-creating-workmanship upon them) such Kingdom-things or mysteries can ever
be discerned or judged; 1 Cor. 2. 10, 14, 15. To spiritual Saints only is it
given, to know such things; Mat. 13. 11. To them, (any Men, in their own
understanding) it is not given. In the (...) creature-spirit of Christ, men
come to see the fellowship of the (...); (Ephesians. 3. 9.) or the mysterious
fellowship of Divine and (...)-nature in Christ's wonderful Person. Hereby, the
most dark (...) of God's infinite Divinity, becomes known and seen to Saints.
Christ himself is the supreme Preacher, Discoverer, and Declarer of all. And,
by a portion of his infallible creature-spirit, are Saints qualified to
receive, such visions or sights of God, as he exhibits to them; and to declare
them to others.

Verse. 10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was
written, was upright; even words of Truth.
Here Is a farther account of (...) same thing, by Solomon, as a type of Christ,
the supreme Apostle, (...) or (...), and High Priest of God, the highest and
chief (...) of the divine mind, to Angels and Men. He finds out (and (...) his
true spiritual Disciples and followers, with meet, (...) words, ways and means,
for revealing or opening the mysteries of infinite Divinity, which remain
sealed up, from all first-creation (...). The whole Counsel, and all mysteries
of the infinite divine Spirit, are (...) in the Tables of Christ's twofold
creature nature, root and branch (in the heavenly and glorified earthly life
thereof) so as to be seen and read or understood, by all spiritual Angels and
Men. All the words of this living creature-word, spirit, or Book of God are
acceptable to God, and to obedient Angels and Men. This Book (in personal union
with the Divinity, whose Book it is) was showed John, opened by the Lamb slain,
as to changeable first-creation life, and raised into the second. On the
opening thereof, blessed Angels and Saints fall down and worship the Lamb, for
opening this Book of acceptable words to God, and right words of comfort and
Salvation to them; Rev. 5. 5, -- 14. By a right reading or understanding of
these words of the revealed or opened Book, are other Saints, with Solomon,
qualified to preach them. This, Paul experienced, by Christ's powerful touching
and raising him, into a right spiritual understanding of such words, in a
newness of life and strength, with Daniel, ( Act. 9. 6. Dan. 10. 18, 19.) on
which, he became a Preacher of his unsearchable Divine and Creature-riches,
(Ephesians. 3. 8.) in right words, acceptable to God and Men, as showing the true
way of Sulvation, in which only, men can be acceptable to God, and truly
blessed. Such words, ( as the new-Wine of the spiritual Vine-tree) are (...) to
God and Man; Judges 9. 13.

Verse. 11. The words of the Wise are as Goads, and as Nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.
Here are summed up, the Truths, spoken, in reference to Christ and Saints, as
Christ is the great Master of such Assemblies, and great Shepherd of his sheep,
setting up, and using others, under him, in this high service. Christ and his
wise-hearted, right-spirited Ministers under him, are the only (...) of such
Words, as will make wise unto (...). Such words, as goads and nails, are
fastened by such Masters of Assemblies, in the hearts of obedient Hearers, that
have an incorruptible Seed of the same Wisdom, in them. The words of Man's or
Devil's wisdom, Princes of this World, that come to naught, (1 Cor. 2. 6.)
signify worse then nothing; even that that natural State, they have set up, in
unchangeable enmity to God, is eternal Life. But the words of God's Wisdom, are
not yea and nay, but only yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1. 17, - 20. Words of infallible
Truth and everlasting Life, fastened by Christ himself, immediately; and
mediately, by other Masters of Assemblies, under him.

Verse. 12. And further, by these, my Son, be admonished: of making many Books
there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the Flesh.
What are these many Books, without end, or to no end? and, much study or
reading, that is weariness to the flesh? Both signify the unprofitable labor in
Man's Wisdom, that can never attain the right knowledge of spiritual Mysteries,
the glorious Truths or things of the Kingdom of God. Yea, that Wisdom is the
very vail on, Man's heart, that hinders his sight, as to any such things. In
that wisdom can Man never see beyond, no nor to the end of what is to be
abolished. So, sets up in the fading (...), Goodness or Glory of that
first-Covenant State, that is to be done away, and utterly abolished out of all
Angels and Men; 2 Cor. 3. 13. Christ, when he had taken this fleshly Vail, rent
it, in himself; Heb. 10. 20. By the death of our natural spirit, at best, can
it be so rent in us, as to make way for our spiritual sight of (...), eternal
things, things of God. Wherever Moses or the Law, yea, and whole Scripture is
read, by such as have this Vail on their Hearts, a single, uncrucified,
natural, first-Covenant (...), they see nothing but letter, old Testament, or
first-Covenant sense of all Scripture; nothing of the Spirit, new Testament, or
second Covenant and spiritual meaning, in all; 2 Cor. 3. 13, -- 15. The
enlightened fleshly, first-Covenant Jews, or Lawyers, saw nothing of
Gospel-mysteries, couched under Moses's typical Law-writings; by which, even
he, they trusted in, condemned them, as Rejecters of all spiritual Truths or
Mysteries, by him, therein declared. (...). 5. 45, -- 47. They saw the literal,
but did not believe the spiritual sense of (and things in) Moses's Writings;
the proper objects of spiritual Faith, discerning, or understanding. They
refused the way of having such an understanding brought a-float, in them; the
death and loss of their own. Hence, such enlight'ned Professors, with their
Teachers and Rulers, not knowing Christ, nor the voices of Moses, and their own
Prophets, which were read, and expounded, every Sabbath day, became the unhappy
fulfillers of them, only, in contradicting, blaspheming and crucifying him, for
witnessing asserting and declaring the very spiritual Truths and Mysteries of
Mose's and the Prophet's Writings, concerning himself, or his mysterious,
wonderful, all-comprehensive Person. Act. 13. 27. What then is such a Man like
to arrive at, or come to, as to the doing himself or other's good, in the way
of Salvation, that understands not one tittle of the saving or spiritual sense
of any Scripture? What amount all such a Man's reading, study, labor,
preachings, writings, books, or whatever he can say or do, through his whole
life, in but that Law-wisdom, that is the very black and thick, darkning Vail,
upon him, keeping him under a perfect impossibility of ever finding out any one
spiritual Mystery or Truth, in all Scripture? No man, in that foolish-wisdom,
ever receives the spiritual or Gospel-Testimony of any Scripture, Joh. 3. 32. A
becoming a Fool, as to that Wisdom, is undispensably necessary, in the methods
and contrivements of God's Wisdom, to a becoming wise unto Salvation, that is,
spiritually wise, in God; so as to understand all things; 1 Cor. 1. 20. and 2.
14, 15. and 3. 18, 19. and 4. 10. None of the divine and spiritual Things, or
Mysteries of God the Father, and of Christ the Son (Col. 2. 2.) (...),
conceives, perceives, receives any Man, save in spiritual Light or
new creature Understanding; for, they can only be spiritually discerned; 1 Cor.
2. 11, -- 14. All the mysterious Truths or Things of God (engraven in the
creature-spirit of Christ, the living Word or Book of God; or signified in the
Transcript or Copy thereof, his written Oracles or Scriptures of Truth, the
holy Bible or Book of God) are perfectly shut up from (and therefore as
perfectly shut out by) Man's wisdom, in all his pretended Divinity-preachings
and Writings, under the disguising title of a Minister of the Gospel. Of whose
Gospel? Christ's? A likely matter! The dark Law-vail is upon his heart, as to
all Christ's Gospel-matters. No humane improvements of that Wisdom (by
cultivating Educationarts, or means, possible) signify any thing, save a being
more confident and strongly armed, to fight Satan's Battles against Christ's
Gospel, in defense of that, he preached, at first, to Eve. How dark and
ignorant were the wise and learned Jewish Teachers, as to all the things in
Christ's Gospel Ministry or teaching, which ignorant, unlearned ( Act. 4. 13.)
Fishermen and Women (under the teaching-Influence of Christ, by which, a
spiritual Understanding was wakened and set up in them) clearly understood?
Solomon, therefore, advises Men to cease from the unprofitable, Mercenary,
trading labor of their own Understanding, (unprofitable, save only for the
gratifying their worldly Interest, by bringing in rewards and honor from Man,
to them) as ever they hope to make any right work on it, at preaching, and
interpreting the Scriptures. They must wait for the Inspirations of the
Almighty, to give or set up in them a spiritual Understanding; Job 32. 8.
Otherwise, preach and write, while they will, the (...) Scripture, as to the
whole counsel of God, or spiritual, saving Sense, Truths, and Mysteries
thereof, is a Book sealed, to them; Isa. 29. 11. Neither learned, nor unlearned
(ver. 12.) as to the Wisdom of Man, can (...), or understand it. So, all man's
Toil and Study, in his own tossing, rolling, fluctuating spirit, under the
mystical wind or inspiration of the very spirit of the Devil, must needs be
unprofitable, as to his own or others true Blessedness; and very wearisom to
his flesh, or whole man, in his but restored natural State, a fleshly,
first-covenant Law-life, Righteousness, and Wisdom. He and his blind Followers
will meet with final disappointment, as to all their self-pleasing hopes and
expectations, therein. After all their confident preaching, hearing laboring,
and walking in their own spirit, in the light of the kindled fire, or Law-zeal
thereof, and compassing themselves about with the sparks, (Works or best Fruits
performed or produced by them, therein) will they be all forced to lie down,
for ever, in Sorrow, under Wrath; Isa. 50. 11. He that quit's all that old name
and life, they trust in, and trusts wholly in the new life or name of the Lord,
is sure to meet with a perfectly contrary issue, and reward, in a state of
eternal Blessedness; ver. 10. Those that find themselves, weary and heavy
laden, in this unprofitable, toilsom course, in their own Wisdom, which is but
bodily exercise, or exercise of the vile, natural body, and state of life, (1 Timothy 4. 8. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45.) Must and will come to Christ, for
spiritual Life and Understanding, who will make way for the springing up of the
incorruptible Seed thereof (where it is) by renting the fleshly Law-vail, and
pulling down the earthen Partition Wall, between them and him (in his spiritual
Gospel-life) by the demolishing Work of his Cross. So alone, can they come to
see and enjoy him, with all his divine, heavenly, spiritual Things and Truths,
as their true Rest and Blessedness, for ever. Mat. 11. 28, -- 30. Never had
Christ's Gospel, in primitive Gospel Times, at best, any national reception, or
owning and countenance. Constantine's owning and embodying it with the Laws of
the Empire, so as to bring it under the Erastian protection and guardianship of
the civil Magistrate, was the foundation of Antichristianism. It Is more then
sorely and dangerously suspicious, that all variety of humane Undertakers at
Gospel-preaching (that can thereby find a worldly self-interest, gratified, in
accumulated worldly Honors and Riches) will, at bottom be found Satan's
Gospel Ministers, and Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 13, -- 15. Mat. 24. 24. And herein,
the grossest idolatrous pretenders to Christ's Gospel, (...) best; and, the
more refined still, worse and worse; yet, all get something (whereas Paul,
worth millions of them, labored with his hands to supply his own and other's
wants; Act. 20. 34.) under the God of this World, whose interest they most
certainly carry on, and serve, against Christ and his Gospel, in all their
clashing varieties, think or say what they will.

Verse. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep
his Commandments: for, this is the whole duty of Man.
Man ought so to fear God, as to be found a right keeper of his Commands. This
is Man under a double obligation for, as the work of God's hands, (...) (...);
and as redeemed out of the Fall, since. Yea, all imaginable ties and
obligations are upon him, for performing this result and total sum of all
instruction and Duty; Fear God, and keep his Commandments. These Commands,
joined with the true fear of God, were most exactly kept and observed by Christ
himself; even his Father's Commands for his (and his followers) laying down the
fading Law-life of Nature, that they may take it up again, in and with the
everlasting righteous Gospel-life of his spirit of Grace; Joh. 10. 17, 18. and
Joh. 14. 15, 21, 23. From the true Sonly fear of God, and love to his Mercy, or
unspeakable Gospel-gift of eternal Life, must we hate, and do judgment (or,
receive and also execute God's righteous Sentence of Death, 2 Cor. 1. 9.) on
our most restored Law-state of Nature. By such humbling our selves to the death
of our Nature, at best, can we come to walk, as Enoch, with God, in his Spirit
of Grace, that is in unchangeable harmony of mind and will, with his infinite
divine Spirit. Mic. 6. 8. How can two Men, walk together, (and how much less,
God and man) except they be agreed? This is the concluding sum of all, God
requir's of us, That we obediently keep and do all his Commands, in his
never-sinning or erring Spirit of everlasting Righteousness and infallible
Truth. The best works or fruits, done or brought forth in our Law-life of
enmity to God, can never answer his requirings of us. Can we love him, with all
our heart, soul, mind, and strength, in a spirit of direct enmity to him? Luke
10. 27. Direct contradiction. The Gospel Spirit of Grace, called Love, is the
fulfiller of the whole Law, mind and will of God; Romans 13. 8, -10.

Verse. 14. For, God shall bring every work into Judgment; with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it in be evil.
Romans 2. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 10. The Man Christ will be found able to do all this;
Heb. 4. (...), 13. The sad consequents of rejecting the advice; given, (v. 13.)
will be eternal misery, torment, and vexation of spirit, on the irrecoverable
loss of all the fading goodness or comforts of the natural state; and, an
eternal exclusion from the once fairly showed and offered never-fading goodness
and glory of a spiritual, eternal life of everlasting righteousness. This will
be concluded by God's infallible Spirit of Truth, whose Authority ( when Christ
appears Judge himself, on his Throne) shall, no longer, be questioned or
disputed, (as all along this World, in Satan's reign and man's day, it has) but
every tongue shall confess it, as of right, belonging to the Man Christ; Joh.
5. 22, 27. Phil. 2. 11. The undeniable truth of his (...) Judgment, will have a
universal acknowledgement from all good and evil Angels and Men. By the
irresistible beamings-forth of the light of that Spirit, (wherein he will judge
and pronounce the Sentence of God's infinitely just and righteous mind and
will) shall the Books of all hearts and consciences be forced open or unlocked,
so as to make enemies themselves, witnesses for him, against themselves, on
their amazing forced remembrance of, and his setting all their innumerable sins
and abominations, naked and open, in the view of themselves and all others. And
then will Christ, also, open his own infallible Book of Records, in which he
has registered and set down, in indeleble characters, from first to last,
(according to the divine sight and judgment of God) all, done by, or found in
every Angel and Man, good or bad; Rev. 20. 12, 13. The Books of all Men's and
Angel's Consciences will be opened, and then Christ's own Book, the Book of
Life, out of which, all Men shall be judged according to their works. Out of,
and by all these Books, will God's Judgment pronounced on Men, be found,
clearly and undeniably righteous. For, the Records in the hearts and
consciences of men, will be found in exact harmony with what is written in God's
own Book, which will lay the evil creature, under undeniable guilt, and just
condemnation, to the silencing and stopping every blasphemous mouth of
iniquity. And then, also, shall the secret hidden spiritual Life of Saints,
with the well-pleasing right works and fruits thereof (unobserved and un-own'd,
yea, blasphemed by enemies) be opened and manifested to all, for their eternal
justification. All secret evils, that have lain hid in enemies, under all fair
shows in holy (...); and all (...) secret good works of spiritual Saints, that
have lain hid under the marred visage of their crucified natural man, shall be
brought into public and general view. So will the incorrigibly wicked be sent,
as justly condemned persons, into everlasting punishment; and, the unchangeably
Righteous, into Life eternal; Mat. 25. 31, -- 46.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 102. line 21. for the in, read, in the. P. 176. l. 1. (...). dull, r.
duly. P. 323. l. 16. f. cammon, r. common. P. 380. l. last, f. creation r
Cretian. Some (...) mistakes, and in stopping, are left to the ingenuous Reader.


