THE Swearing-Master: OR, A CONFERENCE Between two Country-Fellows Concerning
the TIMES.
NED. and WILL. Ned. COme Will. unstring, and pay your Groat, for I am confident
thou wast fuddl'd last night, thou look so thin and small-beerish this
morning.


Will. Fuddl'd quoth'a, I would that were the worst on it Ned, for then a Nap
might do ones business, and set a body to rights again; But I tell thee my
Head's broke, my Brains are split, I am distracted, and my senses are all
turned wrong side outward; and all this with the dreadful Image and Reflection
of yesternights talk.


Ned. What, I warrant you drank Brandy last night, with the two Gentlemen that
'lighted at Bess's just as I went away.


Will. That Is all nothing; But the talk, the talk that I had with them was
enough to have made all the wise men of Greece stark mad. I did but only dream
of it in the night, (which you know I could not help) and methought the Devil
had like to have taken me napping, and carried me sheer away.


Ned. Prithee, honest Will. what could that be?


Will. Hold a blow there Mr. Edward; for, to tell you the truth, the Gentlemen
have sworn me to secrecy, and I would have you know I scorn to forswear my
self.


Ned. Pish, man, art thou no forwarder in the knowledge of this present world,
than to talk of forswearing thy self? That Is no sin sure; or at least, every
body does not believe it is.


Will. By my troth thou talk so like one of their Disciples, that, if thou will swear secrecy to me again, I Will even tell thee all our Conversation; for
in good earnest it lies so heavy upon my stomach, that I would give all the
world to be eased on it.


Ned. I swear then (look this way) by all that is contained in the round world,
and twenty thousand miles beyond it, That I Will be as secreat as a deed of
darkness; except I should chance to light of some body that will swear secrecy
to me again, and to such a one you know I may tell it, let it be what it will
under TREASON.


Will. Very good; I see how it will be; The Gentlemen they have told me
something under and Oath of secrecy; I shall tell it thee upon the same terms;
thou shall tell it a third; that third shall tell it to three thousand, and so
on to the end of the Chapter, till every body know it, through every bodies
Perjury.


Ned. Alas, alas! Will. if Perjury be a sin, how many men do you and I know,
(and some of very good fashion too) that will smoke for it in the Devils
Kitchen. But prithee be sudden, and tell me what is this mighty secret?


Will. Why I Will tell thee then; That Fellow which thou saw there in the
Velvet-Cap, that looked so like my Landlord, is a Swearing-Master, and that
other tall lean Janizary with the Whiskers that was with him, is his Usher, and
they are come down into our Country here to set up a Swearing-School.


Ned. A Swearing-School say thou? And what do thou think Justice Brushum
(God bless his Worship) will say to that? ha?


Will. Away you Fool, thou do not understand right. All the Scholars at their
admission must swear secrecy, and then there is no danger. But if any leaky
Fellow (like thee or me) should chance to discover all, the Master has a
beyond-sea-Patent to show for it, from -- let me see -- Sancha Pancha I think
they call the place; and he has a Friend of a certain Doctorhere in England,
Dr. Case I think his Name is, and a whole Grand Jury of a mattet of nineteen
good men and true besides.


Ned. Hang 'em, they will do no good on it here in the Country; they were better
even go back again to London, and there they may fairly put out Printed-bills
of their Mystery: But what do such clumsie Bumkinly Fellows as thou are I care
for swearing, except it be at the Alehouse, or at the Sizes? and then we can do
it without the help of a Master.


Will. Back again to London, say thou? That will never do, for a trick that I
heard them telling yesternight, till the next P --.


Ned. Sweet William, what trick was that?


Will. Why, you must know, Ned, that as the transporting of Irish-Cattel spoiled
the Trade of England, and was voted a Nuisance, so the transporting of Irish-
Witnesses has been the very ruin and breaking of a great many English
Oath-breakers, who (poor Rogues) can scarce make own and own at years end, the
Bogg-trotters do so under-sell them: But they said, they hoped that the next P
-- would prefer a Bill against them, as well as that not long since did against
their Cattle.


Ned. But prithee what would this Swearing-Master be at? When a Scholar has
spent a great deal of Money and Pains in learning to Swear and Forswear, how
shall he do, I say, (when he comes to understand his Trade perfectly) to set up
for himself, and get a Livelihood by it?


Will. Why to that he answers thus, and methinks very modestly, That, to say the
Truth, indeed the Trade is not so good as it was when it came first up, by a
great matter in the week; but that it is still such, that a good Husband may
make an honest shift to live on it.


Ned. Ay, but I have heard that there are a great many of those poor Irish, and
some of the English too, of that Profession, that have made said complaints of
Poverty, that have been readier to Curse than Swear, and wished with all their
hearts they had been bound to some other Trades.


Will. Pish! Do not thou hear all sorts of Tradesmen crying out continually
of bad Times and dead Trading? That Is all but a mere face and juggle to
discourage other undertakers; But if there were nothing to be got by
Evidencing, why should there be so much projecting and endeavoring to get into
the employment? Nay, I Will tell thee, (for a matter of three or four hundred
good substantial What-d'ye-lacks that have shut up Shop within these three
years) I can remember but one of these Fellows that has miscarried, (and they
say 'twas his own fault too,) and that was one Fitz what-d'ye-call him; and he,
poor Rogue, was hissed off the Stage I know not how, unpitied, and forsaken by
every body alive, but his Wife and John Ketch.


Ned. Yes, I can tell thee of another; and that was our Countryman, that went
to set up at Brussels: I have forgot his Name; but I remember people said he
was Nephew to the Quaker that went to Rome to convert the Pope.


Will. Why prithee what of him?


Ned. He went to the Governor of the Spanish-Netherlands, you must know, with
his mouth-full of a fine story of a Plot, a Design, an Intrigue, a Consult, and
God knows what, of subverting the Government; but the Issue of his brain was so
tender and delicate, that all the Plotters and Counter-plotters in England
could never have kept it alive in that Air. Ill luck he had to be found out in
it; and so was broken (as they say) upon the Wheel of Fortune.


Will. I marry Sir, this comes of gadding abroad; had he staid, and made the
best use of his Talent at home, he might (for ought I know) have been alive,
and live-like at this day. But, poor shallow-brain'd Rascal, he never
remembered that all Plants do not grow in all Countries; And that, though they
send us now and then a Cross-biter from beyond Sea, yet they will be hanged before
they will take any of ours. England, England is the only dear place for
propagating of Lies, and Shams, and Plots, and Cheats; The Infidels of the
Continent, I warrant you, they laugh smoothly at our Fears, and can make
themselves sport enough to see us Islanders damned for having too much Faith.


Ned. But prithee Will. tell me now, what would thou have a body do? Suppose
now that Lazarello of Tormes and the Knight of the Oracle should take their
Corpulent Oaths before Mr. Brushum, That seven Pilgrims in Buckram, with every
one a brown Bill in his Pocket, knocked thee (or say me) in the head
yester-evening, about six a clock, (or say between six and seven, to be sure,)
should either thou or I (think thou) be such wicked profligate Unbelievers,
as to give no Credit to the Evidence, especially since in such Cases (as Gaffer
Whisker the Constable tells us) they swear for the King? For my part I know
what I think, and I know what I should think: But yet (you may imagine if you
please) there are those in England, that would believe (just as they do the
Gospel) that what was sworn must needs be truth; That they were really
(according to the Deposition or Narrative) killed at such or such a time; and
that now, for all their walking, and talking, and drinking, and thinking, they
are but mere Ghosts and Specter, God bless us!


Will. Well, now I Will tell thee in such a case what I would do; I would turn my
back exactly to the Evidence, and looking 'em full in the faces over my left
shoulder, I would tell 'em they ly'd in their throats; that they were Pimps,
and Rogues, and had been brought up at the Swearing-School, though they were
the best Tormes's and Oracles in the Nation.


Ned. Why at this rate, though every body be free to swear, you would have
every body free to believe as they pleased, would you not?


Will. Ay that I would in sober sadness; for in my mind it is as plain as the
Nose upon a man's Face, that swearing Knaves make believing Fools, and that
believing Fools make swearing Knaves; and God knows when we shall have an end
of this Circle.


Ned. Now, Will. methinks thou have spoken gravely, and like a Philosopher, and
if we had a Pen and Ink here, I would subscribe what thou have said; and
there is an end.


LONDON: Printed for N. T. 1681.


