THE SINNERS Last Sentence TO Eternal Punishment, FOR SINS of OMISSION.

Wherein is discovered, The Nature, The Causes, and The Cure
Of those Sins.

By Geo. Swinnock, M. A.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation? etc. London, Printed for Geo. Swinnock, and are to be sold at
the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside, 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES Earl of Carnarvon, Lord Dormer, Viscount
Ascot, Baron of Wing, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
FOr so mean a thing as I am to address my self to a Personage of your Honor
and Quality, may cause wonder in others, and abashment in my self: But for some
Considerations, which may give them satisfaction, and me boldness, and
encouragement.

What I now present your Honor, is a poor Widows mite; such as, being cast
into the Treasury of Gods Temple, may contribute something to repair the
breaches of collapsed Piety, and such as, I hope, the Lord of Lords will not
despise.

Do I call it Mine? (I must correct my self) it is indeed your Honors, and my
tendering it to your acceptance, is but my paying you your own: It is a Legacy
left you by my dear deceased Husband, who commanded me on his deathbed in all
humble wise to present it to your Honor, and publish it under your Protection:
So that although it was left with me, it was left by him for your Honor.

Do I call it a Legacy? (I must again correct, and confess) It is a due Debt:
For our poor Family stands most deeply obliged to your Honor, who have been
pleased to exercise a generous bounty toward us, and such as is suitable to
none but a noble mind.

The Debt is humbly acknowledged by us, and shall be undoubtedly repaid by the
Lord, to whom it was lent: Your Lordship may with comfort read the Specialty in
Gods own Word, Prove. 19.17.
which is very good security. But as for us, alas! what have we to return?
except these gleanings of the Fruits of my dear Husbands Labors, even some of
those, which were brought forth, when he last labored in the Lords Vineyard.

I desire for ever to adore the goodness of God toward me, whose weak
condition seemed to cry like that woman of the wives of the Sons of the
Prophets, unto Elisha, saying, Thy Servant my Hushand is dead, and thou
know, that thy Servant did fear the Lord, etc. 2 Kings 4.1. To which Cry,
your Lordships overflowing munificence has answered very like the Man of God,
verse. 7. Go, and sell the Oil, and pay thy Debt, and live thou, and thy
Children, of the rest.

As for the matter of this Discourse, it is not proper for me to reflect
thereon. Only I have a good confidence, That, as your Honor has been pleased
to cast a favorable Eye on other of my Husbands Works, professing profit and
pleasure in the reading of them; So these words of your dying Servant will not
be unsuccessful, but have the

(...) Good Reader,
BEing requested to recommend this Treatise to thy acceptance, I readily
complied with the motion, induced thereunto partly by my respect to the Author
Mr. Swinnock, a Name well known to most serious Christians, by his former
savoury and useful Works, published for the good of the Church, before one of
which I have expressed my just esteem of his Gifts and Graces in an Epistle
prefixed, and therefore commendation is not my business now (it needs not),
but attestation; and to assure thee, that this piece is his, delivered by his
own hands, to his Son, a little before his, to him blessed, but (alas) to us
untimely death, He died Nov. 0. 1673. in the 46th year of his Age.
and accordingly thou will find the one spirit of the Author in it, and the
same holy, lively way of discoursing, which is so remarkable in his other
Writings, partly with respect to the matter, which is about the eternal
recompenses, as they are represented by our Lord in a Scheme or Draught of the
last Judgment. We are hedged within the compass of our Duty both on the right
hand, and on the left; on the right hand, with the hopes of a most blessed
everlasting Estate; on the left, with the fears of endless and neverceasing
Torments: Reflections on the former are comfortable; what is sweeter than to
live in the expectation and foresight of endless Glory? But the consideration
of the latter is also profitable. We need many Sermons about Hell, to keep us
out of Hell; therefore in this Treatise the worthy Author insisteth on the
dreadful Doom and Sentence that shall pass on the Wicked at the last day.

There is also another thing largely represented which is of great use, the
hainousness of Sins of Omission. Sin in the general is a transgression of the
Law, 1 John 3.4. Now the Law may be transgressed either by omitting what is
commanded as a Duty to God, or by committing what is forbidden, when we
directly transgress an affirmative Precept, that is a sin of Omission; but when
we do any thing against a negative Precept, that is a sin of Commission; in
both there is Disobedience, and so by consequence contempt of Gods Authority.
When Saul had not done what God bids him to do, he tells him, That Rebellion
is as a sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness as Idolatry; 1 Samuel 15.13.
Implying, that Omission to be Rebellion and Stubbornness, for which God would
rend the Kingdom from him: So for a sin of Omission he put by Eli's Family from
the Priesthood, 1 Samuel 3.19. I will judge his House for ever, because his Sons
had made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. Now the more necessary
the Duties omitted are, the greater is the sin, as Heb. 2.3. especially if the
Omission be total, Psalm. 14.3. Jer. 2.32. Or when the Duty is most seasonable,
Prove. 17.16. Or the performance easy; for this is to stand with God for a
trifle, he is denied a drop that would not give a crum, Luke 16.24. Or when we
are fully convinced that it is our Duty, James 4.17. Briefly these sins of
Omission are the ruin of most people in the World; yea, the Children of God
oftener offend in these kind of Sins, than in fowler excesses. Oh how many of
them go out of the World bewailing their neglects and omissions; the best might
have done much more for God than ever they have yet done. But I detain thee too
long from the Book its self; read and peruse it, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things. I am

Thine in all Christian Observation, Tho. Manton, D.D.

MATTHEW. 25.41, 42. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink.


CHAP. I. The Preface and Introduction to the Text.
THough the Wise God is pleased now and then to keep a Peti-Sessions at this
day, and to execute Vengeance on some Sinners, lest men should question his
Providence, and but on some, lest they should question his Patience; Yet the
Great Assize, when Justice shall have a solemn, public and general Triumph,
will be the last Day. This World is the Theater whereon Mercy is acting its
part every moment; if Justice peep out a little, as the Sun out of a Cloud, it
is quickly recalled and hidden again, it will not appear in its full beauty,
and glory, and brightness, till all Nations appear in the other World. Here all
things come alike to all, there is one event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, to the Clean and to the Unclean, to him that swears, and to him that
fears an Oath, Eccles. 9.2. The Sun of Prosperity shines, and the Showers of
Adversity fall on both promiscuously. If there be any difference for the
better, it is commonly on the worser side, Psalm. 73.3. to the 8. verse. But
there when the last Trump shall sound, the living be changed, the dead raised,
and all shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, when the Saints shall
be called, honored, acquitted, and rewarded; when the Sinner shall be
arraigned, accused, condemned, and executed, when the Judge shall say to the
Saints on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World: And to the Sinners on his
left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Then men will see and say, Verily there is a reward for
the Righteous, Surely there is a God that judges in the World. Then men shall
return and discern a difference between the Righteous and the Wicked, between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

In relation to this great and general Judgment, we may consider:

1. The Efficient or Judge, verse. 31. The Son of man shall come in his glory,
with all his holy Angels, and shall sit on the Throne of his Glory. He that was
judged by man, shall be Judge of men.

2. The Subject or Persons to be judged, all the World; verse. 32. And before
him shall be gathered all Nations. The Congregation of the whole World together
shall follow upon the sound of the Trumpet. In a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last Trumpet, (for the Trumpet shall sound) the dead (indefinitely)
shall be raised, 1 Cor. 15.52. Some understand the sound of the Trumpet
Metaphorically, for the Virtue and Power of Christ, whereby he shall cite and
cause all the World to appear before him. Others take it literally and
properly, as God appeared on Mount Sinai, when he gave the Law with the long
and loud sound of a Trumpet, Exodus 19.19. So he will appear at the great Day
with the sound of a Trump, when he comes to reckon with men for the breach of
the Law, Matthew. 24.31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet. The Jews gathered their solemn Assemblies together with the sound of a
Trumpet.

And God will gather the greatest assembly of men that ever was with the sound
of a Trumpet. Adam shall then see all his Children to the hundredth, and
thousandth, and hundred thousand Generation.

3. The Form or Proceeding at that day, from verse. 32. to the end.

4. The Event or Execution of the Sentence, verse. 1. And these shall go into
everlasting punishment, (as Hamans face was covered when the Sentence was
given, and presently led forth to Execution) and the Righteous into life
eternal.

About the Form or Process of this Day, wherein the Text lies, these four
particulars are observable: 1. The separation of Persons. 2. The setting them
in their places. 3. The manifestation of persons and things. 4. The
pronunciation of the Sentence.


1. The separation of Persons. Now the Tares and Wheat grow together, but then
they shall be parted asunder, verse. 32. And before him shall be gathered all
Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd separateth
his sheep from the goats. Here they mingle together in the same House and
Family, and Society, but there the Devils Herd of Goats shall be by themselves,
and Christ's Flock by themselves. The Wicked shall be gathered together, and he
shall bind them in bundles, Matthew. 13.41. and the Godly gathered together. The
Sinner shall have his desire, not to be troubled with Admonitions or
Singularity of the Precise; and the Saint shall have his Prayer, not to be
vexed with the filthy Conversation of the Profane, Psalm. 26.4, 5, 6, 7. I have
not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with Dissemblers: I have hated
the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the Wicked, etc.

2. The setting them in their places. Now the vilest men are exalted, and the
most virtuous debased, but then it shall be otherwise. And then he shall set
the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left, verse. 33. Here the
Godly are set in low places on foot-stools, the Wicked in high places, on
Thrones: But there the Godly shall be honored, and the Wicked disgraced. The
right hand is a place of the greatest honor. To sit at a Kings right hand, is
the highest Seat next him. To sit on King Solomon's right hand, was the honor
he gave his Mother, 1 King. 2.19. To sit at the right hand of God, is peculiar
to Christ, whom he has honored and exalted above Principalities and Powers.
To which of the Angels said he at any time, sit thou on my right hand, Ephesians.
20.21. Heb. 1.13. And to sit on the right hand of Christ will be the honor of
his Spouse, his Queen. At thy right hand was the Queen in Gold of Ophir, Psalm.
45.9. They who are now placed at the left hand of earthly Princes, will then be
placed at the right hand of the King of Kings, of the blessed and glorious
Potentate; and they who are now placed at Kings right hands, will be placed at
Christ's left hand.

3. The manifestation of Persons and things:

1. Of Persons.

1. Of Men. All men shall then be pellucid and transparent as Crystal. We must
all appear, (...), 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, (...) The word signifies a clear and a permanent manifestation.
Such a clear manifestation of men, that every one may see into them, what they
are, and what they have been; and such a permanent manifestation as will last
for ever, according to the Greek Scholiast, on 1 Timothy 3.18. Good men shall then
be manifested, their Principles, their Practices, their Designs and Purposes,
and their uprightness in all to their glory and praise. They who are now
accused of Hypocrisy, and Obstinacy, and Pride, and Peevishness; because they
could not swim with the stream, nor run with others to the same excess of riot,
will then be manifested to be men of Integrity and Humility, and to have
declined the profane courses of others, not out of foolish preciseness, or
needless scrupulosity, or humoursomeness, but out of Conscience to the Commands
of God. Their Faith, and Love, and Sincerity, will be found to their praise,
and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus; When Christ who is our Life
shall appear, then shall ye appear with him in Glory, 1 Pet. 1.7. They who are
now despised, and reproached, and trampled on as the dirt and dung, and filth
of the Earth, will then be manifested to be Gods Jewels, Christ's Glory, and the
Temples of the Holy Ghost. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, we shall
appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.4. Then there will be a manifestation of the
Sons of God, Romans 8.19.

Bad men will then be manifested to be the Servants of Unrighteousness, the
Children of the Devil, the Slaves and Vassals of Corruption, and
notwithstanding all their glorious Profession, and specious Pretenses, to have
been but as a painted Sepulcher, gaudy without, and rottenness within; or as a
curious Chimney-piece, without white and shining, but within full of soot and
blackness: He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the thoughts of the heart.

2. Of the Lord Jesus Christ. We read of the appearing of Christ at that day, 1
Pet. 1.7. Col. 3.4. He was veiled, and hid, and obscured, when on Earth, but
then he shall be revealed and discovered to the whole World. When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. And it will be a glorious
Revelation. Looking for the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13.

In this World he appeared as the Son of man, as one born of a Woman, and in
the form of a Servant; but then he shall appear as the Son of God, as the only
begotten of the Father, and as the Head of Principalities and Powers, and as
the Heir of all things, Matthew. 16.27. For the Son of Man shall come in the
Glory of his Father, with his Angels: and then he shall reward every man
according to his works. He shall come in the Glory of his Father; i. e. in that
Glory and Honor which is proper and peculiar to the Divine Nature.

At his first appearing a weak mortal man was his Harbinger, Mat. 3.3, 4.
to prepare his way before him; But at his second appearing, a mighty immortal
Archangel shall be his forerunner, and go before him. For the Lord himself
shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. At his first appearing he was accompanied with a
few poor mean Fishermen, but at his second appearing he shall be attended with
his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. With all his holy Angels, Matthew. 6.27. With
the thousand thousand that are before him, and the ten thousand times ten
thousand that minister to him.

At his first appearing he came as a Servant to minister unto others, and to be
abased; He came riding upon an Ass, Matthew. 20.5. and 28. But at his second
appearing he shall come in the Clouds of Heaven as his Chariot, Matthew. 26.61.
To be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe. And then
he shall appear as a Lord; some think it is therefore called the Lord's Day, 2
Pet. 3.10.

At his first appearing he appeared wholly as a Savior and Redeemer. When he
appeared to the World, the Philanthropy, or kindness of God to man appeared,
Titus 3.4. And the Grace of God that brings Salvation appeared, Titus 2.11.
But then he shall appear as a Judge, full of Fire, and Fury, and Wrath against
his Enemies. The Kings, and Captains, and Nobles will call to the Rocks to fall
on them, and to the Mountains to cover them from the wrath of the Lamb, when
that great day of his Wrath is come, Rev. 6.16, 17.

At first he appeared as a Sinner; In the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.
He was numbered among the Transgressors: The Lord laid on him the inquity of us
all, Isa. 53.12. He was called a Samaritan, and one that had a Devil, Joh. 10.
A Winebibber, and a Glutton, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, Joh. 8.48.
Matthew. 11.19. A Traitor against Caesar, Joh. 19.12. One guilty of Blasphemy
against God, Matthew. 26.65. A Conjurer, and one in Compact and Covenant with the
Devil, Matthew. 12.24. But his second appearing will be without any such likeness
of sinful Flesh, or imputation of sin by God, or reputation of a Sinner among
men. But unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time without
sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. ult.

2. There will be at that day a manifestation of things. The Books that are now
sealed up, will then be opened, Rev. 20.12.

The Book of the Divine Decrees will then be unclasped, and the Names written
in the Lambs Book of Life will then be visible and legible to all. And I saw
the dead small and great stand before God, and the Books were opened, and
another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, Rev. 20.12. All the Divine
Providence in time will be manifest, then will the Divine Purpose from
eternity, as now the Divine Purpose is manifest by the Divine Providence.

The Book of Divine Providence will then be opened, and all the rare curious
Contrivances thereof unfolded; the agreement of Providence with the Promises
(as well as with the eternal Purpose) will then be apparent. The History of the
whole World will then be read by the Saints in one entire Volume. Now we see a
little of Gods Wisdom, and Power, and Faithfulness in one Providence, and a
little in another, and a little in a third; yea, we are so blind, and
Providence often so dark, that through our ignorance and unbelief, God loses
much of the Glory due to him for them, and we much of the comfort we might
receive by them; but then we shall with strengthened and enlarged
Understandings discern the whole Series, Method, and Contexture of Divine
Providence together, and how by a powerful, wise, gracious Government, all
things conspired, and combined, and wrought together for our everlasting good,
Romans 8. 28. It Is one thing to see a rich piece of Arras, with a curious story
wrought in it, by parcels and pieces, and another thing to see it all together,
hung up, and to be seen all at once with one view.

The Book of Conscience will then be opened. Though now wicked men blot and
blur this Book by their wilful Presumptuous sins, that they cannot read it;
though they darken their Eyes, and stiffen their Wills, and harden their
Hearts, and will not read it, yet then they shall have the Book of Conscience
representing to them in large, though black, yea bloody Characters, all their
atheistical Impieties, Enormities, Drunkenness, Revellings, Debaucheries,
Hypocrisies, Blasphemies, and they shall be forced to read them with sorrow and
terror, whether they will or no.

CHAP. II. The division and brief Explication of
4. THe Pronunciation of the Sentence, verse. 41, 42, 43, etc.

In which we may take notice:

1. Of the Persons sentenced; these are described: 1. By their station, on the
left hand; Then shall he say to them on the left hand. 2. By their condition,
cursed ones, Depart ye cursed.


2. Of their punishment. In which there is: 1. Pain of loss, Depart from me. 2.
Pain of sense, which punishment is aggravated.


1. By its extremity, Fire. This is amplified: 1. By their Companions in those
flames, The Devil and his Angels. 2. By the Divine Ordination of it for them,
Prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


2. By its eternity, Everlasting Fire.

3. Of the reason of this punishment; For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat:
I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, verse. 42, 43.

I shall begin with the Sentence, wherein every word speaks Woe and Wrath, Fire
and Fury, Death and Damnation; and every syllable speaks the deepest Sorrow and
dreadfulest Sufferings. It is like Ezekiel's Roll, written within and without;
and within is written Lamentation, Weeping and Woe, Ezekiel. 2.10. The Lord Chief
Justice of the World, the Judge of the Quick and Dead is now in all his Robes
and Royalty, with millions of glorious Attendants, in the Glory of his Father,
with all his holy Angels, set on the Bench. The poor Prisoner, whose trembling
Soul is newly reunited to the loathsome Carcass of his Body, is dragged to the
Bar, awaiting and expecting some doleful doom. He is lately come from Hell, to
give an account of his Life on Earth, and to receive his Sentence; and loath he
is to go back to that place of torments, as knowing that the pain of his Body
will be a new and grievous addition to his misery, when that shall burn in
flames as his Soul does already in fury. Therefore he pleads,

Prisoner. Lord let me stay here (though poor wretch he has his Hell about him
in his accusing, affrighting Conscience) rather than go to that Dungeon of
darkness. A sight of thy beautiful Face may possibly abate my Sorrows, and thy
Presence may mittigate my Sufferings.


Judge. No, says Christ, here is no abiding for thee, be gone hence. Thou
may remember when my Presence was thy Torment, when thou did bid me depart
from thee, choosing my room before my company. Now my absence shall be thy
Terror, I like thee not so well to have thee nigh me. Depart, I say, from me.


Pris^ner. Lord, if I must undergo so dreadful a doom, as to depart from thee,
the Father of Lights, and Fountain of Life, yet bless me before I go; One good
wish of thy Heart, one good word of thy Mouth will make me blessed where ever I
go. Those whom thou blessest, are blessed indeed; Bless me, even me, O my
Father: At this parting grant me thy blessing.


Judge. Sinner, be gone, and my curse go along with thee. Thou have many a time
despised my Blessing when it has been offered to thee, though I was made a
Curse to purchase it for thee; therefore, I say, depart from me, and the Curse
of an angry Lord, and of a righteous Law accompany thee for ever. Depart, I
say, thou cursed.


Prisoner. Lord, if I must go, and thy Curse with me, send me to some good
place, where I may find somewhat to refresh me under thy loss and curse. It Is
misery enough to lose thy presence, Good Lord, command me to some good place.


Judge. No, Sinner, be gone with my Curse to that place which will torture and
rack thee with extremity and universality of pains. The time has been that
thou have wallowed in sensual Pleasures, now thou must fry in intolerable
flames. Depart thou cursed into fire.


Prisoner. Ah Lord, if I must go with thy Curse, and to so woeful a place as
fire, I beseech thee, let me not stay there long. Alas, who can abide devouring
flames one moment? material fires of man's kindling are terrible, but how
intolerable are those flames which thy breath, like a stream of brimstone,
has kindled? I beseech thee, if I must go to it, let me pass swiftly through
it, and not stay in it.


Judge. No, Sinner, depart, and my Curse with thee, to those extreme Torments
that admit of no ease, and no end, where the worm never dies, and the fire
never goes out; to the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever.
Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire.


Prisoner. Lord, this is dismal and dreadful indeed to go from thee, who art
all good, and to go to fire which has in it extremity of all evil, and to lose
thee, and fry in flames for ever, ever, ever; yet, Lord, if it is thy Will it
should be so, hear me yet in one desire, let me have such society as may
mitigate, at least such as may not aggravate my misery.


Judge. No, Sinner, thy Company must be such for ever as thou did choose in
thy life time. He who was thy Tempter, shall be thy Tormentor. And they who led
thee captive at their will, shall be bound with thee in Chains of everlasting
darkness, and faggotted up with thee together for unquenchable fire. Such fiery
Serpents, gnawing Worms, stinging Adders, poisonous Toads, roaring and
devouring Lions, hideous Monsters, frightful Fiends must be thy eternal
Companions. Depart from me thou cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.


I shall now speak particularly to the punishment of these wicked ones, and
explain the words as I come to speak to them.

(...), Est Metaphora qua vita humana cursus per iter sive prosectionem
describitur.
I begin with the beginning of Christ's Sentence, viz. The pain of loss, which
shall be the punishment of the damned; Depart from me. The word depart is a
metaphor which describes the course of humane loss by a Journey, Luke 1.6. 2
Pet. 2.10. And also their progress to death, Luke 13. The eternal death of the
damned will consist partly, if not principally in their departure from the Lord
of Life.

But it may be Objected, Who can depart from him who is every where? Christ is
God, Joh. 1.1. 1 John 5.20. And God is Omnipresent; Whither shall I fly from
thy presence? Psalm. 139.7. Therefore we must know there is a threefold
presence of God or Christ:

1. There is the essential presence of God, as he is infinite in his Being,
included in no place, and excluded out of none, so none can depart from him,
Psalm. 139.6. to 10. Jer. 23.24. Amos 9.2, 3.

2. There is the favorable presence of God, as he is the Fountain of Life and
Love, and the Father of Mercy, and kindness, and all good. The former is the
presence of his Being, this of his Bounty. This is as the presence of the Sun
by his heat chearing, and by his light delighting the Creature. His presence in
this sense is the substance of his Promises; Fear not, I will be with thee,
Isa. 43.2, 3, 5. Jer. 1.8. Jer. 15.20. Luke 1.28. Act. 18.10. His presence in
this sense is the Redeemers purchase: He suffered, the Just for the Unjust, to
bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Thence the Name of the Redeemer is Immanuel, God
with us, Matthew. 1.23. Against his departure in this sense, Jer. 14.8. is the
Churches earnest Prayer, Leave us not. And the fear of it does so affect Moses,
that he is ready to throw up all, Exodus 33.15. If thy presence go not with us,
carry us not hence.

His presence in this sense is Heaven it self, Psalm. 16. ult. In thy presence
is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, Luke 22. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be
with the Lord. This is that presence of Christ which the wicked shall want for
ever; This is included in, Depart from me.

3. There is the afflicting punishing presence of God. There is the presence of
his Fury, as well as of his Favor. In this sense Job prays for God's
absence; How long will thou not depart from me? Job 7.19. Which Junius
glosseth, Turn thine anger away from me. In this sense God tells men, That he
will visit them, i. e. with Judgments. As a Father beholding his Child about
some naughty Action, tells him, I Will be with you presently, meaning to correct
him: Isa. 23.17. Jer. 6.15. At the time that I visit them, they shall be cast
down, says the Lord. In this sense wicked men shall have the presence of God
for ever. His tormenting presence, as well as the absence of his Grace and
Favor, will be their eternal portion. And certainly if his afflicting presence
in this World, which has love for its Original, and their good for its end, be
so grievous to his own people, that they cry out, Let him turn from me, Job
14.6. Let him depart away; what will his tormenting presence be to the wicked
in the other World, of which wrath, pure wrath is the Original, and
satisfaction to justice his end.

CHAP. III. Concerning the privative part of the Sinners Punishment.
THis part of the Verse will afford this Doctrine.

Doct. That a great part of wicked men's punishment in the other World, will
consist in their departure from the presence of Christ; Then shall he say to
them on his left hand, Depart from me. They now bid God depart from them, They
say unto God, Depart from us, Job 21.14. But that which is their wish here,
shall be their woe for ever. And he shall say unto them, depart from me ye
workers of Inquity, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23. The presence of Christ is now
their Trouble, but his absence will then be their Torment. Hence the state of
the wicked in the other World is called utter-darkness, Calvin in Matthew. 8.12.
Matthew. 8.12. And blackness of darkness for ever, Jude, verse. 13. Because of
its separation from Christ, who is the Light of the World, and the Sun of
Righteousness, Joh. 1.9. Mal. 4.2. It seems an allusion to them that are
fettered in dark doleful dungeons, or to those that in the nightime stand
without in the dark, being excluded such Rooms as are full of Lights, wherein
are rare and costly Feasts.

In the explication of this Doctrine, I shall describe the punishment of the
wicked: 1. In the perfection of the Object, from which they must depart. 2. In
the properties of their departure, and then give the Reasons of the Doctrine.

First, As for the Object of their loss.

1. They lose the Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Life, the Lord of Glory, the
fairest of ten thousand, the only begotten of the Father, and the Heir of all
things. The better the Object is, the greater their loss who are deprived of
it. The more excellent the Person of Christ is, the more exquisite their
punishment will be who must depart from him. Christ is the highest, the
greatest, the chiefest good. In losing him,

1. They depart from an universal good, one that is Bread, Water, Light, Life,
Rest, Health, Ease, Wine, Marrow, a Feast, a Friend, a Father, Pardon, Peace,
Love, Grace, Glory, any thing, every thing, all things that the Soul wants,
and requires to its perfect Felicity.

2. They depart from a suitable good, that very savoury meat which the Soul
loves and needs. They lose that good which the Soul should have, and would
have, and must have, if ever it be happy. The Soul is guilty, and Christ is
pardon, pardon is suitable to a guilty Soul, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. The Soul is poor, and Christ is
riches; Riches are suitable to a poor Creature, Ephesians. 3.8. The unsearchable
Riches of Christ: Prove. 8.18. Riches and Honor are with me, yea durable Riches
and Righteousness. The Soul is miserable, naked, filthy, obnoxious to Death and
Wrath, but Christ is Mercy, Raiment, cleansing, freedom from Hell, and the
Heaven of Heaven, Rev. 3.17, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. Romans 8.1. He is a good that
does exactly, directly suit the condition of the Soul, the miseries of the
Soul, and the necessities of the Soul. He is the Plaster that fits the Sores,
and the Balm that hits the wounds of the Soul; when Creatures are Physicians
and Physic of no value.

3. They depart from an eternal Good, they lose that Good which does not only
suit the Souls disposition, but also its duration, that will last and abide,
and continue for ever. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13.8. He is everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Everlasting meat,
Joh. 6.27. Eternal life, 1 John 5. ult.

2. They depart from, with Christ, the Society of all Christians: When they
depart from the Head, they depart from the Members. When they depart from the
Root, they depart from the Branches. For Head and Members, Root and Branches,
must be together for ever, Joh. 14.2, 3. Where I am, there ye may be also. Now
the Sheep and Goats flock together, but then they shall be parted asunder,
Matthew. 8.11, 12. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and
from the West, and shall set down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven: But the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. They who are now the
Objects of their Contempt, will then be the Objects of their envy. When once
they lose the sight, they shall lose the sight of those glorious Stars for
ever. Every Saint may then say to the Sinner (who now frets and fumes at the
Saints presence, because of his preciseness) as Moses to Pharaoh, I will see
thy face no more, Matthew. 25. ult.

3. They shall depart, when from Christ, from all the means of Grace, or
Communion with God. They shall hear no more Sermons, and join in no more
Prayers, and receive no more tenders of Grace, or entreaties of the Gospel,
Isa. 38.11. I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the
living: I shall behold man no more with the Inhabitants of the world. Where the
King is, there he has his Secretaries, and Seals, and Ministers of State; and
they who are banished the Court, are banished from these.

4. They shall depart from all the good things of this Life. Each Country has
its proper peculiar Commodities, and so has each World. This World has its
peculiar good things, such as are proper to this, and not to be found in the
other World; therefore the Apostle calls them this worlds goods: He that has
this worlds goods, 1 John 3.17. So the other World has its proper peculiar
Commodities, such as are to be found no where else. The blessings of this are
not to be looked for in the other Life, There is neither marrying, nor giving
in marriage, but all are as Angels. Good men, as good Angels, above all bodily
and temporal Blessings; and evil Men, as evil Angels, without them, and fixed
in a state of endless misery. The wicked man possibly was honorable, but his
glory does not follow after him, Psalm. 49.17. He was rich, but that was only in
this world, 1 Timothy 6.17. He was one that abounded in Pleasures, but now they
are gone and exchanged for pains, James 5.5. Luke 16.25. But Abraham said, Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. The
Sinner shall bid adieu to Temporal good, Spiritual good, Eternal good, all
good, that he may speak indefinitely, what Job supposing himself dying, spoke
restrictively, Mine eye shall no more see good, Job 7.7.

CHAP. IV. The Properties of the Sinners loss.
Secondly, I Shall speak to the Properties of this departure from Christ, or
loss therein.

1. It is spiritual. It is a loss peculiar to the Soul or Spirit of Man, and a
loss of that good that is most suitable to the Soul or Spirit of Man. No
mercies are like Soul-mercies, Ephesians. 1.3. and Job 6.4. No miseries are like
Soul-miseries. For the nobler any Being is, the better that is which
advantageth it, and the worse that is that injureth it. It Is one thing to
relieve or abuse a distressed Prince, and another thing to relieve or abuse a
distressed Subject. The Soul of man is the Prince, the chief and noblest part
of man, and it is principally the subject (as chiefly sensible) of this
departure. It Is true, the Soul cannot depart from God locally, but it can and
does morally here, in its affections and conversation; But that which is now
its practice and pleasure, will then be their torment and punishment. Other
losses pinch the Flesh, but this pierces the Spirit. Other losses are
castigatory, and the portion of Children; but this is damnatory, and the
portion of Devils. Ah how will the Soul pine and wither away, when it shall
take its farewell of that Sun, who alone could revive and refresh it? What a
dismal, doleful death must it undergo, when it shall depart from him, who is
its only Life? Such a wounded Spirit who can bear? The Soul has more exquisite
sense, and more curious feeling than the Body; therefore its loss of its own
peculiar suitable satisfying good will cut deep, and fill it with bitter
horror.

2. It will be a total departure. Here they depart in part from God, but then
totally. Here Cain complains, if not allowed God's presence in Ordinances,
though he had his presence in many ways of ordinary Favor; Behold, thou have
driven me this day from the face of the Earth, and from thy face shall I be
hid, Genesis 4.14. But alas how does he complain there? where he is wholly
deprived of the Divine presence in any way of Favor; where he has not the
least glimpse of the light of his Countenance. The partial departures of God
have forced sad Complaints from them that are godly, Job 13.24. Why hidest thou
thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? says Job. I can bear the
withdrawings of men, and their absence: I can bear the strangeness of my
Friends, and the unkindness of Relations, but I cannot bear thy strangeness to
me, thy with-drawings from me? Why hidest thou thy face? Job though a strong
stout man, able to overcome the strong One, the Devil; yet was ready to faint
away and die at this. David cries out mournfully at it, Psalm. 10.1. Why
stand thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thy self in time of trouble.
Poor Heman is distracted, and almost dead with it, Psalm. 88.14, 15. Lord, why
hidest thou thy face? I am afflicted and ready to die: while I suffer thy
terrors, I am distracted. If these partial departures, which had much love in
them, and with them, cast down the Friends of God so heavily, O what will his
total departures out of pure Wrath cause to his Enemies. That world must needs
be dolesome and darksome indeed, to whom this Sun is wholly set, and totally
ecclipsed.

^. It will be an eternal departure. They must leave God for ever; though it
had been spiritual and total, yet if but temporal, there had been somewhat to
have allayed their Sorrows; but to suffer so great a loss, and that wholly, and
for ever too, must needs pierce to the quick. The Sinner shall see the blessed
Jesus no more for ever. He must depart from the tenderest Father, lovingest
Friend, richest Treasure, choicest Good, greatest Glory, sweetest Pleasure, and
that for ever, Jude, verse. 13. To whom is reserved blackness of darkness for
ever. The Sentence one denounced, Depart from me, will be like the Law of the
Medes and Persians, which cannot be altered: 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord. The
Anchor of Hope will then be broken, the Bridge of Grace will then be drawn, the
Gate of Mercy will then be shut, and the Gulf between Christ and the Wicked
never to be passed over. They may cry out in truth, what the Psalmist in
unbelief, Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? Is is
mercy clean gone for ever? Psalm. 77.7, 8. Alas, they are cast off for ever, he
will be favorable to them no more. They may roar out in vain, How long will thou forget me, O Lord, shall I never me remembered? Psalm. 13.1.

4. It is an irreparable loss, such a loss as nothing can make up. There are
many good things which we may do well without, because the want of them may be
supplied by other things. But Christ is the one thing necessary, the one thing
excellent; the want of whom no good thing in Heaven or Earth can make up. When
the Soul departs from Christ, it departs from all good; because nothing is good
without him, and nothing can be had in the room of him. If some kind of Food be
wanting, another kind may possibly do as well; so if some sort of Drugs or
Herbs for Physic be wanting, there may be others found of the same Virtue and
Operation; but if once the Soul be sentenced to depart from Christ, there is
nothing to compensate this loss. He is the Savior, and indeed the only
Savior, Act. 4.12. He is the Mediator between a Righteous God and a guilty
Creature, and indeed the only Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

CHAP. V. The reasons of the Sinners privative Punishment.
Thirdly, I Proceed to the Reasons of this Doctrine, and shall name but two:

1. Wicked men in the other world shall be sentenced to depart from Christ,
because of their wickedness or unworthiness of his presence. The Judge himself
gives this Reason in the Text, verse. 42, 43. For I was hungry, and ye gave me
no meat, etc. Sin is the great Wall of Partition between God and his Creatures:
Evil cannot stand in thy sight, neither can thou behold the works of
Iniquity, Psalm. 5. They must lose the light of his Countenance, who never
minded the light of his Commandments; the holy Jesus cannot abide the Company
of unholy Creatures. Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee?
No, it may not, it cannot, Psalm. 94.20. It Is contrary to his Honor, who has
threatened their banishment from him; and it is contrary to his Nature, who hates
their Company.

If God depart from his own people in this world in part, and for a time, it is
for their sins. Your Iniquities separate between me and your Souls, Isa. 59.2.
Thus they are the Cloud that interpose between the Soul and the Sun of
Righteousness, Isa. 44.22.
and hinder the light of his Favor from shining on us. Job knew and
acknowledged this, in Job 13.24, 25, 26. Why hidest thou thy Face? Thou writest
bitter things against me, and make me to possess the sins of my youth. And if
wicked men depart totally and eternally from God in the other World, it is for
their sins. Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23.
Luke 13.27. Departure from Christ is the Wages which the Workers of Iniquity
earn. Deeds of darkness merit utter darkness.

Wicked men now desire Christ to depart from them. They besought him to depart
out of their Coasts, Matthew. 8. ult. But what is now their Pleasure, shall then
be their Punishment. He will go from them, who bid him be gone; and hide his
Face for ever from those who turn their backs upon him in time. He that
prepares for Sinners the Torments of Hell, will not bestow on them the Joys of
Heaven.

2. Because of their unfitness for the presence of Christ. A carnal heart
cannot savor a spiritual Heaven. The vitiated nature of man cares not for the
pleasures joined with the holiness of the Celestial Paradise. When Angels kept
not their first Estate, they left their own Habitation, Jude, verse. 6. As soon
as they lost their primitive Purity, they lost the place of their Glory and
Felicity. When once they turned haters of God and Holiness, of their own accord
they forsook Heaven. Distempered Palats cannot relish the choicest Dainties.
How can the wicked delight in God (which is the Heaven of Heaven) who have in
them a predominant enmity against him, Heb. 12.14. Follow after holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. It Is holiness that makes the Soul sit
and meet for Heaven, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us
meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. The Blind are
as capable of seeing, and the Deaf of hearing, and the Dead of eating and
drinking, as wicked men are of seeing God as he is, and hearing the melodious
Songs of Saints and Angels, and of feeding of the Tree of Life that grows in
the midst of Paradise, and of drinking of the pure Water that flows from the
Throne of God and the Lamb. If the Tabernacle on Earth, wherein are the Saints
of God, and holy Institutions of Christ, and the Divine Worship, for four or
five hours in a week, be a Prison to earthly carnal men, surely the Temple in
Heaven, wherein is the holy One of Israel in the greatest manifestion of his
holiness, holy Angels, perfect Spirits, pure Service of the blessed God,
without interruption or cessation, would be a Purgatory, yea an Hell to them.
Communion with God is impossible (in natura rei) without conformity to him, 2
Cor. 6.14. They tell a broad lie, who say, They have fellowship with God here,
and walk after their own lusts, 1 John 1.6. He that says he abides in him,
ought himself also to walk even as he walked. Our delight in God is ever
proportionable to our desires of him. Now wicked men desiring above all things
the absence, yea the dethroning of God; can never take any delight in his
presence, though they should be admitted thereunto.

If suitableness be wanting, that which is never so excellent is no way joyous
or pleasant to us. All Creatures delight only in what is suitable to their
natures. Barzillai refused the pleasures of David's Court, because they were so
unsuitable to an old man, that they would be no pleasures to him; he could not
taste their Meat, nor hear their Music. So all the delights of the Celestial
Court would be no delights (because of their unsuitableness) to sinful sensual
natures. Ungodly men could not relish the spiritual Dainties at the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, nor hear with pleasure the heavenly Quire singing
the Song of Moses and the Lamb. I grant that wicked men are naturally capable
of Heaven, as they are rational Creatures; but they are morally incapable, as
they are predominantly carnal and sinful; so they want that holiness which
should prepare, and dispose, and fit them for Heaven.

CHAP. VI. Uses concerning the heinous nature of Sin, and grievous misery of
Sinners.
Use. I Shall now apply this Doctrine. It may be useful by way of Information,
and by way of Exhortation: 1. By way of Information.

1. It may inform us. If the Wicked in the other World shall be banished the
presence of Christ, then how heinous is the nature of Sin, and how odious to
God? God is love it self, and delights in Mercy; yea, takes pleasure in the
Prosperity of men; Joh. 1.4. In him was life, and the life was the light of
men. Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, who pardons Iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Therefore it must be some
grievous Crime, and somewhat which is very offensive to him, that provokes him
to sentence them to an eternal banishment from him. O how horrid a thing is
Sin? It brings all evil, Romans 2.7, 8. And deprives of all good, Isa. 59.2. Its
formal nature is a voluntary departure from Gods Precepts, Heb. 3.12. Jer. 2.5.
And its woeful Effect is an eternal total departure from his gracious presence.
His partial temporary departure from his own people, (who are the Objects of
his eternal Choice, and infinite Love) which makes them go mourning all the
day, and lie roaring all the night, because of their sins, speaks much of the
evil of sin, but his full everlasting departure from others, which leaves them
naked and stripped of all Comfort, and exposed to all Misery and Mischief, does
more abundantly proclaim its filthiness and loathsomeness. It can be no
ordinary Cloud or Vapor that can obscure the Sun at noonday, in all his
beauty and brightness, and turn the clear day into a black night. And it can be
no little or small thing which provokes the Father of Mercy, and God of all
Grace to deal so severely with the works of his own hands.

2. It informs us of the unconceivable misery of Sinners; They must depart from
Christ for ever. To depart for ever from loving and lovely Relations, is no
mean misery to them who have no other Kindred than those on Earth. It was no
small trial of Abraham to leave his Kindred and Fathers house, Genesis 12.1. To
depart for ever from dear and intimate Friends, is a sore trouble to him whose
heart is knit to them. The failure and distance of Friends was grievous to Job,
Job 19.13, 14. And David, Psalm. 38.11. To depart for ever from all the Saints,
the Children of the most high, the excellent of the Earth, from the Members of
Christ, of whom the World is not worthy, will cut deep in them who have any
eyes to see the amiableness of their Persons, and any hearts to underderstand
the benefit of their Prayers and Patterns: But to depart for ever from Christ,
the Prince of Life, the Lord of Glory, the Heir of all things; the richest
Treasure, and highest Honor, and sweetest Pleasure, is doleful and dreadful
indeed. How may the damned cry out, Ah whither do we go now we are going from
thee, thou have the words of eternal life.

The presence of Christ is the happiness of the Soul on Earth, Deuteronomy. 4.7. I
will see you, and your hearts shall rejoice. Joh. 16.22. And ye now therefore
have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your
joy no man takes from you. No such hearty comfort, as in the gracious presence
of Christ. And the presence of Christ, is the happiness of the Soul in Heaven.
I desire to be dissolved (though death simply considered be not desirable) and
to be with Christ. Finis conciliat mediis amorem. His presence is the Heaven of
Heavens. It Is the excellency of the new Jerusalem, that there the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and God himself shall be with them, Rev. 21.3. And the
felicity of the Citizens there. They shall see his Face, Rev. 22.4. In the
presence of Christ is all good, and in the absence of Christ is all evil. If it
were death to Absalom not to see the Kings face, what death will it be to the
damned, to be denied for ever the blissful sight of the face of Christ.

If God depart from his people in some degrees, (for he is their God still,
Psalm. 22.1. Psalm. 88.1.) and but for a time; as a loving Father, to make his
Children more sensible of their folly, and of the worth of his Favor; How
sadly have they cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? How
horribly will they screech and roar, from whom he departs wholly and eternally,
as a supreme and righteous Judge.

It will greatly aggravate their misery, to consider these particulars:

1. The greatness of their loss. It Is not the loss of an House, or Estate, or
bodily good, but the loss of a Soul, the loss of a Savior, the loss of a God;
yea the loss of all good, and that for ever. It Is such a loss as never had its
fellow or equal: It Is such a loss as cannot admit of any addition to it. It Is a
loss that never had the like before it, nor shall have the like after it. It Is
an incomparable loss, that the damned may say as he, Ye have taken away my God,
and what have I more?

2. For how small a thing they lose the blessed Jesus. If they had lost Christ
for somewhat which might have countervail'd the want of him, or had in any
degree equaled him, it had been the better; but to lose a God, a Christ, a
Soul, fullness of Joy, for a little aerie Honor, or brutish Pleasure; this
will cut to the heart. O how will it wound the Soul in the other World to
think, for how small a toy, for how pitiful a trifle, have I lost a Crown of
Glory, and Rivers of Pleasures for ever! Ah what a Fool have I been to lose
Substance for Shadows, Bread for Husks, a Fountain of living Waters for broken
Cisterns, their own Mercies for lying Vanities, Crystal streams for puddle
Water, the choice Dainties of Gods House for the Devils scraps, Heaven for
Earth, and all things for nothing! Was any in Bedlam ever half so distracted.

3. It will much aggravate their misery to consider, that it was their own
voluntary act to lose so much for so little. They shall then think with
themselves, that this woeful condition in which they are, was their own choice.
All the power and policy of Earth and Hell could not force them to destroy
themselves. The Cords that bind them were of their own twisting, the Rods that
scourge them were gathered with their own hands. The Web in which they are
caught, and killed, was spun out of their bowels. God may say to them, as once
to Israel, Ye have destroyed your selves, Hos. 13. Ye are your own Murderers.
I put your Salvation so far into your own hands, that ye could not be damned
against your wills. Your own Iniquities correct you, and ye are holden with
cords of your own sins, Prove. 5.22. Jer. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have
procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter,
because it reaches unto thine heart. Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall
correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see
that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God.

4. It will exceedingly increase their anguish, to know perfectly the greatness
of their loss. Here they know not the worth of a Christ; and thence they are
little troubled at the want of Christ, but then their eyes shall be opened to
see the Beauty, Excellency, and Amiableness of him whom they have lost, and to
see the costly Delicacies, choice Dainties, pure and perfect Pleasures which
the Godly enjoy in him, and with him; and so by the increase of their
knowledge, will be an increase of their sorrow. They shall see Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, they shall see their Neighbors whom they
scorned and mocked, for their purity and preciseness in the presence of Christ,
in the Arms and embraces of Christ, in a state of full Happiness and perfect
Satisfaction, while they themselves are shut out, and denied entrance, Luke
13.25, 28. The fire of Hell will give them light enough to see, as well as heat
enough to feel themselves infinitely miserable.

5. It will greatly add to their torment and anguish to consider, that they
were sometime near the enjoyment of this blissful presence of Christ. Pardon,
and Peace, and Love, and Life, and the endless fruition of the blessed Jesus
were tendered to them, were nigh them, were at the very door of their hearts.
They were solemnly commanded, lovingly invited, severely threatened, sweetly
allured, and pathetically persuaded to accept of Christ and Grace; yea, and
Heaven, and Happiness, and eternal Life; yea, and their hearts began to relent,
and to close with the entreaties of the Gospel; They were almost persuaded to
be Christians indeed. There was but a little, a very little between them and
Christ. The bargain was driven so far, that Christ was got into their
consciences, they bore witness for him, and warned them, if they loved their
Lives, their Souls, to accept of him while he would accept of them; yea, Christ
was got into their Judgments, they gave their Verdict on his side, as one
infinitely more amiable and elegible than the World or Flesh; nay, he had
possibly got into their Affections, they delighted to hear of his great Love to
poor Sinners, and of the great things he purchased for them with his own blood;
and yet though they were so near, they came short, and like Ephraim, played the
part of unwise Sons, and stayed in the place of the breaking forth of Children.

O how like a Dagger will it pierce the heart of them that live under the
Gospel, and neglect the great Salvation offered to them; when they come to be
banished the presence of Christ, and to see others, who made Religion their
business on Earth, bathing their Souls in Rivers of Pleasures, drawing water
with joy out of the Well of Salvation, eating of the Tree of Life that grows
in the midst of Paradise, and housed in the Arms of their dearest Savior, and
shall reflect and consider with themselves, all those Joys and Pleasures, all
those Dainties and Delicacies, all those Robes, and Riches, and Glories, and
Felicities, which they enjoy in the presence of Christ, might have been mine;
they were freely, and frequently, and affectionately offered to me, I had the
refusal of them; nay, I had a good mind to them, I was not far from the Kingdom
of Heaven. There was but a little between me and them, they were at the very
door of my heart, and stood knocking there for admission, and desired only
hearty acceptance; but like a Fool I dallied with them, and deferred them, as if
hereafter had been time enough, and so have lost them for ever.

6. It will much augment their anguish and misery to consider, who it is that
passes so severe a doom upon them. This dreadful Sentence is pronounced by
Love, and Grace, and Goodness it self. He that sometimes called them to him so
sweetly, so affectionately, now casts them from him so sharply, so furiously.
He who sometimes cried to them, Come to me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden; and wept over them, O that thou had known, even thou in this thy day,
the things of thy peace. He that formerly invited, entreated, besought them to
be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. and showed them his heart-blood, the price of their
Pardon and Life, and stretched out his Arms to embrace their returning Souls,
will now in wrath, and rage, and flames, and fury, bid them be gone from him,
and his Curse go along with them. And if Love prove their Enemy, surely Wrath
will not be their Friend. And if Mercy be thus against them, surely Justice
will not be for them. Ah how sorely will it gall the Sinner to consider, This
dreadful doom is denounced against me not by an Enemy, or one that hated me,
but by a Friend and Father, by one that loved me, and took my nature on him,
and suffered therein the Laws Curse, to render me capable of escaping these
Torments which I now suffer, and partaking of those Pleasures which yonder
blessed Souls enjoy.

CHAP. VII. Containing the folly of Sinners, and the vast difference between
them and the Godly at the Great day.
3. IT informs us that every wicked man is out of his wits; surely the man is
mad, who exchangeth his Soul, and Savior, and God, and all for a little
worldly profit, or fleshly pleasure; yea, that parts with true and durable
Riches, for shadowy and fading Treasure, that loses heavenly and eternal Joys,
for earthly and transitory Pleasures.

No man can love sin, but he hates himself; nor part with his Duty, but he
parts with his Felicity. And surely such a man who hates himself, and forsakes
his Happiness, is a mad man. Well might the Holy Ghost speak the Prodigal out
of his wits, when he was out of his way, and wandering from his Father's house.
How mad was he to forsake Bread for Husks? (all the world is but Husks, dry,
coorse, empty Fare, to the Dainties of the Gospel.) Bread in a Fathers house,
for Husks among Swine; yea, and plenty of Bread, enough and to spare, for a few
Husks that could not fill their Bellies.

If one Soul be more worth than a whole World, surely one Savior, one God is
more worth than a thousand Souls, than a million of Worlds. How mad then is he
that parts with this Soul, this Savior, this God, for a little, a very little
of this World; yea, for this little of the World for a very little time.

If all the delights of the Flesh, and all the Pleasures of Sin, and all the
profits of the World, cannot balance the partial enjoyment of God in his
Ordinances for one hour; How unable will they be to compensate the loss of full
Communion with God for ever? O how infinitely does Christ outweigh what ever
the flesh or world can offer in exchange for him!

4. It informs how contrary the portion of the Godly and the Wicked is at the
day of Judgment. At this day they fare often alike, they fall under the same
favorable and frowning Providence, they have the same Comforts, and the same
Crosses. If any difference for the better, it is usually on the Sinners side.
The vilest men are exalted, and the proud prosper. But at that day there will
be a difference indeed for the better on the Saints side. That day will be
terrible to the Wicked, a day of wrath, a day of the perdition of ungodly men,
Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.7. To the Godly a day of Redemption, a time of refreshing, a
day of Light and Gladness, and a good day, Luke 21.28. Act. 3.19. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the time
of refreshment shall come from the presence of the Lord.

The difference between the Godly and the Wicked at that day will be vast.

1. In regard of their station. Then shall he separate them one from another,
as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats. And he shall set the Sheep at
his right hand, (in token of honor and favor) and the Goats on his left, (as
a sign of shame and contempt) Matthew. 25. 32, 33. Those who are now uppermost,
will then be undermost. The filth of the World will then appear to be God's
Jewels; and the darlings of the World will then appear to be the Children of
the Devil. The Righteous shall have dominion over them in the morning, Psalm.
49. In the night of this world, the Wicked sit in high Places, and have
dominion over the Godly; but in the morning of the World, the Godly shall sit
at the right hand of Christ, and have dominion over the Wicked.

2. In regard of the Sentence. And indeed herein is the principal difference.
God and the Devil, Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell, are not more contrary
than the doom of the Godly and Wicked at the great day.

1. His Voice to the Wicked, is, Depart from me. And those words will wound to
purpose: Ah whither do they go that go from Christ. His Voice to the Godly,
Come, Come. No Honey to the Taste, no Music to the Ears, no Cordial to the
Heart, was ever so sweet as this word of Christ. His Voice in the Gospel, when
he called out, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest, was sweet and refreshing to them; but that was but as water to
this Wine: Come, O come and welcome into my Arms and embraces. When they who
had longed for his coming, and looked for his coming, Titus 2.13. and loved
dearly his coming, 2 Timothy 4.8. and sighed and sob'd so often for his coming.
Why are his Chariots so long a coming? why tarry the wheels of his Chariot?
Make haste my Beloved, and be thou like the Heart and Roe upon the Mountain of
Spices. And prayed so earnestly for his coming. The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, Rev, 22.17. Come Lord Jesus come quickly, verse. 20. For these to see him
coming in the Clouds, with all his train of Angels, and to hear him calling to
them, Come to me; O who can imagine the joy that will fill their hearts! If
when they saw him coming with the prospective of Faith, they rejoiced with joy
unspeakable; how will they rejoice when they shall see him coming with the eye
of sense, and hear him call to them to come to him.

2. His Voice to the Wicked will be, Depart from me ye cursed. Be gone as a
cursed Brood, and my curse shall follow you wherever you go. His Voice to the
Godly will be, Come ye blessed of my Father. O come dear Souls, whom my Father
blessed in his eternal Choice, to bless whom he sent me into the world, as a
token of whose blessing, he has provided an everlasting Inheritance for you.
Come ye blessed in your Souls, blessed in your Bodies, blessed in your Names,
blessed in your Conditions, and thrice blessed in your eternal possessions.

3. His Voice to the Wicked will be, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire. Be gone from me to extremity of Torments, Fire; and eternity of Torments,
Everlasting fire. His Voice to the Godly will be, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom. Ye have been Heirs a long while under Age, and Kings in
the lower World in disguise, the time is now come for you to enjoy your
Inheritance. O come ye blessed Ones, and inherit the Kingdom as Kings thereof.
Enjoy your full Glory, 2 Cor. 7.17. Perfect Pleasure, Psalm. 18. ult. And vast
Dominion, 1 Cor. 6.3. And Rev. 2.26, 27. And he that overcomes, and keeps my
words unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall
Rule them with a Rod of Iron, etc. I, and enjoy this Kingdom for ever; Inherit
the Kingdom: Inheritances are for ever. The Lord knows the days of the
Upright, and their Inheritance shall be for ever, Psalm. 37.18.

4. His Voice to the Wicked will be, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Be gone to that place of Torments, which
infinite Wisdom and Wrath contrived, and infinite Power and Justice provideth
for the Devil, and his cursed Crew. Depart from me, and be their Partners and
Companions in Torments for ever. His Voice to the Godly will be, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World. Come take possession of a Crown, to which your Heads were
destined before ye were born. O come and partake of those Pleasures and Joys,
of that Glory and Dignity to which infinite Love elected you, and which
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Grace has prepared for you.

O how vast will the difference be at that day between the Servants of God, and
the Servants of Sin, when those shall weep, and howl, and wail, and gnash their
teeth for envy and vexation; and shall call to the Rocks to fall upon them, and
the Mountains to cover them from the Wrath of the Lamb; the Servants of God
shall sing and rejoice, and lift up their Heads with joy, because the day of
their Redemption is come, Rev. 6.16. Luke 21.28. And when these things begin to
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws
nigh.

CHAP. VIII. An use of Trial, with the marks of those that shall be banished
Christ's presence.
Secondly, THis Doctrine may be useful by way of Exhortation, and that two ways:

1. To try whether thou, Reader, art one of them that art like to be banished
the presence of Christ. It Is a woeful doom, as thou have heard at large;
therefore examine thy self, whether it shall be thy part and portion or no? To
help thee herein, that thou may not deceive and delude thy own Soul, I shall
give thee out of the Word of Truth, the Characters of them, to whom Christ will
say, Depart from me.

1. The evil Liver and profane Person shall be banished Christ's presence. The
black Sinner shall not stand before the white Throne. Then shall he say unto
them, Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you not, Matthew. 7.23, Luke
13.27. Those who lived in the breach of his Commands, must not live in the
enjoyment of his company. The Workers of Iniquity must associate with the
wicked One, not with the holy One. Heaven can by no means admit the unholy;
Into it can in no wise enter any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, Rev. 21. ult. Scandalous Sinners proclaim to the World,
That the Devil, not Christ, is their Master, and that Hell where the Devil is
with his Angels, not Heaven where Christ is with his Angels shall be their
eternal home. They who never liked or loved his presence on the Earth, but
banished him their Hearts and Houses, must think and expect that he will not
like or love their presence, but sentence them to an everlasting banishment
from him.

2. The grossly ignorant Creature shall be banished the presence of Christ. He
will not know them who do not know him. Wilful Ignorance does certainly exclude
the undefiled Inheritance. A blind eye cannot see the blessed Jesus in all his
Glory; neither can a dark Heart enjoy the Kingdom of Light. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, to render Vengeance on
them that know not God, (2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.) Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord. The portion of such will
be everlasting destruction from his presence. They are destroyed for lack of
knowledge, because they reject knowledge; Christ will reject them, Hos. 4.6.
They are lost Souls, whose eyes the God of this World has blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4.
Inner darkness is the direct way to utter darkness.

3. The hypocritical Professor shall be excluded the presence of Christ. He
that has but the shadow of Holiness, must expect a real Hell. If thou bear
the Name of Christ, and art not partaker of the Divine Nature, thy Profession
(as Vriahs Letter to Joab) will but hasten thy Execution, Job 13.16. He (i. e.
God) also shall be my Salvation, but an Hypocrite shall not come before him.
God will be the godly upright Souls Salvation, but not the Hypocrites. He shall
not dwell with God, Psalm. 5.4. No, not stand in his sight, Psalm. 5.5. Nay, not
so much as come before him with any Comfort. He may come before good men with
acceptance, as the foolish Virgins before the wise, who were ignorant of their
Hypocrisy, but he shall not come before the Omniscient God. When those Virgins
came which wanted Oil, the door was shut, Matthew. 25. There was no entrance, no
admission for them. They had not received God into their Hearts (though he was
often in their Lips) and he would not receive them into his House; The door was
shut.

CHAP. IX. An Exhortation to fly from this wrath to come; with some helps
thereunto.
2. IT may exhort us to take heed, that this separation from Christ be not our
portion. O, Reader, how much does it concern thee, whatever thou losest, to
make sure of the presence of Christ in the other World! Believe it, though thou
can bear the loss of an Estate, or Friends, or Relations; yea, and the
partial absence of Christ in this World, yet the total loss of Christ in the
other World will be an intolerable loss. They who live here cheerfully without
him, cannot do so there. When thou shall be banished from all thy Possessions,
and all thy Relations, and all thy worldly Comforts, then also to be banished
from Christ, the Prince of Life, and Lord of Glory, and Consolation of Israel,
will be a woe with a witness.

Can thou read and hear the misery of the wicked, in their total, eternal
separation from Christ, and not tremble, for fear it should be thy portion,
lest thou should be of the number of them that shall hear that dreadful
Voice, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.

To this end, that thou may escape this woeful Condition of the Ungodly, obey
these few Directions.

1. Believe and bewail your enmity against Christ. He loves you, yet by nature
thou hate him, Prove. 8. Romans 1.31. Romans 8.7. Indeed he may say of thee, and
all others in thy Condition, They hated me without a cause. But thou do hate
him, and thereby art wholly incapable of his presence. Can two walk together
unless they be agreed?

This enmity of thine against Christ (which discovers it self in thy daily
Rebellions against his Laws, and Opposition to his Authority,) must be felt and
lamented. There is little hope of their recovery, who are sick unto death, and
insensible thereof, Matthew. 9.12. -- They that be whole need not the Physician,
but they that are sick. Thy first work must be to know this plague of thine own
heart; and to know it not notionally, as a Physician, by reading of it, or
beholding it in others; but experimentally, as the Patient knows a Disease by
feeling it, complaining of it, mourning for it, and longing to be freed from it.

Consider with thy self how impossible it is for thee to delight in the
presence of Christ, whom thou abhorrest; and to take pleasure in the Company of
any, whom thy nature has a reluctance against.

2. Make Christ your Friend through Faith in his blood. There is no getting to
Christ hereafter, but by coming to him here. Accept him now, and he will accept
thee then. He will say to those that are now strangers to him, Depart from me,
I never knew you. If thou do not know him, and him crucified in this World,
he will not know thee in the other World. Thou can not rationally expect
admission into his presence, if thou have no acquaintance with his person.
Strangers and Enemies are kept out, when Children, and those that are the
Friends of the Master of the house are taken in. It is by Faith in his blood
that thou can be united to him, and made one with him; as the Wife is united
to the Husband, and the Members to the Head, Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present
it to himself a glorious Church. Ephesians. 1. ult. Which is the Body, the fullness
of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. 3.17. And being so made one with him,
Husband and Wife, Head and Members shall be together for ever. Where I am,
there shall ye be also, Joh. 14.2, 3. The great ground of Christ's passion was,
to bring those that believe to God, and that they might abide with him
eternally.

3. Follow after holiness. The holy Soul can only suit an holy Savior, and
therefore the holy Soul can only enjoy the holy Savior. Two cannot walk
comfortably together, unless there be an agreement in their dispositions. Into
the new Jerusalem can in no wise enter any thing that defiles, or is unclean,
Rev. 21. ult.

Heaven is an holy Hill, Psalm. 15.1. An undefiled Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3. The
holiest or most holy place, Heb. 9.8, 12. And therefore will admit of none but
holy persons. Dogs must be without, when Children shall be taken within doors.

CHAP. X. The positive part of the Sinners misery, expressed by Fire; and why.
I Come now to the second part of the Punishment of the Wicked, and that is
Poena sensus, the positive part of their misery, or that anguish which God will
inflict on their Souls and Bodies. Which punishment is set forth: 1. By its
extremity. 2. Eternity.


(...).
I shall speak first to its extremity, Fire. The Greek word (...) comes from the
Hebrew Vr, and so the Latin Vro, to burn. From the Greek (...) comes Pyrausta,
a fly that lives in the fire, and dies out of it. Fire is used to describe the
pains of Hell, because of the violent pain, and extreme torture which it
causes. Whether it be a material fire, as Austin and Bullinger think; Or
Metaphorical, as Gregory and Calvin, i. e. a pain equivalent thereunto; nay,
much more grievous, as others imagine. But this is certain, no Racks or Engines
of pain or misery here below are sufficient to set forth those Instruments of
eternal death, which God has prepared for the wicked in the other world. The
wrath of God, which is the very dregs of the Cup that the damned shall drink,
is called Fire, Psalm. 18.8. Nay, God himself in this respect is called a
consuming Fire, Heb. 12. ult. For our God is a consuming fire.

The Doctrine which I shall draw from this positive part of the Wickeds
punishment shall be this.

Doct. 2. That the Wicked shall in the other world depart from Christ, into
fire; Depart from me into everlasting fire. They shall not only be stripped of
all good, Depart from me; but also be filled with all evil, Into everlasting
fire. Our Savior in Matthew. 18.9. calls it Hell fire. And the Holy Ghost terms
it, The vengeance of the eternal Fire, Jude, verse. 7.

In the Explication of this Doctrine, I shall show: 1. Why the positive
punishment of the wicked is set out by Fire? 2. Wherein it exceeds our Fire?


For the former, the punishment of the damned resembles Fire.

1. In regard of its intension, and the extreme pain and anguish it causes.
Fire is the most out-ragious and tormenting of all the Elements. Nebuchadnezzar
thought to fright and fear men to purpose, with the threatening of a fiery
Furnace. The fire in the Valley of Hinnon, wherein Children were offered as a
Burnt-Offering to the Devil, was exquisitely tormenting. But who can tell the
pains of Hell? Those fires are but dark shadows and representations of this
Fire. What elementary or culinary fire is comparable to that Fire. Phaleris
Bull, Low Country Racks, Foreign Strapadoes, are nothing; not so much as
Flea-bites to the the fire of Hell.

The woeful effect of it speaks it terrible. It causes weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. The stoutest heart will then be forced to weep like a Child
for pain; the most resolute sturdy Spirit will wail and moan for anguish, and
all will bite their flesh, and gnash their teeth with envy. There Cain may cry
out indeed, My punishment is greater than I can bear. For alas, Who can dwell
in everlasting burnings?

The infinite Wisdom that prepared it, speaks it intolerable; Prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, (...), the word signifies Divinam destinationem; 1
Cor. 2.9. Heaven is prepared for the godly. Matthew. 25.35. And they for Heaven,
Romans 9.23. Col. 1.12. So wicked men are prepared for Hell, Romans 9.22. And Hell
for them. As if God had from eternity consulted and contrived the most
exquisite way and means of afflicting the Creature. As if his Wrath had set
his infinite Wisdom and Power on work to devise the fittest materials for the
punishment of the wicked, and the most cutting, killing Instruments of eternal
death.

The Company in this place of Torment, will render it the more miserable. The
Devil and his Angels, those frightful Fiends, and bitter Foes of Mankind, shall
be his eternal Associates. That cursed Crew which drew men to sin, and tempted
them so diligently, shall be tormented with them, and a torment to them for
ever. (...), because he strikes through with his darts: (...), as his Agents
and Emissaries.
The word for Devil properly signifies a Calumniator or Slanderer. He first
slandred God to man, and then man to God; He is therefore called the Accuser of
his Brethren, Romans 12.11. Those evil Angels have their Names either from their
Natures, as Spirits; or Office, as Angels; or Dignity, as Principalities and
Powers; or malice against God, as Satan, Devil; or their Fall and Fruits, as
unclean Spirit, evil One, Father of Lies, Murderer, Deaf and Dumb Spirit. The
Devil is mentioned singularly, because there is one chief, The Prince of
Devils, Matthew. 12. And the rest under him, or because they are all one in
Counsel, as if but one in Being. The chief Devil has many other under him, at
his call and command. This fire is said to be prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, because they are the greatest and chiefest of Sinners, others are but
their Scholars. Now how hot is that Hell, that Fire which God from all eternity
devised for the Devils, his most malicious Enemies? And how ill will they
speed, who have millions of such dreadful Devils for their everlasting
Companions.

2. In regard of the universality of the pains it will cause. Fire has all
manner of Torments in it, and afflicts the whole man. If any be troubled
extremely with the Gout, or the Stone, or the Colic, or the Toothach, or any
one racking Distemper, how dolefully does he cry out and complain? But if all
manner of Diseases should in extremity seize a man, and that in every part of
him, how dreadfully would he weep and wail? The truth is, Colic, Stone,
Cancer, Gout, Toothach, Pleurisy, St. Anthonys Fire, and all other, are
included in this Fire. It has not only extremity, but also universality of
Torments; thick darkness for the Eyes, hideous yellowing for the Ears,
loathsome brimstone for the Smell; and every sense molested and offended in the
highest degree, every part tormented in flames.

CHAP. XI. The difference between our fires and Hell fire.
BUt the great pain of the wicked will more fully appear, if we consider the
difference between our fires on Earth, and that in Hell.

1. They differ in the cause of their kindling. Our fires are kindled with cold
Air, a puff of Wind; thus the spark is blown up into a flame. But Tophet is
prepared of old: for the King it is prepared: the pile thereof is fire and much
wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it,
Isa. 30.33. O what a flame is that which is blown up by the breath of an
Almighty God. What a vast difference is there between the breath of man, or of
a pair of Bellows, and the breath of a God? This breath is like a stream of
brimstone; and if the breath that kindles the fire be like a stream, or rather
a Sea of brimstone, what is the fire it self? What a vast difference is there
between the breath of a pair of Bellows, and the fire kindled by them.

2. They differ in their nature. Our fires are by Philosophers described to be
a stream of sulphurous particles, or swarm of motes of brimstone, violently
agitated, and forcibly breaking forth from those respective Bodies to which
they did formerly belong. And this is apparent, because when any body is
thoroughly burnt, the sulphurious parts are almost gone; and when those parts
are gone, what remains will burn no longer. But the fire of Hell, whether it be
material or metaphorical, is quite another thing. It is a deep impression of
infinite wrath and fury on every member of the Body, and faculty of the Soul.
And O what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands of the living God, for
our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.2. ult. The wrath of God is sometimes
compared to that of a Lion roaring after her prey, which tears, and rents, and
kills, and slays, without the least pity. And to a Bear robbed of her Whelps,
which claws, and wounds, and destroys whatsoever comes near her. But alas, the
wrath of a God is infinitely more cutting, more killing. The Mountains are
moved, the Rocks are rent in pieces, the stoutest Oaks are rooted up, the
Foundations of the Earth tremble, the great Luminaries are darkened, the course
of Nature is over-turned, when he is wroth. Thou, even thou art to be feared,
for who may stand when thou art angry.

If his wrath be kindled but a little, how woefully do his own Children cry out,
Job 6.4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, Job 13.24. Wherefore hidest
thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? Psalm. 88. Their Spirits are
drunk up, while they suffer his terrors, they are distracted. What then will be
the condition of them on whom he will pour out all his wrath? If a small degree
of God's anger be so terrible, when it is mingled with Love; what will a full
Cup of pure wrath be?

3. They differ in the ends of their Creation. Our fires were created for our
Service and Comfort. God made these for the use and benefit of man, to fence us
against the cold; to melt and mould metals, and form them into several moulds,
etc. But the fire of Hell is created for the torment of Men and Devils. God
makes it of such a nature, as may best suit his end. For every wise Agent
fitteth his means to his end; and the more wise the Agent is, the more proper
means he finds out for his end. Now when the only wise God, to whom Angels
themselves are Fools, shall set his infinite Wisdom awork about the most proper
means of racking and torturing the poor Creature; surely it will be done to
purpose. As when his Love sets his Wisdom awork, to find out a way to comfort
his Children, what Rivers of Pleasures, Weights of Glory, Crowns of Life,
fullness of Joy does he provide. So when his wrath sets Wisdom awork, to find
out a way for the afflicting his Enemies, what stinging Adders, and gnawing
Worms, and Chains of Darkness, and Lakes of Brimstone does he provide.

4. They differ in the Fuel that feeds them. Our fires are maintained and
preserved in burning by wood or coals, or somewhat that is combustible; and the
fire must be suitable to the meanness and limitedness of the fuel. But the
fire of Hell is fed with the Curse of a righteous Law, and the wrath of an
infinite God, and the lusts of the damned. Ah what work will sin, backed with
the Curse and wrath of God, make in the Souls and Bodies of men. If David
beloved of God under the weight of sin, and sense of Divine displeasures, went
mourning all the day, and cries out so mounfully, Thine Arrows stick fast in
me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is no soundness, in my flesh, because
of thine Anger, nor rest in my bones because of my Sin. Mine Iniquities are
gone over mine head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.2,
3, 4. O what will they suffer! and how will they roar and howl, whose Sins are
as a Mountain of Lead, shall press and oppress their Consciences! all whose
lusts shall gnaw their Spirits, set home and close to their Souls by the fury
and malediction of God.

5. They differ in this, that our fires are accompanied with Light; but the
fire of Hell, though it has heat to torment, has no light to comfort. It is a
state of darkness, of utter darkness, Matthew. 25. Of Blackness of Darkness,
Jude, verse. 13. They have only light enough to see themselves endlesly and
easelesly wretched and miserable. Darkness is dreadful, but what darkness like
utter darkness, or blackness of darkness? The Egyptians did not move out of
their places in the time of their darkness, but what will men do in the dark,
in the midst of ravenous Wolves, and roaring Lions, and stinging Adders, and
fiery Serpents, and frightful Devils?

6. They differ in their Operations:

1. Our fires work only on the Body, they cannot pierce the Soul; but Hell fire
pierces the Soul. Spirits burn in it as well as Bodies, Go into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. If it seize on Devils, it will
also on the Souls of men. The Spirit whose senses are most acute, will feel the
greatest pain in the unquenchable fire.

2. Our fires destroy and consume their fuel; they turn their wood and coals
into dust and ashes; the bodies of men are by them turned into ashes, and
hereby the pain cease with the life of the Creature. But the fire of Hell
will never consume, though it be ever consuming, it will always be destroying,
but never destroy the Sinner. The damned will be always dying, but never die.
The Almighty hand of God will preserve them, to undergo that wrath that is
intolerable, and those flames that are unquenchable.

CHAP. XII. The fullness of wicked men's misery, in that it is positive and
privative, with some Cautions against it.
Use. LEarn hence the full misery of the wicked in the other World. They shall
not only be deprived of all good, in their banishment from the presence of God,
but also be afflicted with all evil, in their suffering the pains of Hell fire.
The godly in the other World shall be perfectly blessed, in their freedom from
all poenal and all moral evil, and their fruition of all that is truly good,
for they shall ever be with the Lord, who is an universal good. So the Wicked
in the World to come shall be perfectly cursed, in the absence of what ever is
comfortable, and in the presence of whatsoever is dreadful, and may render them
miserable; Snares, Fire, Brimstone, an horrible Tempest, shall be rained on
them as their portion; woeful are the fruits of Sin oftentimes in this World. It
keeps good from men here, strips them of their Estates, Relations, Liberties,
Limbs, Health, Names; nay, of the Gospel, Ordinances, and seasons of Grace, and
brings on them much evil here, Aches, Pains, Diseases in their Bodies, Horrors
and Terrors in their Souls. But these are nothing to the effects of Sin in the
other World. Here in the midst of Judgment, Mercy is remembered; there is no
state on Earth of mear or pure wrath. All good things are not removed, nor all
evil things inflicted on any. In the worst Estate there is Life, and that
clothed with some Favors. The pained have some intermission, or at least
remission of their pains. In the lowest estate there is hope of better, and
that is no small Cordial to a poor Creature; there is no Condition so bad, but
might have been worse, both for its intention and duration. But now in the
other World, the wicked have Judgment without a mite of Mercy, and Misery
without any Ease; either in regard of degree or intermission: All good banished
from them, and all evil inflicted on them.

Ex. If the wicked shall be thus punished with the loss of Christ, and the
pains of Hell fire; it exhorts us to flee from the wrath to come. Ah who would
fry one hour in flames for a Kingdom! How dreadful is the hearing of fire;
fire, in the night? How does the very sound of it fright men and women? Ah then
what will the feeling of it be in utter darkness, in that black long night of
eternity! Sinner, when thou art tempted to sin, consider whether the
satisfaction of thy Lust will make thee amends for, and balance the loss of
God, and thy suffering the flames of Hell.

Alas, how little is the pleasure of Sin, but how terrible, how intolerable is
the pain of it! What wise man would be racked a day for a moments delight? much
less suffer the wrath of an infinite God, for the dreggy pleasures of a Beast.
Do thou think thou can bear it? art thou able to endure it? Can thou
suffer the pain of our fire? if not, how will thou endure the pain of that fire
which the breath of a God kindles, and keeps burning? which tortures the
Soul as well as the Body, and which was prepared of God for the afflicting and
punishing his Creatures. O Friend, fly to Christ, if thou would flee from
the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. He is the only skreen between thee and the
fire of Hell. Fly from sin, if thou would fly from Hell fire. Fly the
Cause, and thou fliest the Effect: Take away Sin, and you take away Hell.
Whatsoever thou sowest now, thou shall reap hereafter; Gal. 6.7. Sow Lust, and
reap the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. Sow Holiness, and
reap Happiness; They who sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption:
but they who sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal.
6.8.

CHAP. XIII. The eternity of the Sinners misery in the other World, with the
grand Reason of it.
I Come now to the eternity of the Sinners punishment, in that word Everlasting.

(...), The word is referred to God, and then is used for that which is eternal,
a part ante, or that never had a beginning. Sometimes it is referred to the
rational Creature, and then signifies an eternity, a part post, or that which
never has an end. The word comes from (...), an Age, because what is
everlasting, endures through all Ages and Generations, and infinitely beyond
them.

The Doctrine which I shall draw from this property of ungodly men's punishment
shall be this.

Doct. 3. That the punishment of the wicked in the other World will be
everlasting. It will not only be extreme, in regard of its intention; but also
eternal, in regard of its duration. Their privative punishment will be eternal:
They shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. And so will their positive punishment be, Jude, verse. 7.
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them are set forth, suffering the
vengeance of the eternal fire. And Christ tells us, There the worm never dies,
and the fire never goes out, Matthew. 18. And again, it is called the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone for ever.

It were no small ease to the damned, if they had hopes of any end of their
misery; though after as many millions of millions of years as have been moments
since the Creation, and as are Creatures small and great in both worlds; but it
may not be, it cannot be; after all these years they are not to remain one
moment the less in Hell.

I shall only give the Reasons of it, and proceed to the Use.

There are several Reasons given why the Sinners temporal fault should have an
eternal punishment.

1. Some tell us, He refused eternal Life, and therefore it is but reason he
should be punished with eternal death. They had eternal pains and eternal
pleasures set before them, and they chose eternal pains. In choosing the way,
they chose the end; they chose the way of the Flesh, the way of their own
Hearts, and so consequentially they chose Hell, to which that way led. Now if a
man has but his own choice, whom can he blame but himself? If a man have what
he desires and loves, if it be ill with him, he must thank himself. He that
sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul: all that hate me, love death, Prove.
8. ult, Jer. 4.17, 18.

2. Others tell us, That if they should live here for ever, they would sin for
ever; therefore God taking the will for the deed, punishes them for ever. They
die eternally for sin, who would have lived eternally in sin. Vellet sine fine
vivere ut posset sine fine peccare, Greg. Man would live here for ever, if he
had his will, that he might sin for ever. Scotus and Aquinas tell us, Peccant
in aeterno suo and puniuntur in aeterno Dei: They sin in their eternity, and
God punishes them in his eternity. If God would give them an eternal abode on
Earth, they would employ it in disobeying and dishonouring him eternally. And
because they would sin for ever, therefore they shall suffer for ever; Jer.
8.5. The Children of Israel are slidden back with a perpetual backsliding;
they hold fast deceit, and refuse to return. How loath are they to forsake
their Lusts: 1. They hold them fast. As a Fountain sends forth water, so does
the Sinner send forth wickedness, Jer. 6.7. Now a Fountain sends forth water
freely without constraint, and constantly without cessation. What any thing
does naturally, it does easily and unweariedly. The Sun shines naturally, and
he shines without any pains or tiresomeness. The Fountain sends forth water
naturally, and does it with ease and constancy. So the Sinner sins naturally,
and does it delightfully and unweariedly. When the Body and its members, the
instruments of sin, are tired and worn out, and unable to execute the lusts of
the flesh, the body of sin is still fresh and vigorous in plotting and
conspiring evil, and in embracing and cherishing evil motions: whence it
appears, that man sinning naturally would (if he lived) sin eternally, and
thence say they, He is tormented for ever. But,

3. The principal Reason of the eternity of the Sinners misery, and indeed the
only reason in my Judgment (with due respect to others) is the infinite demerit
of sin, as committed against an infinite Majesty. Because the Sinner is not
capable of bearing a punishment infinite in intension, therefore he must have
it infinite in duration. I doubt not, but if the Sinner were able to bear the
infinite stroke of Divine Justice (notwithstanding his will to sin for ever,
and his choice of eternal death, and all the other reasons that are usually
brought for the eternity of their pains,) he should not stay long in that
prison of Hell, but quickly be released: But because a poor finite Creature
has not a back strong enough to bear an infinite blow, therefore he must be
always suffering.

The notoriety and malignity of sin proceeds from the dignity of the Person
against whom its committed, as I have largely shown elsewhere. Because the
Authority of an infinite God is despised, the Law of an infinite God disobeyed,
the Love of an infinite God undervalued, and the Image of an infinite God
defaced by sin, therefore there is an infinite demerit in sin. In a Treatise
called The Incomparableness of God. And because man cannot give satisfaction
infinite in value, therefore he must give that satisfaction which is infinite
in time, or rather in its eternity, Psalm. 49.7, 8. Psalm. 51.4. Job 7.20. And
considering that God was resolved to have full satisfaction for sin, I conceive
Christ himself could not have satisfied for the sins of any, if he could not
have offered a Sacrifice of infinite merit to answer the infinite demerit of
sin. But herein the Wisdom and Goodness of God did superabound, in providing an
Antidote stronger than the Poison; for whereas sin is infinite, only Objective,
as committed against an infinite God: The Sacrifie of Christ is infinite, both
Objective and Subjective, as offered up to an infinite Majesty, and offered by
one that was an infinite Majesty; whose Person being infinite, rendered his
Sacrifice of such boundless value and merit.

CHAP. XIV. How little cause to envy Sinners, and how careful we should be to
avoid their eternal misery.
Use 1. WE may learn hence what little cause any have to envy Sinners their fat
and sweet in this World. Alas, for their poor short pleasures of sin, they must
have extreme and eternal torments. Who would grudge them their portion, or eat
of their Dainties, or buy their Bargains, that is not mad, and quite bereaft of
his wits, Prove. 23.17, 18. My Son, envy not Sinners: for surely there is an
end. I, and a sad end for poor Sinners. An end of Woe, and Wrath, and Death,
and Misery, without any end or ease. Ah what sad Objects are they of Pity, who
laugh a minute, and must weep for ever! who for a little gigling mirth, and
poor drossy pleasures, must fry eternally in Hell flames among Devils and
damned Spirits.

Ex. Reader, Believe and consider this misery of the Wicked, and be restless,
till thou art secured against it. Ponder it well, to be among Devils, those
stinging Serpents, roaring Lions, frightful Monsters, would make thy hair stand
an end, and thy heart to ache; but to be amongst them in extremity of Torments,
in fire, in fire kindled by the infinite wrath of God, and in universality of
Torments, to have all kind of Judgments and Plagues inflicted on thee; I, and
on every part of thy Body, and all the powers of thy Soul; and to suffer all
this for ever, ever, ever. Can thou bear the company of Lions, and Bears, and
Wolves, and Adders, and Serpents, and the deformed Monsters here for ever? How
then will thou bear the Company of Devils, hideous, monstrous, frightful
Hell Hounds for ever? Thou can not bear the pain of our fire for one day, no
not for one quarter of an hour; how then will thou bear the pain of Hell fire
for ever? Ah who can dwell in everlasting burnings! who can endure abiding
flames? The Patient in a violent fit of the Stone, or Colic, or Gout, supports
himself with this Cordial, This will not last long. The Woman in labor, in the
extremity of her pains, has this to revive her, All this, through the kindness
of God, will soon be over. The Primitive Christians comforted themselves under
their dreadful Sufferings from their Persecutors, with this, Our light
Afflictions are but for a moment. They are black Clouds, but will soon pass
over, and vanish away. But, Reader, if once thou art turned into Hell, into
those unconceivable intolerable flames, amongst those frightful Devils, thou
can have nothing to bear up thy Spirit, not the least hope of any cessation,
or intermission, or remission of thy pains. Ah how will despair, like a dagger,
stab thee to the heart! what a cutting corosive will it be to think, I am here
amongst horrid, hideous, hellish Devils, (who have been my Tempters, and are
now my Tormentors,) banished the blissful presence of God and Jesus Christ,
suffering those torments, and pains, and misery, to which all the fires and
racks on Earth are but as the rasing of skin to Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace.
Ah what Tongue can tell what this poor Body suffers in every part of it! Ah
what Understanding can apprehend the anguish and remorse of this Soul, its
cutting Reflections on what it has been and done, and its killing praevision
of what it must undergo, and I must endure all this for ever! Though my pains
are so extreme in their intention, yet if they were short in their duration, I
had some ground of comfort; nay, if they were to last no more millions of
years, than there are Stars in Heaven, and drops of water in the Ocean, I
should have some crevis of light, some hope to bear up my heart: But alas,
alas, I am here in the midst of this cursed Crew, under these extreme ineffable
pains, and must be here for ever. The wrath upon me is abiding wrath, Joh. 3.
ult. It is wrath to come, and ever will be wrath to come. After Ages, and
Generations, and millions of them; I, and millions of millions of them, my pain
would not be a moment the nearer a period. My night of darkness and horror
will be along night indeed, the Clock will never strike, the time will never
pass, the morn will never dawn, and the Sun will never rise. O what shall I do,
thousands, and thousands of thousands, millions, and millions, of millions, of
millions, signify not a moment to my wretched and cursed eternity. Ah such
company, such misery, and that for ever, ever, ever! Reader, does not thy Soul
tremble to think of this, which will be the portion (probably) of most in the
Christian World; and will thou give thy self a moments rest, in a state liable
and obnoxious to it: For the sake of thy precious Soul, if thou have any true
self-love, Break off thy sins by Repentance, and thine Iniquities by accepting
of thy Redeemer. Hell has not yet shut its mouth upon thee, nor is the gate of
Mercy yet shut against thee. O bless the Divine Patience, and know the things
that concern thine own peace.

Thy life is short and uncertain; when once death seiseth thee, thou art
immediately fixed, there can be no change, no alteration of thy state. Tears,
Prayers, Groans, Sighs, Sobs, will work nothing, prevail nothing with the Judge
to alter his Sentence, or thy Condition. Now is the accepted time, now is the
day of Salvation. Therefore, O Sinner, Agree with thine Adversary quickly,
while thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into
Prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till
thou have paid the uttermost farthing, Matthew. 5.25, 26. But having written
largely of this in another Treatise, and intending to speak of it here only by
way of Preface, to what I mainly intend, and now come to discourse of, and that
is the Nature, Danger, Cause, and Curse of Sins of Omission, in the reasons of
this severe Sentence, I shall speak no more thereof, but proceed to the third
general part of the Text, and that is the reason.

CHAP. XV. The reason of Christ's severe Sentence, and a question resolved,
whether the Righteous, by their Acts of Charity, do not deserve Heaven as well,
as the Wicked, by their Omission thereof, deserve Hell.
Thirdly, THe reason of Christ's severe Sentence against them, verse. 40, 43.
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

The words have nothing of difficulty in them, and therefore I shall not wast
time in the explication of them. Every one knows what it is not to give meat to
the Hungry, or drink to the Thirsty, or Raiment to the Naked, etc. That it is
the omission of a Duty, viz. Charity, which God commands, and also that
Believers are the Members of Christ, Ephesians. 1. ult. Christ mystical, 1 Cor.
12.12. And therefore what injuries are done to them, are done to Christ, Acts
9. Only it may be needful to speak to these two particulars, before I raise the
Doctrine.

1. Whether there be not the like ground of the Salvation of the blessed that
there is of the damnation of the wicked; namely, the merit of their works. Both
seem to speak it, Come ye blessed, etc. For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat.
Again, Go ye cursed, etc. For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat? etc.

2. Why Christ will try men at the great day by the performance or neglect of
this Duty of Charity, and not rather by their performance or neglect of Prayer,
Hearing, Watchfulness, or some other Duty, or by their Humility,
Heavenly-mindedness, Patience, Temperance? etc.

In answer to the first, though Bellarmine affirms, There is the same reason in
each, and Cornel. A Lapide, with the rest of the Papists, concur therein, yet
if they were not wilfully blind, they might see enough in the Text to disprove
them.

1. In that Christ calls to the blessed to inherit the Kingdom, (...), which
word signifies Haereditatis jure possidere, to enjoy a thing by right of
Inheritance, from Parents and Ancestors, and not by right of Purchase, or
deserving; therefore Heaven is often called (...), an Inheritance, Col. 1.12.
Ephesians. 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.3. So the Type of it, the Land of Canaan is often called
by the 70, probably from the division or distribution of the Land by lot to
them, A (...) sors and (...) Lexceu (...), Distribuo quia hereditates olim per
sortem distribul solebant.
Josh. 14.2. which to a word is the import of the word. Now they who enjoy an
Estate by right of Sonship, do not possess it by Merit. What can a Child who
may inherit his deceased Fathers Estate in his Childhood or Infancy do to
deserve that Estate.

2. In that Christ tells them, That this Kingdom was prepared for them before
the foundation of the World. Now what could they do before they had a Being to
deserve this Inheritance. And the Apostle is positive, that all is to be
referred to the Purpose of God, not to the piety of any men. For (says he) the
Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
Purpose of God according to Election might stand, (mark) not of works, but of
him that calls. It was said unto her, The Elder shall serve the younger, Romans
9.11, 12. Ephesians. 1.4. Rev. 13.8.

If it be Objected, That God foresaw that they would improve their Free will
unto the performance of such good Works, whereby they would deserve Heaven, and
therefore chose them to Heaven, which the Papists stand much upon. I answer,

1. The foresight of their Faith and good Works cannot be the cause of their
Election, because their Election is by God himself declared to be the cause of
their Faith and good Works. If their Faith and Obedience be the effect of
Election, they cannot be the cause of it; but so they are, Joh. 6.37. All that
the Father has given me shall come to me, i. e. believe on me. Again, As many
as were ordained to eternal life believed, Act. 13.48. So for good Works, Joh.
15.13. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 8.30.

2. Then man's will must be the ground of God's Actions, not his own Will. The
Scripture tells us, That God works all things after the Counsel of his own
will, Ephesians. 1.11. But say the Papists in Election, God works according to
the imp^^vement of man's will.

3. Then the accomplishment of Go^ Decree depends upon the mutable and
uncertain will of man, so that there is a possibility that God may be
disappointed of his Choice, and his Elect of that Happiness to which they are
chosen, if both depend on a changeable Creature. But the word of God speaks the
contrary, that God cannot be frustrated of his Choice, Psalm. 33.10. The Counsel
of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all Generations.
His Decrees are sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. though his sentence may be altered, Jer.
18.7, 8, 9, 10. Nor can the Elect be disappointed, Matthew. 24.24. If it were
possible, they would deceive the very Elect. Here the impossibility of their
seduction is grounded on the stability of their Election.

4. Then there can be no Election of Infants to everlasting life. I mean, of
such as God fore-seeth or ordains to die in their infancy, because God cannot
foresee that these will improve the liberty of their wills unto Faith and
Repentance. That Infants may be saved, is clear, Matthew. 19.14. Suffer little
Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Matthew calls them (...), Luke (...), the first word signifies
Puerulus, a little Child, one, say the Critics, that is in the first seven
years of his Age. But the latter, Luke 18.15. signifies Infants newly born, or
sucking Babes. Now if of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, then they may be saved.
But none are saved, save such as are elected; therefore without any foresight
of Faith or good Works, rational Creatures may be elected, Romans 8.30. Romans 11.7.

5. If foresight of men's Works be the cause of their Election, then man has
whereof to glory. He is then the cause of his own Salvation. Election is the
Original of all, a spring that runs under ground for a time; first bubleth
up and discovers it self in effectual Calling, so glideth along in a life of
Faith and Holiness, and at last emptieth it self in the Ocean of Peace, and
Joy, and Happiness: So that if man be the Cause of his Election, then he may
thank himself for his Salvation. John is no more beholden to God than Judas,
for it is the improvement of the freedom of his Will which brings him to Heaven.
God did as much for Judas (say they) as for John. But how contrary is this to
the word of Truth? Romans 4.2. But if Abraham were justified by Works, he had
whereof to glory. The Scripture speaks in another Dialect, By Grace ye are
saved, through Faith, not of Works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. The
Knife with which Adam cut his own Throat, and wherewith he murdered his
Posterity, was Pride. He would hold of himself, and not of God. The wise and
gracious God, in the way he has taken for our Recovery, is pleased to lay this
Knife as far as may be out of our way, lest we be ruined by it a second time:
Though this Pride, the Popish Doctrine of Merits, and foresight of good Works
maintains; but God tells us, Man is nothing, and God all in all; that no flesh
might glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29.

6. The Holy Ghost gives us the true ground or motive of Election, far
differing from this of the Papists, and that is the Will and Pleasure; Having
predestined us according to the good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. Being
predestined according to the purpose of him, verse. 11.

Romans 9.18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardneth.

Matthew. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with a holy Calling; not
according to our work, but according to his own Purpose and Grace which was
given us in Christ before the world begun. Again, the Particle For, enim, (...)
is counted causal, Piscat. in Loc.
not that always it notes the Cause, but sometimes a Reason or Argument,
whether taken from the Cause or Effect, Matthew. 1.18. Matthew. 15.14. 2 Timothy 2.7.
Besides this is sufficient for parity of reason, or the resemblance, that as
some go by the way of good Works to Heaven, so others by the way of evil Works
to Hell. Good Works are not (...), ceu causa salutis sed (...), respectu fidei
and finis ejus, vitae aeternae, Glass. not the cause of reigning, but the way
to the Kingdom. Once more, Let the Papists show the same proportion between a
few imperfect defective good Works, which men are enabled to do by the help of
God, and the unconceivable eternal Joys and Glory of Heaven that is between the
evil works of men, and the endless pains of Hell, and then let them plead their
merits. They may, if they please, observe, that the Saints themselves are so
far from pleading their Merits, or boasting their deserts, that they hardly
remember that they ever did those Works which Christ proclaims to their praise,
and rewards through his own blood with a Kingdom. Lord, when saw we thee hungry
or thirsty? etc. O what a vast difference is there between an upright humble
Christian, who acknowledges himself less than the least of all Gods mercies,
and a proud Papist that dares say, Coelum gratis non accipiam.

CHAP. XVI. Why Christ will try men at the Great Day by acts of Charity.
THe second question to be discussed before I proceed to the Doctrine, is, why
Christ tries men at that day by the neglect or performance of Charity, and not
of some other Duty, as hearing, praying, watching, etc. Or by their Patience,
Humility, Temperance, or Heavenly-mindedness? etc. To this I answer,

These Works of Charity are by a Synechdoche put for new Obedience, and all the
good works of a Christians life. Though Christ mention those as the test of men
at that day, yet he does not hereby exclude others. The Scripture abundantly
proves, that other Graces and Duties shall be rewarded at that day, 1 Pet.
1.6, 7. Matthew. 10.18. Heb. 6.10, etc. and that men shall be condemned for other
sins beside the neglect of Charity. The want of the Wedding Garment, Matthew.
22.12, 13. Unprofitableness in the improvement of Talents, Matthew. 25.30. We
have a Bed-Roll of other sins condemning, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8. Indeed
every sin, any sin that men have lived in, and loved, who have died impenitent,
will be found damnable at that day.

It cannot rationally be supposed, that the performance or neglect of those
outward acts of Charity should be the general test, (I mean of all) for how
then shall those that die in their Infancy and Childhood, or such as are
extremely poor be tried, who are rendered wholly incapable of feeding the
Hungry, or clothing the Naked. Neither do I judge it shall be the sole test,
for it is possible for a man in these outward acts to be bountiful to men, who
has no regard or fear of God in him. The Apostle supposes a man may give all
his Goods to the poor, and yet be void of true love to the poor, 1 Cor. 13.3.
It Is unquestionable, that the Worship of the blessed God is much more excellent
than our kindness to the Children of men (as Calvin well observes on the Text)
yet Christ who knows the hearts of all men, and from what principles they
act, will mention the Saints acts of Charity at that day, and reward them
accordingly, and will mention the Sinners omission of Charity at that day, and
condemn him for it.

1. Because acts of Charity are more obvious and apparent to the World. Though
the Christian usually is close therein, and will not let his left hand know
what his right hand does; yet Charity, like Musk, will discover it self. The
Objects thereof will publish their Benefactors; and he himself thinks it
needful sometimes to be open and public in his liberality (though not for
self-ostentation, yet) for others imitation. Luther tells us, That Christ will
try men this way, because the World shall justify his Sentence both of reward
and punishment. If a man be charitable, all his Neighbors take notice of it;
yea, commonly love him for it; the vilest of them will commend him, though by
his holy Conversation he condemns them. I suppose this is the good man of whom
the Apostle speaks, when he tells us, That for such a one a man will even dare
to die, Romans 5. Therefore when Christ shall acknowledge the Charity of his
people, and then reward them with himself; the wicked Neighbors of these men
will confess the truth thereof, and their Consciences will force them to
consent thereto. Again, there is hardly a Muckworm, whose Motto is, To have,
and to hold, to heap, and to hoard up, who will as soon part with his blood, as
any thing considerable to the poor; but all his Neighbors, good and bad,
observe him, speak of him, and generally condemn him for his
earthly-mindedness. So that when Christ at the Great Day shall accuse him, they
will be forced to attest the truth of that Accusation, and when Christ at that
day shall condemn him, they cannot but agree to the Sentence; Psalm. 52.6, 7.
The Righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him. Lo, this is the
man that made not God his strength: but trusted in the abundance of his riches,
and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

2. Because these acts of Charity are signs of Faith and Love, to which Graces
Heaven is promised, James 1.12. James 2.5. Joh. 3.16, 17, ult. Christ who
knows the Heart, understands ^^om what inward root our outward ^ruit
springs; and therefore Faith and Love, which are the Fountain of true
Charity, James 2.15, 16, 17. being inward and secret, he mentions what is more
open and known, as a sign and testimony of that faith in him, and love to him,
which are invisible and unknown to the World. Faith is a Grace seated in the
heart, With the heart man believes unto righteousness; (where, by heart, I
suppose is understood the Understanding and Will; for Faith, in habitu, is in
each; and in exercitio, an act of both.) And the heart is called an hidden man,
1 Pet. 3. But it discovers it self to the Believer by love. For when once the
Soul applies Christ for Pardon and Life, and begins to hope for those great
and good things which Christ has purchased for him, and promised to him; this
Faith kindles an holy flame of Love in the affections to Christ, and hereby
the Soul understands that he is a true Believer beloved of God; for our Love is
but the reverberation of God's Love back again to himself, 1 John 4.19. And
then Faith discovers it self to others, by these fruits and effects of love to
God, i. e. feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked. St. Paul tells us, That
Faith works by love, as its Tool or Instrument, Gal. 5.6. Love to God produces
love to his Saints, and love to the Saints will draw out the hand, and heart,
and purse to relieve them in their wants, 1 John 3.17. Love is costly and
expensive, thinks nothing too much or too good for its Beloved. Mary's Box of
Ointment is very precious, but not too precious for her Lord. Life is worth all
the World, yet laid down for a Christian at the command of Love, 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.

3. Because practical godliness, of which Charity is a part, will be that by
which men shall be tried at the Great Day; our Lord Jesus does hereby declare,
That it is not the Profession, but the practice of Religion, that will be
enquired into by the Judge of quick and dead. It is not saying, Be thou fed,
and be thou clothed; without giving wherewith to be fed and clothed: But it
is feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked, that shall be rewarded. Good
words may please our selves, but good works only please God, and profit our own
Souls. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. It Is the
doing, not the talking Christian that has the promise of Heaven, Matthew. 7.
It Is the practical, not the verbal Christian, that has a right to Heaven
through the precious blood of Christ, and the gracious promise of God; Rev.
22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. It is the
real, not the nominal Christian, that is prepared for heaven. None are fit to
do the will of God in heaven, but those who have been accustomed to do the Will
of God on Earth. There is a making meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in
light, Col. 1.12. A young man by the School, is made meet for the University;
and a Christian by practical Holiness, is fitted for eternal Happiness.

Our Redeemer would hereby declare, That all shows and shadows of Godliness,
all gaudy Professions, and curious flourishes of Religion, if void of good
Works, though as Gloworms, they shine somewhat in the dark night of this World,
yet in the long day of eternity they will all vanish and disappear. God will
not then examine who has been the greatest Talker of his Will, but the
greatest Walker in his Way; nor who has been the best Speaker, but who has
been the best Doer. For whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and
continues therein, he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a doer of the Work;
this man shall be blessed in his deed, Jam. 1.25. Hearing the Word, without
doing the Work it commands, brings no blessing. The life and substance of
Religion consists in practicing what is good, and not in praising what is good.
It consists in Scripture-Duties, not in Scripture Phrases.

4. Because Christ would hereby publish to the World, the great respect he has
for Charity; therefore he tells us, He will take special notice of his Saints
Charity at that day. Charity, whether in relieving the Oppressed, or comforting
the Sorrowful, or counselling the Doubtful, or supporting the Feeble, or
feeding the Hungry, or visiting the Sick, or clothing the Naked, is highly
esteemed of Christ. To what Duty has he annexed more or larger Promises,
Matthew. 5.7. Psalm. 18.25. Eccles. 11.1, 2. Psalm. 41.1. Psalm. 112.1. Isa. 58.12.
He speaks of it, as if very much of Religion did consist in it, and almost all
of it. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is to visit the
Fatherless and the Afflicted, James 1. ult. He slights our most severe Duties,
(those which are most irksome to the flesh) if this be wanting, Psalm. 58.7, 8,
9, 10. He limits his own Mercy to the merciful, 2 Samuel 22.25. James 2.13. He is
himself a merciful High Priest, Heb. 5. He had compassion on the ignorant, and
those that were out of the way, Heb. 5.2. On those that had nothing to eat,
Matthew. 15.32. On those that were scattered as sheep without a Shepherd, Matthew.
9.36. Therefore he cannot but value exceedingly, and love tenderly those that
are like him. That which lies so near his heart, must needs be enquired after,
as much, if not more than any thing else. And there is scarce any thing that
speaks our respect of persons or things, more than our enquiry after them.
Joseph loved his Father Jacob dearly, I suppose far above all his Kindred, and
therefore he first enquires after him. ^s your Father well, the old man of whom
ye spoke? Genesis 43.27. David's heart was set on Absalom, therefore when the
Messenger returned from the Battle, he does in the first place, and in a
special manner enquire after him. Is the young man Absalom safe? 2 Samuel 18.
Thus Christ being so infinitely taken with Charity, cannot but make a great
enquiry after it at the Great Day. It is fruit that will then abound to the
Saints account, Phil. 4.17. And such Seed, that they who sow it liberally,
shall reap it liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6.

CHAP. XVII. Three particulars about the Text.
I Come now somewhat closer to the Reason of the Sentence; For I was hungry,
and ye gave me no meat, etc. Here we must understand:

1. Observe. That the omission of inward Charity is included in this of outward,
and will be as dangerous, if not more at the Great Day. The subject of it, the
Soul is much more noble than the Body; therefore to suffer a Soul to perish
through our neglect of giving it spiritual Alms is a greater sin, than to
suffer the outward man to perish for want of bodily Alms. Again, the end of
spiritual Alms is higher, (than of bodily) the eternal Salvation of the Soul, 1
Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your Faith, the eternal salvation of your Souls.
Both sorts of Charity are comprehended into these two verses.

Visito, Poto, Cibo Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo;
Consule, Castiga, Solare, Remitte, Fer, Ora.
2. Observe. That other Works, beside Works of Charity, and other Omissions,
beside the Omission of this Duty, will be mentioned at that Day, and men shall
be judged according to them. Indeed all our Works will be then accounted for.
But you will say, What time will this take up. I answer, It seems probable,
that the day of Judgment may last longer than most imagine. The Holy Ghost
tells us, That God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good? or whether it be evil? Eccles. 12. ult. If every
Work, then more than acts of Charity; and if every Work good or bad, open or
secret, then the day of Judgment must be a long day. The Apostle speaks the
same as to the matter of Judgment, with the wise man, We must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10.

There are two of our eminent English Divines now with God, who have left their
Judgment herein upon Record. One tells us, I humbly conceive, That the day of
Judgment shall not be past over in an instant, but shall be of long
continuance. Mr. Strong in a Sermon. on 2 Cor. 5.10. p. 26.
For if Christ should judge only as God, he could dispatch it in an instant;
but his judging us men will be after the manner of men, that the Creature may
understand, admire, and approve what is done. The other says, Mr. Shepherds
sound Convert, p. 88.
It must take up some large quantity of time to manifest all the secret sins of
men; and therefore it may be made evident both from Scripture and Reason, that
this Day of Christ's Kingly Office, in judging the world, shall last happily
longer than the day of Christ's private Administration now in governing the
World.

Austin tells us, Austin, De Civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 1.
Per quot dies hoc judicium extendatur incertum est, Scripturarum more diem
poni solere pro tempore nemo nescit.

3. Observe. Christ does not say, Ye took my Meat from me, or wronged me of my
Raiment, or persecuted me, and cast me into Prison; But I was hungry, and ye
gave me no meat; naked, and ye clothed me not; in prison, and ye visited me
not. He does not say, I was hungry, and naked, and sick, and instead of
relieving, ye derided me, and by your taunts and jears, added Affliction to the
afflicted, or ye despised and condemned me, as they, James 2.6. But I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. It was a bare omission of a necessary Duty
for which they are sentenced to Hell. It Is not robbing, but not relieving; not
oppressing them with violence, but not supplying their necessities which Christ
here condemns them for.

These words considered thus relatively, as the reason of Christ's severe
Sentence, will afford us this Doctrine which I chiefly intend.

CHAP. XVIII. That sins of Omission are dangerous and damnable.
Doctrine. THat sins of Omission are dangerous and damnable, or Christ will
sentence men at the Great Day to eternal punishment of loss and sense, for not
feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked. Observe how naturally the Doctrine
flows from the Text, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink, etc. The sin mentioned is a bare omission, and the Sentence
clearly speaks the punishment: Hence I gather, That sins of Omission are
damnable. Christ will sentence men to Hell for them. Readiness not slaying Agag,
(an omission) lost him the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 15.20, 26. The Moabites and
Ammonites were excluded the Sanctuary of God (an high and special Privilege)
to the tenth Generation, for an omission, for not meeting Israel with bread and
water in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 33.4.

But it is as clear, these sins bring eternal as well as temporal pains and
punishment. The slothful Servant is sentenced, and sent into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, for a bare omission, for not improving
his Talent, Matthew. 25.24, to 31. The Servant did not waste his Talent by
Riotousness, as the Prodigal did, (for he tells his Lord, v. 25. Lo, here is
thine,) only omit to improve it through idleness. But he who wanted hands to
work, had fetters provided for hands and feet. And he who would not work by the
light, is rewarded with utter darkness.

Again, we have a clear and full proof of the Doctrine, in Matthew. 3.10. And now
also the Ax is laid to the root of the Trees: therefore every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. In the
verse we have three parts considerable:

1. the Sin, and that is a bare omission, the not bringing forth good fruit.
Our Savior speaks the same in Matthew. 7.19. He does not say, Every Tree that
brings forth evil fruit is hewn down, that brings forth Drunkenness, or
Robbery, or Uncleanness, or unsavory Communication, etc. is cast into the fire;
But every Tree that brings not forth good fruit. The sin is only a neglect of
positive holiness.

2. The severity of the punishment is, hewn down, and cast into the fire. The
hewing down, is the fitting and preparing the Sinner for the fire; as the Tree
cut down, is prepared for burning. This is done by their provoking God to leave
them to impenitency, under the ministry of the Word. The Word is compared to a
Sword, Ephesians. 6.17. A two-edged Sword, Rev. 1.16. And it will cut, and hack,
and hew to purpose, Hos. 6.5. God heweth them by his Prophets, and slays them
by the word of his mouth. It cuts to the heart, Act. 4.54. Act. 5.33. And has
dreadful effects on them, Isa. 6.9, 10. And he said, go and tell this people,
Hear ye indeed, but understand not; see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the
hearts of this people fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest
they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their
Hearts, and convert, and be healed.

And this hewing them down is also by death. The Ax of death fells the Tree for
the fire of Hell. The rotten Tree, or the barren Tree, is not good for fruit,
therefore for the fire.

He is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Abscission is the way to perdition,
to eternal burning. This is the Catastrophe of the barren Trees Tragedy.

3. The certainty of it. Both Christ and the Baptist speak of the punishment in
the present Tense, not the Future, Is hewn down, and cast into the fire; not,
shall be hewn down, etc. The fruitless person shall as certainly be in Hell, as
if he were there already; therefore promises and threatenings, though future,
are delivered to us as present. As, to us a Son is born, Isa. 9.6. Isa. 21.9.
Babylon is fallen.

4. The universality of the Persons, Every Tree that brings not forth good
fruit. Every man, what ever his Profession may be, or his Hopes are, or his
Privileges have been, if he bring not forth good fruit, he is hewn down, and
cast into the fire. The Doctrine being thus proved by Scripture, I shall
proceed to the Explication of it in several particulars.

1. I shall speak to the nature of them, and show what sins of Omission are.

2. To the danger of them.

3. To the Reasons why they are so damnable.

CHAP. XIX. The nature of sins of Omission in general.
First, COncerning the first, i. e. the nature of them. I shall speak to one
more generally, and two more particularly.

1. By the several distinctions of these Sins.

2. By their agreement with, and difference from sins of Omission.

1. More generally, a sin of Omission is a neglect of some Duty commanded us in
the Word of God.

In every Command, there is a Precept and a Prohibition. A Precept enjoining,
and a Prohibition forbidding. A Precept enjoining some Duty, and a Prohibition
forbidding the contrary. The neglect of doing what the Precept enjoins, is a
sin of Omission, and the doing what the Precept forbids is a sin of commission.

The truth is, in every Commission there is an Omission; as in every deadly
Disease somewhat of a Feavor. For in every Commission, as in Drunkenness, or
Oppression, or Uncleanness, there is a neglect or omission of the Duty
commanded, as Temperance, Charity, and Chastity. But those we most properly
call sins of Omission, which are extrinsicate from sins of Commission; as not
praying, not reading the Word, not believing, not feeding the hungry, etc. But
to speak strictly, there is no sin but sins of Omission; for all sin consists
in privation of due rectitude or deficiency, and coming short of the rule.
Though the Commands are generally delivered by way of negation, partly because
of the proneness of men to commit those sins that are forbidden, and God would
by his Negative command, curb, and keep them in. Thou shall not, etc. thou
shall not, etc. partly because Negative Commands bind more strongly than the
Affirmative. The Affirmative obligant semper, but not ad semper; but the
Negative bind semper and ad semper, as the Schoolmen speak. The Affirmative
bind us always, ( i. e. there is no time wherein it can be said that they are
of no force,) but not to all times. I am always bound to pray, but I am not
bound to pray at all times; I am bound always to speak truth, but I am not
bound to speak all truth at all times. But Negative Commands bind always, and
at all times; as, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery. These
bind every moment of a man's life, I mean every moment of his life these sins
are to be forborne; they are at no time lawful: Though, I say, the Commands are
delivered Negative for the most part, ( viz. eight of them,) yet we must
understand, that all the Negative Commands of God include their Affirmative;
as, Thou shall have no other gods before me; this includes, thou shall have me
for thy God, thou shall know me, love me, fear me, trust me, and worship me as
thy God. And when God says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image,
etc. this includes, thou shall Worship me according to my Will, revealed in my
Word. When God says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain;
this includes, thou shall use reverently all my Names, Titles, Attributes,
Ordinances, Word and Works. When God says, Thou shall not kill; this
includes, thou shall use all lawful means for the preservation of thine own and
thy Neighbors life. When God says, Thou shall not commit Adultery; this
includes, thou shall by all just ways maintain thine own and thy Neighbors
Chastity, in thought, word, and deed. When God says, Thou shall not steal;
this includes, thou shall be true, faithful, and just in all thy Contracts and
Dealings with others, restore what is ill gotten, be diligent in thy Calling,
and endeavor the furtherance of thy own and thy Neighbors estate by all just
ways. When God says, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor;
this includes, thou shall to thy power promote truth in thy self and others,
maintain thine own and thy Neighbors good Name. When God says, Thou shall not
covet, etc. this includes, thou shall be fully satisfied with thine own
Condition, and desire and delight in thy Neighbors prosperity. Thus the
Negative Commands of God include their Affirmative, so that to depart from the
evil forbidden, is not to keep these Laws, unless also we practice the Duties
commanded. The neglect of any of them is a sin of Omission.

CHAP. XX. Three distinctions about sins of Omission.
2. I Shall speak more particularly, and explain these sins: 1. By these
distinctions. 2. By their agreement with, and difference from sins of
Commission.


First, These sins of Omission are to be distinguished in regard of substance,
manner or measure.

1. When a duty is omitted in regard of the matter of it, as when men pray not,
give not to the Poor, hear not the Word, etc. these omit the substance of the
Duty. Of such as those God complains, There is none that looks after God,
Romans 3.11. And again, They will will not hear the Law of the Lord, Isa. 30.9.
And he that turns away his Ears from the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13. These are most deeply guilty
before God. They show their utter contempt of him, and openly manifest it to
others; when they omit to relieve the Poor, to pray in their Families, or to
attend public praying and preaching; hereby they are scandalous and offensive.
They grieve the godly, Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because the wicked
forsake thy Laws, Psalm. 119. and they harden the wicked. When ungodly men see
others neglect all Religion, they are encouraged in their Atheism and
Irreligion; and presuming others are wise, and that themselves shall fare as
well as others. As it was said of those, Ezekiel. 13.21. so it may be said of
these; They strengthen the hands of the wicked. Again, these are guilty in all
respects; they who offend in the matter of a Command, by neglecting the Duty it
self in the substance thereof, offend in the manner and measure also; but they
who offend in the manner and measure, may not offend in the matter.

2. When the omission is in regard of the manner of the duties performance; As
when men do pray, but they pray not uprightly, with the heart, Jer. 12.2. Thou
art nigh their mouths, but far from their reins. Nor earnestly, with their
whole heart, and with all their heart, and all the powers of their Souls, as
the Precept is, Jer. 29.13. and that Prayer to which the Promise is annexed,
James 5.16. But pray (as if they prayed not) formally, and customarily, and
carelessly; scarce hearing themselves, and no wonder then if God hear them not;
they pray not reverently, with the aw of God upon their Spirits, but are rash
in their words, and irreverent in their hearts, Eccles. 5.1, 2. So when men
give Alms, but do not give cheerfully, with a free, willing, ready heart; For
God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.17. Nor seasonably, when it may do most
good, Prove. 3.18. Say not to thy Neighbor, Go and come again to morrow, when
thou have it by thee. So when men hear the Word, but hear not awfully, in the
fear of God, as in the presence of God, Acts 10.33. We are all here present
before God, to hear all things commanded thee of God: Neither hear believingly,
giving their assent to what they hear, and applying it to their own Souls. The
Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it, Heb. 4.2. These, and such like, though they are not guilty of
omission, in regard of the matter of a Duty; yet they are guilty of omission,
in regard of the manner of it; though they do the thing commanded, yet they do
it not as it is commanded, and so are guilty of the breach of a positive Law
and Command.

3. When the omission is in regard of the measure of the Duty; As when a man
gives Alms, but not answerable to his Estate; though God has filled his Belly
with hidden treasures, and waters of a full Cup are wrung out to him, and he is
able to give pounds to poor indigent Families, he puts them off with a few
pence, or at most shillings, this is an omission in regard of the measure. God
expects charitable Contributions from men answerable to his Bounty to them, 1
Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in
store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.
According to the measure of the Divine Mercy to us, such should be the measure
of our Charity to others. According to the seed thrown into the Earth, is the
Crop returned by the good ground. Therefore to make scanty Returns, when we
have large Receipts, is a sin of omission: So when men pray, but not with that
frequency which they might and ought. The Command is, To pray contiuually, to
pray without ceasing, to pray evermore.

Which must include at lest frequent, i. e. daily prayer, each Morning and
Evening; but some men pray, but it is only at certain seasons, now and then, by
fits and starts: Some pray only upon the Lords-Days, as if they had liberty all
the working-days to be Atheists, and neglect the owning of the great God.
Others pray only under some Affliction; and as Patients to their Physician,
never go to God, but when they cannot tell what to do without him. So the Jews,
In their Affliction, they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15. When he smote them,
then they sought him, but their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant, Psalm. 78.34, 37. Unevenness of Pulse argues a
distempered Body, so does unevenness in Duties a distempered Soul. In their
trouble they will pour out a prayer. When troubles are on them, they will make
bold to trouble God, and call him up for their help. God expects frequency of
Application to him every day, and greater frequency of those that have more
time, and fewer Obstacles and Impediments than others. Now the putting God off
with Applications to him, and Acknowledgments of him once a week, instead of
every day, and much under Affliction, instead of doing it in all conditions,
and at all seasons; or putting him off with Morning-Prayer only, instead of
Morning and Evening-Prayer, or with Family Prayer only, when we should also
pray in our Closets daily; these are sins of Omission, in regard of the measure
of the Duty.

Secondly, These sins of omission are either partial or total.

Total omissions are, when men wholly neglect the Duties commanded, as when
they altogether cast off Praying, and Hearing, and giving Alms, and examining
their own hearts; Psalm. 14.3, 4. They are all gone aside, there is none that
does good: They call not upon God. A man may read the Word Atheist in the
foreheads of these men. They carry about them wherever they go the sign and
mark of Condemnation. They please themselves possibly that they do not abound
in scandalous sins of Commission, not considering that they may be guilty of
self-murder, as well by starving or not feeding their Souls, as by stabbing or
poisoning their Souls.

2. Partial Omissions are, when men do sometimes perform the Duties commanded,
but not with that constancy which they ought, Job 15.4. Thou castest off fear,
and restrainest prayer before God; i. e. Thou imprisonest Prayer, and do not
afford it the liberty it formerly had: It was wont to appear every day openly,
but now it is kept in, and shows it self but seldom.

Thirdly, Sins of omission are distinguished into external or internal
omissions.

1. External Omissions are a neglect of the outside (as I may call it) of the
Command.

2. Internal Omissions are the neglect of the inside of the Command: We must
know, that in every Command there is an Extra and an Intra, an Outside and an
Inside, somewhat that concerns the Hands and Conversation, somewhat that
concerns the Heart and Affections. As for example, In the Fourth Command of
sanctifying the Sabbath, there God commands us to spend the whole time of his
day (except so much as the works of Necessity and Mercy call for) in religious
Exercises, and the Duties of his own worship, as Praying, Reading, Hearing,
Singing, etc. Now the bare performance of these Duties is the outside of the
Command, and he who does them (though customarily) obeys the Command
literally,; but the sanctifying the Name of God in these Duties, and the
performance of them with Reverence, Humility, Faith, Love, Joy, according to
the several duties, and several parts of them, is the inside of the Command;
and he alone that performs these Duties in such a manner, obeys the Law
spiritually. The neglect of the former is an external Omission, for which God
threatens Families and Nations: Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that know
thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name, Jer. 10.25. They
who will not deprecate the wrath of God, must feel it; and they who will not
entreat his Favor, must go without it. So the not casting the incestuous
Person out of the Church, was an external omission, 1 Cor. 5.2. The neglect of
the latter, i. e. of performing Sabbath-Duties in the forementioned manner, is
an internal omission. Thus God complains of his people, that though they
prayed, and possibly made long Prayers, yet God counts their prayers as no
prayers, for their internal Omissions: There is none that calls upon thy
Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. They put up (it may be)
some lazy Petitions, but they pour out no hearty Desires: Nay, God curses men
for doing his work negligently, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of
the Lord deceitfully.

CHAP. XXI. The agreement and difference between sins of Omission and sins of
Commission.
2. IT will further explain these sins of Omission, to consider the difference
between Omissions and Commissions, as also their agreement.

1. They agree in the Authority forbidding them. The same God forbids each sin;
He that says, Thou shall not kill: The same says, Thou shall serve me
diligently, Exodus 20. Jer. 48.10. Matthew. 22.37. With all thy heart, Matthew. 7.13.

2. They are both against the same particular Command. In the same Command
wherein he forbids theft, he commands diligence in our Callings, and the use of
all lawful means for the increase of our own Estates. In the same Law wherein
he forbids Uncleanness, He commands Care and endeavor to preserve our own and
our Neighbors Chastity.

3. They are both a privation of that Rectitude which is required by the Law to
the goodness of every action. For if malitia moralis, non est quid positivum,
If there be nothing positive in the formal nature of sin, according to the
Schoolmen, (as there can be nothing positive in it, unless we will make God the
Author of it,) but a want of a conformity to the Law; then every Commission is
an Omission in this respect, and so they agree in their formal nature.

4. They agree in their fruit and effect; sins of Commission exclude Heaven,
and condem to Hell. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor
Drunkards, nor Covetous, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Ephesians. 5.9. and so do sins of Omission, as the Text does abundantly prove.

The difference between sins of Omission and sins of Commission consists,

1. In that sins of Commission are against a Negative Law, and sins of Omission
are against an Affirmative Law, Oppression is against a Negative Law, Thou
shall not oppress thy Neighbor, Thou shall not oppress a Stranger. Neglect of
Charity is against an Affirmative Law; Give to him that asks of thee, and
from him that would borrow, turn not thou away, Matthew. 5.42.

2. They differ in this; Every Commission proceeds originally from a sin of
Omission, but sins of Omission do not proceed originally from sins of
Commission. All sin springs from this, The departure of the heart from God,
Jer. 2.5, Heb. 3.12. and the want of true love to, and fear of his Majesty, 1 John 5.3. Joh. 15. which are sins of Omission. Where there is no love to God,
there is no care to forbear what he forbids, Joh. 14.24. He that loves me not,
keeps not my sayings. And where there is no fear of God, all manner of
wickedness will abound, Psalm. 36.1.2. David concludes a wicked man's Omission
from his sins of Commission. The transgression of the wicked says within my
heart, That there is no fear of God before his eyes; i. e. His scandalous
Practices, and sins of Commission, tell me, That he is guilty of inward
Omissions, That there is no fear of God before his eyes. He who casts off
fear, will soon let the Reins loose to all Licentiousness. They who called not
on God will devour Jacob, and make waste his dewlling place, Jer. 10. ult. No
sin comes amiss to them, Romans 3.9, to 14. The monstrous, horrid, unnatural sins
of the Heathen had their beginning in sins of Omission. When they knew God, (i.
e. by the light of nature, which plainly speaks a Deity) they glorified him not
as God; (e. i. did not love him, fear him, trust in him, honor him as God,)
neither were thankful, (did not acknowledge their Engagements to him, for their
noble Beings, and manifold Mercies): These were sins of Omission; but what
follows upon them? Truly unnatural bestiality, unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, murder, pride, etc. Romans 21.21,
to the end. Men leave the fountain of living Waters, and then hew themselves
broken Cisterns which will hold no water, Jer. 2.13.

The first and great sin of Mankind proceeded from an omission. Adam's heart
was turned from God by Unbelief, (I humbly conceive) before ever his Hand
touched, or Tongue tasted the forbidden fruit. But now sins of Omission do not
proceed originally from sins of Commission; James 1.14, 15. But every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished, brings
forth death.

Barlow exercit.
3. They differ in this, that sins of Commission are founded in some act or
habit: Sins of Omission only in the Soul, without acts or habits. 1. There is
somewhat positive about sins of Commission, but nothing about sins of Omission,
and that is the reason. 2. As Drunkenness is an immoderate use of Beer or Wine:
Here is an act of the Creature, and much positive about this sin, though
nothing positive in the sin it self. So in theft another sin of Commission,
there is somewhat positive about the taking away our Neighbors goods, and
keeping them as our own; but in sins of Omission there is nothing positive; as
in not praying, not hearing, not believing, not giving to the Poor; there is
nothing positive, no acts, but a neglect of acts required. Sins of Omission are
wholly privative, and have nothing of positivity in them.

4. They differ in this, that sins of Commission are more scandalous in the
eyes of men than sins of Omission. I do not say sins of Omission are always
less heinous than sins of Commission, (I shall prove by and by they may be more
heinous) but that they are less scandalous. Sins of Commission, as Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Theft, Swearing, Murder; these make a great noise in the World,
are taken notice of by all, and with the Snail, leave a slime and filth behind
them wheresoever they are; But sins of Omission, as not praying in our Closets,
not examining our own Hearts, not relieving the Poor and Needy, not bringing up
our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, etc. These are more
still and quiet, observed by few or none.

5. They differ in this, that sins of Omission are the aversion of the heart
from God, and sins of Commission are the conversion of the heart to the
Creature, or somewhat below God. Omission turns the heart from God: Hence we
read of man's going far from God, Jer. 2.5. and of their departing away from the
living God, Heb. 3.12. Which is not meant in regard of local motion, (for so
none can depart from God, Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4, 5.) but in regard of their inward
carnal Affections, and disobedient Conversations, Jer. 17.5. Whose heart
departs from the Lord. Commissions are a turning to the Creature, Whose heart
is after covetousness. They imagine mischief in their hearts, Psalm. 140.2.
Eccles. 9.3. The heart of the Sons of men is full of evil.

Having spoken to the nature of sins of Omission in general, and more
particularly by their several distinctions, and their agreement with, and
difference from sins of Commission; I come to the second thing promised in the
explication of the Doctrine, and that is the danger of them.

CHAP. XXII. The danger of sins of Omission, in the heinous nature of them, and
their offensiveness to God.
Secondly, THe danger of sins of Omission; though men are ready to conceive
that sins of Omission, because they make no great cry in the World, are but
infirmities, are venial sins, and are not much to be regarded, as having little
of danger to the Soul in them; yet the contrary will appear plainly, if we
consider these particulars.

1. The malignity and sinfulness of them speaks their danger. The more venom
and poison there is in any Cup or Dish, the more dangerous it must needs be;
the more sinfulness there is in any sin, the more hazardous it is to the Soul.
Now I shall show the sinfulness of omissions.

1. They are most against the mind and will of God. Those sins are the
greatest, which most cross the Will of the Lawgiver; For sin is a
transgression of the Law, or Mind, of God. And every one knows that the Mind
of God is more in the Precept, or Affirmative part of the Law, than in the
Prohibition, or Negative part of it. The Precept or performance of the Duty
commanded is the main thing, the Prohibition is, as it were, accidental, in
order to our Obedience to the Precept; Men's legis est lex.
therefore sins of Omission being against the substance and principal part of
the Command, and so most directly against that which is the special Mind of the
Lawgiver, must needs be the greatest Sins. It is more good to do good, than
not to do evil. Omissions are not to be esteemed bare Negations or Privations,
but as breaches of a positive Law, wherein the mind of God is most discovered.
Now how great a Sin, and how dangerous is it to cross the Mind of God? surely
it is bad thwarting him that can cast Body and Soul into Hell; Vide ante, The
second difference between sins of omission and commission.
I say unto you, says Christ, fear him, Matthew. 10.28.

2. Sins of Omission are the ground of, and make way for Sins of Commission.
The want of love to God and our not believing his Word, which are Sins of
Omission, are the ground of all abominations. When a man once casts off daily
reading the Word, and seeking God by Prayer, or performs those Duties coldly
and carelessly; he throws himself out of God's Protection, and so becomes a
Lacquey to the Devil, and a tame Slave to every Lust to trample on, and
tyranize over at pleasure; Psalm. 14.3, 4. They are all gone aside, they are
altogether filthy: there is none that does good, no not one. Negligentiam in
orando semper aliqua notabilis transgressio sequitur, says One; always some
notable Sin follows upon slothfulness in prayer.

David's not watching his Eyes and Heart, and his not employing his time better
at that hour of the day, brought forth Drunkenness, Murder, Adultery, Lying,
etc. Some Sins of Omission are like great men, that never go without many
Followers; admit their Persons, you must admit their long train which they
bring with them. So a Gad, a whole troop of ugly lusts will throng in upon our
neglect of one Duty.

Not doing good, fits the heart for doing evil: The ground not sown with good
Corn, does naturally of its own accord bring forth evil weeds. Indeed, it is
impossible for him that does no good, not to do evil. He that does not gather
with Christ, scatters; and he that is not with me is against me, Matthew.
12.30. He that fights not for his Prince in a day of Battle, is his Enemy; and
that Servant who helps not his Master in Harvest, hinders him. Not to save a
life when we may, is to destroy and murder it. The Negative Christian will
quickly fall to be a positive Atheist and Heathen. If the Heart be empty of
good, and swept clean of Grace, the unclean Spirit will quickly take up his
logding in it. Besides, God does often judicially give up them to commit Evil,
who refuse to do good. Because they received not the truth in the love of it,
(here is a Sin of Omission) God gave them up to strong delusions, that they
might believe a lie, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Now how great and dangerous is
this Sin, that ushers in so many Sins? Alas, one Sin is too weighty for thy
Soul to bear; how heavy then will that whole rabble and regiment of sins be,
that one sin of Omission may bring along with it? If I live in Sins of
Omission, Sins of Commission will follow both naturally and judicially.

3. Sins of Commission do exceedingly grieve the Spirit of God: Indeed every
Sin is offensive to the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Holiness, as directly contrary
to its nature; but the Spirit of God sets a particular, special brand and mark
upon these Sins, as grievous to him; Follow that which is good, rejoice
evermore, pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks, quench not the
Spirit, despise not Prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Observe, the
Duties are all positive, (the neglect whereof is a Sin of Omission) to which he
exhorts them, if they would not quench the Spirit. The Spirit is not only
grieved, but also quenched by Sins of Omission. Fire may be quenched by
withdrawing fuel from it, as well as by throwing water on it. By scandalous
Sins of Commission, we throw water on this heavenly Flame^ quench it; but by
neglecting to p^^^^d to attend on Prophesying, and such Sins of Omission, we
withdraw fuel from it, and thereby put it out. When the Israelites would not
hear the Voice of God, they are said to grieve his holy Spirit, Psalm. 95. And
when they believed not his Word, the Wonders that he wrought, they are said to
vex his holy Spirit, Isa. 63.10. with Numb. 14.11. Numb. 20.12. Then they
rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit. Not to obey God, is to disobey him. Not to
be loyal to him, is to be rebellious; now hereby they vexed his holy Spirit.
Now how great a Sin, and how dangerous is it to grieve the Spirit of God; the
size or measure of Sin, is to be taken from the Majesty slighted, disobeyed,
and offended by it. The Spirit is God, an infinite boundless Being, whom these
Sins of Omission grieve and vex. Again, how dangerous is it to grieve and drive
the Spirit from us: It Is the Spirit that must enable us to our Duties, Romans
8.26. Direct us in our walkings, Psalm. 143.10. Comfort us in our Sorrows, Joh.
14.16. Isa. 65.1, 2, 3. It is the Spirit, that is, the Spirit of Grace and
Holiness, Zach. 12.10 (...) 1.4. and must work them in our hearts, if ever we
be gracious and holy, 1 Pet. 1.2. It is the Spirit must strengthen us with
might in our inward man, to keep the Commandments of God, Ephesians. 3.16. Ezez.
36.27. It is the Spirit that is the earnest of our Inheritance, the
First Fruits of our eternal blessed Harvest, and that must seal us up unto the
day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Romans 8. Ephesians. 4.30. How great a Sin, and
how dangerous therefore is it to grieve this Spirit, and by Sins of Omission to
incense him to withdraw from us, without whom we are unable unto any good, and
indeed exposed to all evil.

2. The danger of these Sins will appear, by their offensiveness to God. Since
our Felicity depends on the Favor of God, and our Misery on his Anger, (Hell
it self being but his wrath ever to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult.) those Sins which
are highly provoking to God, must be very dangerous. If in his Favor be Life,
Psalm. 30.5. and his Wrath be worse than Death, Psalm. 90.11. I had need to
beware how I provoke him to jealousy. Now the not believing God, which is a
sin of Omission, is called the Provocation, Psalm. 95.8, 9. Harden not your
hearts, as in the Provocation, as in the day of temptation in the Wilderness:
When your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my Works. This Provocation was
their not believing his Word, for all the Wonders he had wrought for them. They
said, Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Behold he smote the Rock, that
waters gushed out: Can he give Bread also? Can he provide Flesh for his people?
Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth: So a fire was kindled against
Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel: because they believed not in God,
and trusted not in his Salvation, Psalm. 78.19. to 23.

It will appear how provoking sins of Omission are to God by these three
particulars:

1. By his frequent Reprehensions, and complaints of men for them. He blames
men for not sacrificing, Mal. 3.18. for not mourning, 1 Cor. 5. And sharply
reproves for not receiving Correction, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your
Children, they received no Correction; For not grieving when smitten, Jer. 5.3.
For not seeking God, Isa. 9.13. Nay, observe what special notice he takes of,
and how sadly he aggravates their Omissions, Jer. 3.7. I said after she had
done all these things, (i. e. gone up upon every high Mountain, and upon every
green Tree,) Turn thou unto me, but she turned not. Here he complains of
Isreal's Omission, in not turning to him; but mark how he accents Judahs
Omission, who knew what Israel had done, and how God had put her away, verse. 8.
Yet her treacherous Sister Judah feared not, (the dreadful doom of Israel
struck no aw into the heart of Judah.) And verse. 10. And yet for all this (that
Israel has committed, and been severely punished for,) her treacherous Sister
Judah has not turned unto me with the whole heart, but feignedly, says the
Lord. Here was an Omission internal, or in the manner of her Conversation; it
was not sincere, but with dissimulation.

2. By his severe Comminations and Threatenings denounced against those that are
guilty of Omissions. He curses those that deny him their help in a day of
Battle, and that come not forth to help the Lord against the mighty, Judge.
5.23. He curses those that are not diligent about his Work, Jer. 48.10. And
believe it, his Curse is effectual, not like the discharge of a piece with
powder only, which does no execution. Those whom he curses, are cursed indeed:
His curse, like Lightning, blasteth and withers wherever it comes. I
cursed his habitation, (says Eliphaz, not as a private Malediction of his own
Spirit, but as a pious Praediction of Gods Spirit.) Now mark what follows
upon God's cursing the wicked man's Habitation, Job 5.2, 3, 4. His house is by
this breath of God tumbling to the ground presently. His Children (that should
be the honor and support of it) are far from safety, verse. 3. they are crushed
in the Gate, and there is none to deliver them, verse. 4. Whose harvest the
hungry eats up, and takes out of the thorns, and the Robber swalloweth up
his substance. His Estate, which is a second thing requisite to the outward
glory of a Family, that is seized on, and snatched from him. So God threatens
multitudes with his wrath (which is so terrible, so intolerable, that none can
stand before it, Psalm. 147.8. that Mountains are moved, Rocks are rent in
pieces, the Foundations of the Earth tremble at it; yea, that God's own people
are ready to be distracted at it, Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5.) for a Sin of Omission, For
not calling on his Name, Jer. 10. ult.

God threatens to cut a man off from his people (which includes either a
cutting off from the society of Gods people here and hereafter, as Genesis 17.14.
or of being cut off out of the Land of the living by the Sword of the
Magistrate, Exodus 30.33. or both, as some think,) for a mere omission. But a
man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the
Passover; even the same Soul shall be cut off from his people, Numb. 9.13.

3. It appears, that Sins of Omission are highly provoking to God, by the
execution of his Judgments on them that are guilty of them. His Works as well
as his Word speak his great indignation against these sins. Saul lost his
Kindgom, for not killing Agag and the best of the Flock, Because thou have
rejected the Word of the Lord, the Lord has also rejected thee from being
King, says Samuel to him, 1 Samuel 15.23, 26, 28. Ahab omitted to kill Benhadad,
and lost his life for it, 1 King. 20.42. Because thou have let go a man out of
thy hand, whom I appointed to utter destruction, thy life shall go for his
life. Eli was a good man, and as much in Gods Favor, but by not reproving his
Sons, he so far incurred Gods anger, that he lost his two wicked Fondlings in a
day, and the Priesthood for ever, 1 Samuel 3.12, 13, etc. Moses was God's
special Friend and Favorite: And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man
speaks to his Friend, Exodus 33.11. And the Lord said to Moses, thou have
found grace in my sight, and I know thee by Name.

Yet when this Moses is guilty of an Omission, that he does not believe God,
nor sanctify his Name in the eyes of the Children of Israel, he is excluded
the temporal Canaan, Numb. 20.12. Though Moses was taken up to the Mount, to
converse with God forty days together, when Aaron and all the people must stay
below; though Moses was honored to see the Commands written with God's own
Hand; though Moses was taken into a Rock, while God passed before him, that he
might hear his Name, The Lord, the Lord God gracious, etc. proclaimed, and see
his back parts; though God was pleased to confer with Moses, as one Friend with
another; yet when this Moses comes to be guilty of such an Omission, he is
denied liberty to enter into the Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Nay, though
this Moses begs so hard, I pray thee let me go over, and see the good Land
beyond Jordan, that goodly Mountain and Lebanon; Yet God was so provoked by his
Omission, that though he had heard him once and again for greater things on the
behalf of others, Exodus 33.11. to 15. Numb. 14.10. He would not hear him in
this small Request for himself; But his wrath was kindled, and he would not
hear me, and said, let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter,
Deuteronomy. 3.25, 26.

Nay, how angry was Christ with the man who had not a Wedding Garment at his
Supper; how severe is his Sentence? how dreadful his Doom? And when the King
came in to see the Guests, he saw there a man which had not a Wedding Garment.
Though but one in a Crowd, Christ spied him.

1. Here is his Transgression: We do not read, that the man slighted the
Invitation, and denied to come, as they in verse. 5. nor that he entreated his
Servants spitefully, and slew them, as those, verse. 6. We do not read, that the
man came to the Feast in a drunken-fit, or reproached and abused either the
Master or Guests, but only omitted to bring with him a Wedding Garment, which
some say is Charity; others Obedience; he was a Professor, but without godly
practices; but I suppose is meant Christ, and the Graces of the Spirit, which
are compared to a Garment, Romans 13. Col. 3. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. And that ye be
renewed in the Spirit of your Minds. And that ye put on the new man.

2. Here is the man's self-conviction, verse. 12. (...), he was muzled: The same
word is used of muzling the mouth of a Beast, whereby its unable to open it to
eat, 1 Cor. 9.9. His conscience was that which put a muzle on his mouth, being
convinced that he might and ought to have procured a Garment, before he had
gone to the Feast. They who have a form, and no power of Godliness, who make a
show without any substance of Religion, will be speechless when Christ shall
come to reckon with them.

3. Here is his Condemnation, verse. 13. Bind him hand and foot. When
Malefactors are cast in Law, either by their own Confession, or the Evidence of
others; the Jailer puts new Fetters and Shackles on them to secure their
Persons against Sentence and Execution, lest they should make an escape. Bind
him hand and foot: Make sure of him. The Sinner shall have no power of
resisting, or possibility of flying from Divine severity. And (...), ejicite,
cast him forth. Cast him out as a vile, loathsome, abominable wretch, unfit for
company, whom I hate to behold; Into utter darkness, (...), a Prison, a
Dungeon, where there is no light, a condition most remote from joy and comfort;
such darkness as has a blackness joined to it, Jude, verse. 13. There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, weeping for the extremity of their own pain, and
gnashing of teeth out of envy at others happiness.

CHAP. XXIII. The danger of sins of Omission, in their destructiveness to man,
and our proneness to overlook them.
3. THe danger of Sins of Omission will appear by their destructiveness to men.
The more wrong and injury any Sin does us, the more danger is in it. Now what
has been already spoken, does abundantly evince this. If Omissions are so
great sins, that they most directly cross the mind of the Law, and make way for
all Sins of Commission, and exceedingly grieve the Spirit of God, they must
needs be dangerous and destructive to men. If God himself blame them so
sharply, threaten them so severely, and punish them so grievously, who are
guilty of such sins; then these Sins must be very injurious to us. But it will
further appear, if you consider that they cause,

1. The Judgments of God on men, in regard of their Bodies, or external
Comforts. He punishes many with extreme penury, for not being diligent in
their particular Callings. Their idleness (which is a sin of Omission) clothes
them with rags, Prove. 23.21. Again, The idle Soul shall suffer hunger, Prove.
19.15. How does experience prove the truth of this. Many begin the World (as we
say) with considerable Estates, who, in a few years, for lack of care and
industry in their Imploys, have wasted all. The idle man may call the Prodigal
Brother. Besides, these Sins of Omission are punished with a temporal
destruction. The Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not, Jude, verse. 5. Israel was God's
own people, his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. a people nigh unto him, Psalm.
148. ult. incomparable for this, Deuteronomy. 4.7. and other Privileges, Romans 9.4.
Yet when guitly of this Omission, God would not spare them, but destroyed them.
No Privileges can exempt from punishment. God may forsake his Tabernacle at
Shiloth; deliver his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hand, if they will not believe him, if they will not obey him, Psalm. 78.60, 61.

2. A judicial tradition to spiritual Judgments. Of all Judgments, none in this
World are so dreadful as those that are spiritual; bodily Judgments touch the
Flesh, but these the Spirit. When God would speak and wreak his anger against a
person or people to the utmost; he does it this way, by giving them up to their
own wickedness. When he would strike Ephraim under the fifth Rib, and kill him
at a blow, it is by this Judgment. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone,
Hos. 4.17. He is given to Idolatry, let him take his fill of it, and see what
the end will be. He is fond of lies and vanities, and delights in prostituting
himself to their embraces; Let him alone. Let none disturb him, or recall him;
let no Mercy, no Misery, no Means, no Ministry ever hinder him in the
prosecution of his Lusts, or stop him in his course, much less be effectual for
his Repentance and Amendment. In temporal Judgments, God acts the part of a
Father, to whip his Child, that he may reclaim him for his Errors, and be fit
to inherit his Estate. But in spiritual, God acts the part of a Judge, to
deliver the Malefactor over to Execution. In the former, he prunes the Tree,
that it may bring forth fruit, and so continue in his Garden to his joy and
delight; but in the latter, he leaves the Tree as unsound and barren, to be cut
down for the fire. Now sins of Omission cause God to deliver men up to these
Judgments. God calls upon Israel to hear and obey him, they will not. But my
People would not hearken to my Voice, Israel would none of me. What was the
result of their refusal? So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they
walked in their own counsels, Psalm. 81.11, 12. God does not testify his anger
for their contempt of him, by sending Plague, or Flames, or wild Beasts among
them. He does not say, Well, since they thus slight my Authority, I will be
avenged on them to purpose, I will give them up to the Sword, or Famine, or
racking Diseases, or greedy devouring Lions, which would have been sad and
grievous; but he executes on them a far more sad and grievous Judgment, when he
says, So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their
own counsels. God's leaving one Soul to one lust, is far worse than leaving him
to all the Lions in the World. Alas, it will tear the Soul worse than a Lion
can do the Body, and rent it in pieces, when there is none to deliver it. God's
giving them up to their own wills, that they walked in their own counsels, is
in effect a giving them up to eternal wrath and woe.

3. The destructiveness of Sins of Omission to the Souls of men appears, in
that they render the Condition of men desperate, and without remedy. Sins of
Commission wound the Soul dangerously, but sins of Omission make the state of
the Patient hopeless and desperate. Sins of Commission are directly against the
Law, and so bind the Sinner over to its Curse; but Sins of Omission are
directly against the Gospel, and thereby hinder the Patients Cure, Gal. 3.20.
Joh. 3. ult. He that has broken the Precepts of the Law, is liable to its
punishment; but yet this Sinner may fly to the Gospel, as his City of Refuge,
and lay hold on Christ there tendered for Pardon and Life. But by some sins of
Omission, he rendereth the Gospel ineffectual for his good, and himself
incapable of the good things promised in it. Faith and Repentance are the two
Conditions upon which all the exceeding rich and precious Promises depend; so
that by not believing, and not repenting, which are Sins of Omission, men deny
themselves all the benefit and advantage of the Gospel. He that believes shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. He upbraided the
Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Woe to thee Corazin, woe to thee Bethsaida, etc. Matthew. 11.21, 22, 23. Sins of
Commission make the wound, and Sins of Omission keep off that Plaster, which
alone can heal it. Sins of Commission plunge us into a bottomless gulf of
Misery, and Sins of Omission stop the current of that Mercy that alone can
relieve and succor us. These Sinners are like men in swoons, gasping for
breath, and ready to expire; yet shut their mouths, and fasten their teeth
together, to keep out those Cordials that alone can recall them to life.

4. The danger of Sins of Omission will appear, by our proneness to slight and
neglect them. If Sins of Omission are of so deadly a nature, as most to
contradict the Will of God, and so highly provoking to him, and so mortally
destructive to us; then the more we slight this great Enemy, the more dangerous
it is to us: A weak enemy, and an enemy that can do us little harm, may be
slighted without great danger. But when an enemy is so powerful, so deadly, so
damnable, our contempt of him is a great advantage to him, and a great
disadvantage to us; for by this means he falls upon us disarmed and unprepared
for him. Pompey slighted Caesar, when News first came to Rome of his marching
into Italy with his Army, and said, That if did but stamp with his foot, he
should therewith fetch Soldiers enough out of all parts to subdue Caesar. And
so made small preparation to resist him, which was his own and the
Commonwealths destruction. Truly, thus men are apt to slight sins of Omission,
and thereby to undo themselves. As it is said of Joab, He spoke kindly to Amasa,
and made as if he would kiss him: But Amasa took no heed to the Sword that was
in Joabs hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his
bowels to the ground, that he died, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10. Thus sin of Omission is
familiar with us, and pretends rather love and kindness, than any hurt to us
(for in all sin there is a deceitfulness) and we taking no heed to the Sword in
its hand, Heb. 3.13.
to its malignant killing-nature, but slighting it, as if it were venial, are
destroyed by it.

And there are three Reasons why we are so apt to overlook sins of Omission:

1. Because Conscience does not so soon cheek us for them, as for sins of
Commission. If a man commit Murder, or Adultery, or Theft, his Conscience is
ready to fly in his face, and thunder in his ears, as it did with Cain, after
the slaughter of his Brother, that he cried out, My punishment is greater than
I can bear; and he went up and down trembling (as some think) all his days,
Genesis 4.13, 14. But men may neglect Praying, or Reading, or Charity, especially
in regard of the manner of doing them, and Conscience will take little notice
of it. Such Omissions may pass with little or no regard. Cain in the Offering
he brought to God, neglected (probably) to bring the best of the fruit of the
ground, however to offer it with an upright believing heart; but we read not
that he took notice of these Omissions, though he did of God's manifest
disrespecting his Offering, Genesis 4.3, 4, 5. It Is ordinary with some moral men,
if they fall into ill Company sometime by accident, and are made drunk, to be
ashamed of it, and much troubled for it; but these men can live in their
Families without Prayer and Scripture, and neglect to teach their Children and
Servants the ways of God; and yet these Omissions do not at all disturb them,
they go up and down, and eat, and drink, and sleep, as merrily as if they
obeyed the whole Will of God. Job tells you of those that bid God depart from
them, that desire not, nor endeavor to know him; that cast off Prayer to him,
and all his Service as fruitless; and yet these men, guilty of such great and
gross Omissions, could take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of
the Organ, and spend their days in wealth and mirth, Job 21.12, 13, 14, 15.
These Negative Sins are still and silent, and make none or little noise in the
ears of Conscience. But positive sins are more clamorous. We read of those that
were guilty of Bribery and Oppression under their guise and mask of Religion;
and how they are stabbed and frighted? A dreadful sound is in their Ears,
trouble and anguish make them afraid. They believe not that they shall come out
of darkness, Job 15.21, 22, 24, compared with 34. and 35. verses. How many do
we know in places where we live, who if they should rob or wrong their
Neighbors, would hardly enjoy any peace or quietness in their Spirits, who can
live cheerfully and contentedly day after day, nay year after year, while all
this while they rob God of that Love, and Fear, and Trust which they ow him in
their hearts, and of that open Homage and Allegiance which they ow him in their
Houses.

The reason hereof is, because sins of Commission are most against natural
light. In sins of Omission there is no such actual disturbance, by which the
free contemplation of the mind is hindered, as in sins of Commission. Beside
foul acts of Sin, as Uncleanness and Murder, etc. bring more shame, and cause
more horror, than bare neglects of our Duty. Conscience is not wont to take
any great notice of external neglects, or of spiritual defects.

2. We are the more prone to overlook, and take no notice of sins of Omission;
(as Conscience is less troubled for them, so) our Christian Friends are not so
apt to warn and admonish us of them, as of sins of Commission. If a Professor
fall into some gross sin of Commission; as if he be over-taken with
intemperance, or lying, or going beyond his Neighbor: All the Town or
Neighborhood rings of it, his Christian Friends hear and take notice of it,
and out of love to his, and faithfulness to their own Souls, admonish him of
it, and endeavor with the Spirit of meekness to bring him to repentance for
it. But this Professor may neglect prayer in his Closet, reading and meditating
on the Word of God, examining his own heart; nay, possibly prayer in his
Family, and the instruction of those committed to his Charge in the Principles
of Religion, and his Friends be wholly ignorant hereof, and so be all their
days wanting to acquaint him with his sin herein. When David had been guilty of
several sins of Commission in the matter of Vriah, Nathan hears of it, (for it
seems to be the Town-talk, in that it is said, That he caused the Enemies of God
to blaspheme, verse. 14. And I suppose Gods Narration of it to him was rather a
Command, or Commission, for the manner of his reprehension of David, than of
certifying him of that he was ignorant before,) he goes to him, and tells him
thereof, and calls him to Repentance for them, 2 Samuel 12. 1, to 10. But though
David in all this time (likely nine months, for the Child was born, verse. 14.)
had been guilty of many Omissions, in not confessing his sin with sorrow and
shame, in not begging pardon with Faith and Hope, and in several other
particulars; yet Nathan takes no notice thereof in his Speech to him, neither
makes any mention of them.

3. We are the more prone to overlook sins of Omission, because they are so
near akin to Intermissions, which are lawful and necessary. Affirmative
Precepts (as was said before) do not bind ad semper; I am bound to pray in my
Closet and Family every day, but I am not bound to pray in either all the day.
God commands me to mind the nourishing and refreshing my Body, and to follow my
particular Calling, and as occasion is to visit the Fatherless and Afflicted;
now because these Intermissions, or Omissions, for a time are allowed and
commanded, men are apt to turn them, or to fall from them, into total
Omissions, and when they do so, to be little troubled for them. Because men may
be excused from solemn religious Duties three parts or more of the weekday,
therefore they will neglect them altogether, and are insensible of their
neglect. Commissions being never lawful, for the Negative Commands bind ad
semper; therefore if men be guilty of them, they take the more notice of them,
and lay them more to heart; but positive Precepts being sometimes unseasonable,
and binding but at sometimes, ( i. e. the Duties of them are to be performed
but at some time) when instead of our intermission there be an omission, we are
ready to wink at it, and regard it at most but as an Infirmity, which may
require a pardon of course. If I may omit Prayer and Scripture ten hours of the
day, says the subtle wicked heart of man, why not eleven hours? and if eleven
hours, what great hurt if it be omitted twelve hours? i. e. the whole day, and
the Duty be not performed at all.

CHAP. XXIV. The Reasons why sins of Omission are damnable.
I Come now to the third thing to be spoken to in the explication of this
Doctrine, and that is to give the Reasons why Christ will condemn men at the
Great Day to eternal Torments for Sins of Omission.

Thirdly, The Reasons of the Doctrine, Why sins of Omission are damnable:

The wages of sin (as sin) is death, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, Romans 6.
ult. Therefore these Omissions being sins as well as Commissions, must of
necessity be damnable to our Souls. As there is bitterness in every Sprig or
Branch of Wormwood, and saltness in every drop or spoonful of Seawater; so
there is Death and Hell, and Wrath and Damnation in every Sin. The wicked
Papists distinguish Sins into Venial and Mortal, but they got that distinction
from the Devil, not from God; they have their seven deadly sins; But the Holy
Ghost tells us, All sins are deadly, without any distinction, Gal. 3.10. Though
one Sin may be greater and more heinous than another, yet every sin is mortal.
A Pistol is less than a Musket, and a Musket than a Canon; but they are all of
them killing; Ezekiel. 18. The Soul that sins shall die. Under the word death is
comprehended all the misery of this and the other World. Sin being a contempt
of the Authority, a violation of the Law, and a slighting the Love of an
infinite God, deserves all that privation of Good, and infliction of Evil which
this Sentence of Christ includes, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. God cannot inflict a greater punishment, nor can
a finite limited Creature bear greater Torments than Sin (being of infinite
demerit) requires and calls for.

Now I have largely proved, that Omissions are sins as well as Commissions; and
to speak properly and exactly, there is no sin but the sin of (...)ion. For
even in Commissions, their sinfulness consists in their want of that goodness
which the Law requires. Were there not a deficiency in them of somewhat which
they ought to have, or a want of conformity to the Law, there would be no sin
in them. Yea, I have proved sins of Omission in some respect greater sins, as
more against the Mind of the Lawgiver, (whose Will consists rather in the
Affirmative than Negative part of the Command) and as the ground of sins of
Commission, and as more directly against the Gospel than sins of Commission.
They are much mistaken, who judge Omissions pure Privations, or mere Negations
little other than non-entities; for Omissions are transgressions of an
Affirmative Command, and violations of a positive Precept, and the greatest
Contradictions to the Mind of the Law, and therefore most justly liable to its
Curse. The Apostle tells us what Obedience the Law requires, and what the
Condition of such as fail therein is, Gal. 3.10. 1. It requires practical
Obedience, not hearing, or knowing, or speaking only of what is written in the
Book of the Law, but doing it; To do them. It Is doing that the Law requires,
Do this and live, etc. And it is doers that the Law justifies, Romans 2.13. Not
the hearers of the Law, but the doers thereof shall be justified. Now under
this doing, sins of Omission are expressly forbidden, and those Duties (the
neglect of which are sins of Omission) are commanded.

2. It requires personal Obedience, Every one. It takes no notice of Obedience
by a Proxy, or a Surety, but requires it in our own persons. The Law admits not
a Mediator.

3. Perfect Obedience; In every thing written in the Book of the Law. It will
not admit of the least deviation, of any one step awry, but presently curses
and condemns for them. If any thought, word or deed, be never so little too
light, it will not grant the least grain of allowance, but damneth for them.

4. It must be perpetual; That continues not. If in one day, one hour, one
moment of his life he fail, he is undone. If a man could be obedient to the
whole Law all the time of his life, and should in his dying-hour disobey it;
the Law would take no notice of all his former Obedience, but sent him to Hell
for his latter Disobedience. For mark the state of those that yield not this
perfect, personal, perpetual, practical Obedience. Their Condition is cursed;
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Book of
the Law to do them. In the word cursed, all evil is included. So that
Omissions, or the neglect of those Duties which the Law requires, being sins,
they render the Creature liable to the Curse, which is indeed all manner of
misery here and hereafter.

Death and Hell are the end of every Sin, though they are not the end of every
Sinner; they are the reward of every evil Work, though not the reward of every
evil Worker. Free Grace in the blood of Christ does sometimes interpose, and
put in an Exception to this general Rule. The Gospel accepted and pleaded, is a
bar to those rigorous proceedings of the Law. Therefore though this Reason will
justify Christ, and condemn the Sinner in the judgment of his own Conscience,
(especially this Sinner being under a Covenant of Works) yet I shall give
farther Reasons from the Sinners non-interest in the Privileges of the Gospel.

2. Christ will condemn men at the Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, Except a
man be born again, he shall never see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. This is
indispensably requisite, not only as a condition without which Heaven may not
be had in regard of Gods pleasure, but also as a disposition without which
Heaven or Happiness cannot be enjoyed in regard of the subject. For it is this
that is meant by our being made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in light, Col. 1.12. Again, the Holy Ghost tells us, That without
holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. This holiness as a due qualification
of the Agent in relation to the beatifical Vision or sight of God, the
blessed-making Object, is necessary by the Gospel. How often are the
Unregenerate and unsanctified by the Spirit of God doomed to Hell, and excluded
Heaven, Joh. 3.18. Rev. 19. Into it can in no wise enter any thing that is
defiled or unclean. Again, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11.
Implying, that Death and Destruction are the portion of the Unconverted.

Now these Sins of Omission are evidences of a man's want of Regeneration. Nay,
there is much more evil in a state of Sin, than in an act of Sin; which state
of Sin consists most in Sins of Omission. For this was the great evil and
misery of the Ephesians by nature, Ephesians. 2.12. That they were without God, i. e.
were without any inward regard of him, or outward Obedience to him. Sound
Conversion and saving Repentance make clear work, as the Flood drowned all out
of the Ark, Noah's Friends as well as others. So Repentance destroys all sins,
even sins of Omission as well as Commission. It loves none, it allows of none.
Restraining Grace will probably refuse the way of Disobedience, but renewing
Grace will close the way of Obedience. Those that are in a wicked and
unregenerate state, are characterized in Scripture from their sins of Omission.
The wicked through the pride of his heart will not seek after God: God is not
in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. The Lord has a controversy with the Land,
because there is no Mercy, nor Truth, nor Knowledge of God in the Land, Hos.
4.1. Nay, the reign of Sin (which ever speaks an unconverted and unregerate
estate) is as visible, if not more in Omissions than in Commissions. As there
is as high an act of Authority, and Sovereignty, and Princely Power in a
Negative Voice, or denying such and such things to be done as in a positive
Law, enjoining such and such things to be done. So the omission of what is
good, or refusing to do what God commands, may speak Sin reigning in the Soul,
as well as doing, or commanding to be done what God has forbidden. It is
indeed the judgment of many, that a Princes Negative Voice is a greater part
and mark of his Royalty, than any Affirmative Command of his; for a King may
have Power to Command, that which he has no Power to forbid. As he may and
should enjoin his Subjects to Worship the true God, according to his revealed
Will; but he has no Power to forbid them. Thus in Sins of Omission, for a man
to live without Prayer, without the love and fear of God, without delight in
him, and communion with him, without care of, and watchfulness over his own
heart and life, may be a greater sign of the reign of Sin, and thereby of an
unregenerate state, than the commission of some gross actual Transgressions.

It is apparent, that this man is under the power of Lust, as a Servant to it,
Tit. 3.3. And under the dominion of the Devil, carried captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2.26. And an unregenerate, unsanctified person, because he lives
in Disobedience to these positive Laws of God. Whereas he that is born of God
sins not, 1 John 3.9. with his whole will; there is not a free, voluntary,
cheerful submission of his Will to the quiet, undisturbed dominion of Sin. And
he that is born of God has a tender regard to the whole Law. I have esteemed
thy Precepts concerning all things to be right; therefore I hate every false
way, Psalm. 119.128. He has respect to Affirmative as well as Negative
Precepts: He has an equal uniform regard to all the Law, to that part which
commands the doing good, as well as that part which forbids the doing evil.
Therefore the man that lives in Sins of Omission, is not born of God, and
therefore incapable by the Gospel of Heaven; and so justly for this cause
sentenced to Hell.

CHAP. XXV. Farther Reasons why Christ at the Great Day will condemn men for
sins of Omission.
3. CHrist will condemn men at the no interest in himself. There is no way to
escape Hell, but by the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. Jesus that
delivers from the wrath to come. There is no way to attain Heaven, but by
Christ: I give to them eternal life, and they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28.

As Salvation is God's Gift, Romans 6. ult. so it is Christ's Purchase. There is no
Name under Heaven whereby men may be saved, but by the Name of Christ, Act.
4.12. So that all who are without Christ, not interested in him, must of
necessity perish. He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has
not life, 1 John 5.12. Those that are without Christ are unpardoned; All their
sins are imputed to them, Ephesians. 4. ult. Romans 3.25. And wherever sin is
imputed, it condemns, Ezekiel. 18.3. Those that are not interested in Christ,
are Children of the Devil, Joh. 8.44. and Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. And
such Children must be with their Father the Devil, and under wrath for ever.

Now those that live in Sins of Omission have no interest in Christ. Our
interest in Christ, and so in Life, is by Faith. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 2.20. I live by Faith in the Son of God. It
is Faith that causes the Union between Christ and the Soul, and joins them
together; by virtue of which Union, the Christian has communion with Christ in
his Merits and Righteousness, that his Life, and Death, and Burial are the
Christians, are by God imputed to him, as if performed in his own person: Hence
it is said, That the Christian lives with Christ, is crucified with Christ, and
buried with Christ, Romans 6.4. And the Christian is said to be the righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. By this Union with Christ, which is the fruit of
Faith, the Christian is made a Son of God, Gal. 3.26. and so an Heir of God,
and Joynt-Heir with Christ, Romans 8.17. As a Woman by marriage being united and
made one with a Man, has communion with him in his Relations, Honors, and
Estate So the Christian by Faith made one with Christ, has communion with him
in his Relations. Go tell my Brethren, I go to my Father, and your Father, to
my God, and your God, Joh. 20.17. In his Estate, Christ is Heir of all things,
Heb. 1.2. and the Believer is a Joynt-Heir with him, as is before proved.
Christ was the Firstborn among many Brethren, and so the Inheritance did
belong to him, Col. 1.18. Believers are a Congregation of firstborn, and so
the right of the Inheritance is theirs, Heb. 12.23. But such as live in sins of
Omission are without Faith, and therefore without Christ, and therefore must be
without Heaven for ever. Faith is a sanctifying as well as a justifying Grace,
Act. 26.18. And to give them an Inheritance among them that are sanctified
through Faith in Christ, and therefore will not suffer the Soul to live in any
sin.

Faith will not suffer a man to live in the want of love to God, in so great an
Omission; for when Faith certifieth the Soul of Gods love to it, this kindles
in the Soul flames of love to God, 1 John 4.19. When Faith brings much fuel,
the fire of love will be great. Faith will not suffer a man to live without
Repentance. The eye of Faith which beholds a Christ crucified for sin, affects
the heart with sorrow for, and indignation against those sins that crucified
him, Zach. 12.10. They shall see him whom they have pierced, and mourn. Faith
will not suffer a man to live without delight in Christ, and rejoicing in the
God of all Consolation. Faith sees so much good certainly laid up in the
Covenant and Promises for the Soul, that it fills the Soul with joy in the hope
and expectation of the enjoyment of them. Whom having not seen, we love: and in
whom believing, though now we see him not, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. Faith will not suffer a man to live without
waiting quietly on God. Faith will not limit the Holy One of Israel, but
patiently stay Gods time for the mercies the Soul wants. Faith knows his
Bonds are good, his Debts are in sure Hands: The God that cannot lie has
promised, Tit. 1.2. and therefore is not hasty to call them in. He that
believes will not make haste, Isa. 28.16. Faith will not suffer a man to live
without prayer. He that knows his own wants and necessities, how great and
urgent they are, and also where he may quickly have liberal Supplies, and
bountiful Relief will not long be kept from that Door. You may sooner and
easier put off a Beggar ready to starve, (who must needs perish, if Charity do
not help him,) and persuade him never to ask Alms more, as keep a Believer from
his daily waiting at Heavens Temple, to ask spiritual Alms. An Unbeliever has
little hope to speed, and therefore little heart to speak. But a Believer has
tasted God to be gracious, and received many a blessing upon his knees, and
therefore cannot but know that Door again, at which he has received so good,
so large Doles. He knows that whatsoever he asks, according to the Will of
God, in the Name of Christ, shall be granted him, 1 John 5.14. Joh. 14.14.
Hereby he is encouraged to beg and ask. I believed, therefore have I spoken,
says David, Psalm. 116.10. I believed, says the Soul, therefore have I wept,
and prayed, and made supplication, and have prevailed.

Faith will not suffer a man to live without Scripture. The Word of God is the
Food of Faith, and a man can as well live without Bread, as Faith without the
Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. It Is Scripture that breeds Faith; Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. And it is Scripture that feeds
Faith, and helps it to thrive; I hope in thy Word, Psalm. 119.114. Hope is a
degree of Faith. So Psalm. 119. Establish thy Word unto thy Servant, upon which
thou have caused me to trust. Thus I might show how inconsistent other Sins of
Omission are with Faith; and therefore they who live in such sins, must be
Unbelievers, and so obnoxious to the wrath of God, Joh. 3. ult. But I shall
conclude this Head with this Note, that Faith is obediential, and therefore
it is impossible for a Believer to live in Disobedience to God's positive Laws.
We read in Scripture of the Obedience of Faith.

Faith in the Promises works Obedience to the Precepts. As it is impossible
without Faith to please God, Heb. 11. So it is impossible with Faith not to
desire to please him. The Disobedient and Unbelievers are joined together.

Abraham was called to an hard piece of Service; To leave his Country, this was
hard to forsake his Native soil. Jer. 2.10.
Nescio qua natale solum; therefore God commands us to pity and relieve
Strangers, Jer. 2^.3.
because they are comfortless, being out of their own Country. To leave his
Kindred, this was harder; there is a tender affection between near Relations.
If he had gone into a strange Country with his Kindred, their company might
have sweetened the bitterness of his banishment; but he must leave his Country
as well as Kindred behind him. Nay, he must leave these, and go into a place
where he must not have a foot of Land for himself, ( Genesis 12, 1, 2, 3, 4.) yet
Abraham obeys. But what was the weight which set the wheels in such quick ready
motion, truly his Faith was the spring of his Obedience. Mark, Heb. 11.8. By
Faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place, which he should after
receive for an Inheritance, obeyed and went out, not knowing whither he went.

and Unbelievers, says Christ, Matthew. 24.51. Others, as younger Brethren,
receive their part of wrath under them as the Heirs. They are the great Owners
of Hell, the chief Landlords of the Valley of Death; others do as it were hold
from and under them. So the Hypocrite in heart heaps up wrath. The Hypocrite in
heart. Hypocrisy lies close in the heart, as the Juglers tools, out of sight.
As in the Cellar, under the Parliament, there was nothing to be seen but what
was lawful and allowable, Coals and Wood, fit Provision for Winter: But when
these were taken away, and the Cellar was searched to the bottom, then the
Barrels of Powder appeared, and the Coals and Wood were discovered to be fuel
laid in for the Devils Kitchen. So, many persons who are unblamable (as we say)
in their lives, walk without offense, are negatively holy, these seem to be
good men, and approved; but if we search them further to the bottom, their
Hypocrisy appears, that all this was for vainglory, or some carnal interest;
they heap up wrath, and shall have that wrath which is so dreadful, that Hell
is called by that Name, in great measure; or he himself by his Hypocrisy is
daily filling up that Cup of Wrath which he must drink of eternally. An
hypocritical Nation are the people of Gods wrath, Isa. 10.5, 6. whom he
appoints to ruin. They go about to mock God, as they do men; but they deceive
themselves, God is not mocked. They do as those who use much art to hide the
wrinkles and defects of Nature, but God can see Jezabel under all her paint,
and find out the Wife of Jeroboam, notwithstanding her disguise, and will
punish the Dissembler with the Lake of Fire; and then what shall become of the
Professor? All that love and make a lie are doomed to that Dungeon of Darkness.
Hypocrisy is the loudest lie that ever was told, because it is given to God
himself. It may be said to every Hypocrite as Peter to Ananias, Thou have lied
not to man, but to God, Act. 5.4. For he tells God, and would make him believe
he forbears gross Sins, and is negatively holy, because it is his Will, when he
neglects his positive Precepts, wherein he has discovered most of his Will.
Now such as live in Omissions, notwithstanding all their Profession, and all
their negative Piety, are but Juglers and Dissemblers. They who are partial in
their holiness, are not sound at heart. Whoever obeys any Command out of
Conscience, will endeavor Obedience to every Command. David is approved for
his Integrity, from the universality of his Obedience, 1 King. 14.8. So Zachary
and Elizabeth are declared righteous before God, i. e. upright, walking in all
the Statutes and Commandments of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. Uprightness
makes no baulks in the field of Divine Precepts. Were not this man who lives in
Omissions unsound, he would fear Omissions as much as Commissions; for
sincerity hates every evil way, Psalm. 119.104. and he would be careful to obey
Affirmative as well as Negative Commands; for uprightness, as Moses, has the
whole Law in its hands; nay, written in its heart, and expounded in its life.
But this man, who like a Globons body, touches the Law of God in some one
point, but meets not in the rest, shows plainly that he is hollow within, as
your Globes are. For observe it, if this man were sincere, and acted upon
conscientious grounds, then those pious Reasons upon which he forbears sins of
Commission, would incline him to take heed of sins of Omission. If he forbear
Commissions, because they are against the Will of God, (which should be the
main ground of all Obedience, Psalm. 119.5, 6.) then he would also take heed of
Omissions, because they are as much against the Will of God as Commissions. If
the Authority of God were that which swayed him in his Negative, the same would
move him to positive holiness; for there is the same authority in Negative and
in Positive Precepts, Exodus 20. The same God that says, Thou shall not steal,
says, Thou shall be diligent to know the state of thy flock; And thou shall
give to him that asks.

Again, if this man abstains from Commissions, because they dishonor God; he
would also take heed of Omissions, for they dishonor God also. Every breach of
the Law is a dishonor to the Lawgiver, Romans 2.23, 24. Further, if he forbear
Commissions, because he is redeemed from them with the blood, 1 Pet. 1.17, 18,
19. of Christ, he would take heed of Omissions; for Christ did not only redeem
from Sin, but also unto Service, Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. Once more, if he did forbear Commissions, because they
are injurious to his own Soul, and deprive him of Heaven and Happiness; then he
would take heed of Omissions, for they are as destructive to his Soul, and will
as certainly hinder it of Heaven, as the Text assures us. So that upon
whatsoever conscientious grounds he forbears Commissions, he would upon the
same grounds take heed of Omissions, which he not doing, proclaims himself an
Hypocrite, and as such, is most justly condemned to die eternally. He that
forbears sin from a Principle of Grace, will be as careful to do good, as to
abstain from evil. Restraining Grace matters not much the omission of good, but
renewing Grace or Holiness in Truth cannot allow it. Such a man chooses the
things that please God, Isa. 56.4.

CHAP. XXVI. 1. Use. Of the Doctrine by way of Informamation: How dreadful will
be the Condition of those that live in sins of Commission.
HAving explained the Doctrine, by describing the nature and danger of sins of
Omission, as also the Reasons why Christ will sentence those that are guilty of
them to an eternal banishment from his presence, and to eternal torments with
the Devil and his Angels; I now proceed to the Application of the Point. This
Doctrine may be useful, 1. By way of Information. 2. By way of Examination. 3.
By way of Exhortation.

1. The Doctrine is useful by way of Information.

First Use of Information.
1. If Christ will condemn men for sins of Omission at the Great Day, what will
become of them that are guilty of gross Crimes, and who live in sins of
Commission? These must be doubly punished, for they are guilty of Omissions and
Commissions too. If they who feed not the Hungry, and cloth not the Naked,
shall be damned; surely they who take meat out of the mouths of the Poor, and
rob the Needy of their Raiment, by fraud or force, shall be doubly damned. If
they be sent to Hell, who visit not the sick and imprisoned; how doleful will
their Judgment be who wound the Servants of Christ, and cast them into Prison.
If the mere civil man be excluded the highest Heaven, surely the scandalous
Sinner shall be cast into the lowest Hell, Jer. 22.13. Woe to him that builds
his House by unrighteousness, and his Chambers by wrong.

If the Tree that is void of good fruit be hewn down, and cast into the fire, (
Matthew. 3.10.) what will become of the Tree that abounds in evil fruit? If
barrenness of good expose to Divine Vengeance, what will fruitfulness in evil
do? If the Fig Tree that had leaves and no Figs was cursed, and withered away,
what curse shall befall those Trees that bear Gall and Wormwood? Whose Grapes
are the Grapes of Sodom, and whose Clusters are the Clusters of Gomorrah. If
men shall perish who call not on the Name of God, what shall become of them who
blaspheme the Name of God? If they who hear not the Word of God shall be
destroyed, what destruction shall befall them who deride it, and mock at it? If
those whose feet run not the ways of Gods Commandments, who lift not up their
(...) to Heaven and pray, whose (...) are folded in their Bosoms, and whose
tongues talk not of Judgment, shall be cast into the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever; where shall they be cast whose Feet are swift to
shed blood, whose Eyes are full of Adultery, and cannot cease from sin; whose
Hands are full of Bribery and Extortion, and whose Tongues are full of cursing
and lying, and whose Throat is an open Sepulcher.

What Tongue can tell the misery that will befall such Sinners at the Great Day?
If not relieving the Poor, and not supplying the Needy, and not visiting the
Fatherless and Widow, the Sick and Imprisoned, cause such a severe Sentence to
be denounced against them, as, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels for ever; what Sentence shall be denounced against
those that grind the faces of the Poor, that make Music of their Moans, Isa.
3.15. That sell them for a pair of shoes, Amos 2.6. Who oppress the Poor, and
crush the Needy, Amos 4.1. And who slay the Widow and Fatherless?

Go to you rich men, weep and howl, for the miseries that shall come upon you.
Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments moth-eaten. Your Gold and Silver
is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire. Behold, the hire of the Laborers, which have
reaped down your Fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the
cries of them that have reaped, are entered into the Ears of the Lord of the
Sabbath. Ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he does not resist you,
James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 6. Those sins that are crying, and do more especially
require Vengeance at the hands of God, and provoked Divine Justice to take
notice of them, are sins of Commission. As Murder, Gen 4.10. The Voice of thy
Brothers blood cries to me from the ground. Sodomy, The cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, because their sin is grievous, Genesis 18.20. Oppression of
Gods Servants, Exodus 3.7. or of any Widows or Fatherless. If thou afflict the
Widow and the Fatherless, and they cry unto me: I will surely hear their cry,
for I am gracious, Exodus 22.23. Or of any Poor and Needy, as in the Text of
James 5.4. The cry of the Laborers are entered into the Ears of the Lord.

1. These Sinners who are guilty of these gross Commissions, are guilty of
Omissions also: They have the weight of both sorts of sins to press them to
Hell. A man may be guilty of Omissions, as not to believe, not to pray, not to
examine his own Soul, etc. and yet be free from gross Commissions; he may be no
Liar, no Thief, no Oppressor, no Murderer, no Adulterer, at least in regard of
the outward acts which I intend here: But a man cannot live in gross
Commissions, but he must also live in Omissions; the Oppressor must omit to
relieve the poor. He that destroys life, must neglect to save it. Besides, they
who live in such Commissions must omit Faith and Repentance, which are
inconsistent with them; they must neglect daily to call on God, for prayer
would make them leave such sinning; but indeed such sinning makes them leave of
(though possibly they did sometimes begin to seek God in a formal way,)
praying. Those in the 5. of James, who oppressed the Laborers, who condemned
and killed the just, (gross Commissions) had their Riches corrupted, and
Garments moth-eaten, i. e. were guilty of Omissions, would rather their wealth
should waste with rust, and their Rayments with moths, than bestow any on the
Poor. Those in the 4. of Hos. 1, 2. who were guilty of Swearing and Lying, and
Killing, and Stealing, and Adultery, omitted Truth, and Mercy, and the
Knowledge of God.

2. Sins of Commission (I mean those gross Crimes) do more openly dare God than
Omissions do. By Omissions we deny him, but by such Commissions we dare him,
and defy him. Such Sinners, as it were, bid God do his worst, they fear him
not. They do (at least implicitly) mock at his Threatenings, and deride his
Reproofs, and slight his Judgments that are executed on their Fellows before
their own faces. They speak in the Language of the Jews, Isa. 5.19. That say,
Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we may see it, and let the Counsel
of the holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it. These jear
at Gods Judgments, and mock at his Menaces; they credit not his Comminations,
nor expect their Execution. They look on the words of their Prophets as mere
wind, and the matter of their Prophecy as a mere mockery. Let him make speed,
etc. and the Counsel of the holy One of Israel draw nigh, i. e. you have much
and long told us, that your holy One, forsooth, who cannot abide sin, and who
is of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, will execute his Judgments on us for
our sins, and that this is by Counsel established, and cannot be reversed; we
would willingly see these Judgments so much talked of, and do wish that they
may hasten, and not linger as they do; for we neither believe you, nor fear
them. But who were these who spoke at this desperate rate? truly those that
lived in Commissions, who brought forth wild Grapes, Isa. 5.4. who brought
forth filthy, naughty, abominable fruit; in stead of Grapes, the Vineyard
brought forth Thorns and Briars: These were they who dared the Divine Justice,
as if they had been incarnate Devils.

3. Gross sins of Commission are more directly contrary to the very light of
Nature. Indeed it is against the light of Nature not to feed the Hungry, and
cloth the Naked, and help the Distressed; but it is much more against the light
of Nature to oppress the Poor and Needy, and slay the Widow and Fatherless.
Because natural light is much more disturbed by gross Commissions than by bare
Neglects; it appears, that those are more against a natural Conscience than
these. We read, that the natural light of the Heathen did discover the
sinfulness of their Commission, and condemn them for them, Rom, 1. (...)lt. And
that the Barbarians, by the lig^^ of Nature, could discover the evil of Murder,
and how Vengeance, like a Blood-Hound, did pursue the violent man, to take and
slay him, Act. 28.4. Now that which so directly opposes not only Scripture,
but Nature, and that which a man will do (as it were) violence to his own
Conscience that he may commit, must unquestionably be dreadful, and out of
measure sinful. As the Apostle says, To him that knows to do good, and does
it not, to him it is sin, James 4.17. ult. So say I to him that knows he
should not do these evils, and does them, to him they are sins, i. e. a
wickedness with a witness. They have more of enmity against God, and contempt
of his Mind, and have sadder marks of Divine Vengeance. But what sins are more
against knowledge, than those that are not only committed in spite of
Scripture, but also of Nature it self. No Vinegar so sharp, as that which is
made of the sharpest Wine. He that knows his Masters Will, and does it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes. He that knows his Masters Will, is, that
he should forbear such sins, and yet commits them, shall be beaten with many
stripes, Luke 12.

4. Gross sins of Commission are more scandalous to men, and bring more
dishonor to God. They give greater offense to men, good men are grieved by
them. Lots righteous Soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7. David tells us, Rivers of Tears ran down his eyes,
because the wicked broke Gods Law, Psalm. 119.136. Jeremiah wept in secret for
the sins of Israel, Jer. 13.17. Wicked men's sins cause godly men's sorrow. They
need not disturb the Righteous by their Persecutions of them, they do it
sufficiently by their Transgressions against God. As these gross sins grieve
the good, so they harden the bad: Others are encouraged to dress themselves by
such foul and false Glasses. Jer. 23.14.
Vile Sinners presume their states good though their lives be bad, because they
are no worse than such and such, (possibly who are learned, and rich, and
therefore counted wise men,) and therefore whatever befalls them, they shall
fare as well as others. Alas how many walk more by Patterns than by Commands,
and so are led by following others to Hell! And how deep will they be damned,
who draw others after them to Sin and Hell? They who forsake the Law, praise
the wicked, Prove. 28.4. i. e. commend them for their wickedness, as they who
keep the Law condemn them. Gross Commission dishonor God most; they cause
others to speak ill of God, and disgracefully of Religion. Nathan tells David,
That by his Uncleanness and Murder, He had caused the Enemies of God to
blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12. If a Child of God commit one such noisome act, the wicked
quickly take the scent, and a Cry is raised among the whole Pack, who with open
mouth upon this pursue and blaspheme God and godliness. By these particulars it
appears, that gross Commissions are sins of the greatest size, and therefore
must have the greatest severity. If they are used as Bastards who met not
Israel with bread and water, how will God use them at last who meet his people
with Bonds and Fetters, with Fire and Faggot? If Christ pronounce such a
dreadful Sentence in the Text against the (Comparative) green Tree, what shall
become of the dry?

CHAP. XXVII. Negative godliness is not enough. Christ's impartiality in
Judgment.
IN the second place, Second use of Information.
If Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission, it may
inform us, that a negative Religion, or negative Christianity, is not enough.
Many please themselves that they are Gracious, because they are not openly
Vicious; and that they are Pious, because they are not scandalously Profane;
but they mistake and deceive themselves. It is good not to do evil, but it is
evil not to do good. Negative Christians are as it was said of Galba, Potius
extra vitia quam cum virtute: Rather seemingly free from Vice, than really
filled with Virtue. Or at best, as was reported of Cato, That he was homo
virtuti simillimus, A man that looked like a virtuous person.

How many civil men presume their persons holy, because they are not so filthy
as those who rake in Ditches and Kennels, and defile themselves daily with
scandalous Abominations; and they presume their states to be good, and
themselves in the way to Heaven, because they are no Drunkards, no Swearers, no
Adulterers, no Thieves, no Murderers; when for all this they shall be cast to
Hell, because they are no Believers, no Penitents, no obedient Subjects to the
King of Saints, Because they know not God, and obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7, 8. Such men are farther distant from good than from evil. Ceasing from
evil is not enough, it is but one step Heavenward; doing of good must accompany
it, or it will be of small moment.

I confess, when I behold a civil man, who is harmless in his Carriage,
unblamable (in regard of scandal) in his public Conversation, and courteous in
his Behavior to all; I cannot but respect him, and am ready to wish (as
Athanasius, that all the World of Atheists and profane Wretches would turn
Hypocrites) that all scandalous Sinners would turn Civilians, and come so far
toward Holiness; but yet I must say, that this is scarce half way to
Christianity. He is not half a Saint, who is but a negative Saint. The
forbearance of gross Corruptions is the easiest and least part of Religion, and
therefore will not speak any man in a state of Salvation. The Tree that is
barren, and without good fruit, is for the fire, as well as the Tree that
brings forth evil fruit.

For men to think to excuse themselves that they do no hurt, wrong neither Man,
Woman, or Child, and are not (as the Pharisee said) as the Publicans, who
generally were Oppressors, is but a vain foolish thing. The idle Servant might
have said, Lord, I did no harm with my Talent, I did not lay it out in Rioting
and Drunkenness, or any way to thy dishonor; I only hid it, and did not
improve it, Matthew. 25. yet this was enough to condemn him. Can we call ground
good ground, for bearing no weeds, if it never bring forth good Corn? Or do we
count that Servant a good Servant, who does not wrong his Master in his Estate,
by purloining or wasting it, if he live idle all day, and neglect the business
his Master appoints him. Believe it, Reader, thou may not be morally evil to
the abomination of men, and yet not spiritually good to the acceptance of God.
He keeps no Law of God, who minds only the negative part of it. A life free
from enormity is too often accompanied with an heart full of iniquity. And that
this negative Holiness is insufficient, will appear if we consider,

1. That the Holy Ghost characterizeth a godly man both negatively and
positively. The Scripture tells us, That a true Christan minds both parts of
the Law, its commanding part as well as its forbidding part. When the Holy
Ghost speaks of David's goodness, he tells us, That he served the Wills of God
in his Generation, not only his forbidding-will, but also his commanding-will,
Act. 13.36. When Job is commended as a godly man, he is said to eschew evil,
there was his negative Holiness; and to fear God, there was his positive
Holiness, Job 1.1. and 8. The Psalmist describes the happy man by his holiness
both ways.

1. By way of Negation, Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of
the Ungodly, (i. e. that commits not wickedness, which is the consultation
of the Ungodly,) nor stands in the way of Sinners, (i. e. that goes not on
with pleasure in any course of profaneness,) nor sits in the Seat of the
scornful, (i. e. that hardneth not not his heart against advice and admonition,
etc.)

2. By way of Position, But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that
Law does he meditate day and night. His affection to the Law, and his
meditation in it are both positive; and without these the man could neither be
holy nor happy. He might have been able to say, I have not walked in the
Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stood in the way of Sinners, not sat in the Seat
of the scornful; and yet been a wicked and cursed man; for Negatives neither
speak nor make any man holy. It is a positive quality, that gives being,
perfection, and denomination to Piety. Therefore Jehu is branded for a wicked
man, notwithstanding all his zeal against Baal, because he took no heed to walk
in the Law of the Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 10.29, 30, 31. Philosophers tell
us, That motions are imperfect, and but in fieri, whilst they are passing from
the Terminus a quo, and are not perfect, or in facto esse, till the Terminus ad
quem be attained. Whilst a man is departing from evil, he is but an imperfect
Christian; when he comes to the doing of good, which is the end of the former,
then he is a Christian indeed.

2. The Law, which is the Rule of Religion, is Affirmative as well as Negative.
Every man is so far perfect in his Calling, or in any Art, as he agrees with
his Rule. And every man is so far religious (and no farther) as he agrees with
the Will of God revealed in his Word, which is the Rule of Religion; Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be to them, etc. Now this Rule
has Positive as well as Negative Commands. Nay, all its Negative Commands have
(as has been shown before) somewhat positive in them, and therefore negative
holiness cannot be sufficient. He that makes not Conscience of every part of
Gods Will, makes Conscience of no part of Gods Will. He that denies
ungodliness and worldly lusts, because the Law, his Rule, forbids them, will
also live righteously, soberly, and godly, because the same Rule commands them,
Tit. 2.11, 12. Indeed all true eschewing of evil does proceed out of love to
good; so that he who does not delight in good, and do it, cannot eschew evil
out of any good Principle. Observe the Rule, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. And be renewed in
the Spirit of your mind. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness. Isa. 1.15. But men love to be
complete in every thing, but that which deserves exactness.

3. An Heathen may be negatively religious. A Cato, a Seneca, an Aristides, may
be free from Intemperance, Bribery, Injustice, Uncleanness, and all gross sins;
and can we think that Religion sufficient for us which Heathens may attain to.
Is there nothing revealed by the Sun-light of Scripture for us to do, which
they were unable to see by the dim Rush-candle of Nature. The Holy Ghost
acquaints us with the condition of the Heathen, Ephesians. 2.12. That they were
without God, without Christ, strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and without hope in the World. In which words
we have their dreadful estate, how far they are from any Savior, and so from
any hope of Salvation; which would not be, if their negative holiness were
sufficient to make them happy.

Third Use of Information.
3. If Christ will condemn men for sins of Omission at the Great Day, then it
may inform us of the Justice and Righteousness of Christ. It Is said of Christ,
That he loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity, Psalm. 45. And again, That he
shall judge the world in Righteousness, Act. 17.31. Herein it appears:

1. Because he spares no Sins. He condemns those that live in Omissions
(little light sins in the imaginations of men) as well as those that live in
Commissions. He sends to Hell those that do not relieve, as well as those that
rob his people. He pours out his wrath upon them that do not visit his
Members in Prison, as well as those that cast them into Prison. Those sins that
are Peccadilloes in the Worlds eye, have felt the heavy weight of his hand. The
man that gathered a few sticks, was destroyed with stones. Vzzah touched the
Ark out of kindness, but God smote him with death for it. Moses for omitting
the Circumcision of his Child, was like to have lost his life. Aarons two Sons,
Nadab and Abihu neglected (as is supposed by Expositors) to fetch fire from the
Altar to burn their Sacrifices, and were destroyed with fire from Heaven,
Levit. 10. The impartiality of Christ is evident herein, that at the Great Day
he will bid the Civil as well as the Scandalous Sinner depart from him into
everlasting fire.

2. Because he spares no Sinners. He says to all those on his left hand,
whether Rich or Poor, Great or Small, High or Low, if guilty of these
Omissions, Depart from me into everlasting fire. He is no respecter of persons,
he spares none for their greatness and strength. His hand reaches the tallest
Cedars, and plucks up the strongest Oaks. Neither Power nor Majesty can free or
exempt persons from his severity. If Princes and Potentates will omit their
Duty, they must expect to feel his Fury. Pharaoh, Jeroboam, Ahab, Ahaz, Rev.
6.15,
Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, might neglect their Duties to men, and escape
punishment from men, but could not neglect their Duties to God at so easy a
rate. As all their sins were within the view of his Omniscience, so all their
persons were within the reach of his Vengeance, and that found them out to
their cost.

He spares none for their nearness to him. He beholds them afar off that are
very near to him, when they make bold with him. Judges on Earth may sometimes
(though sinfully always) favor their Kindred in an unrighteous cause, but he
judges otherwise. Though Coniah be to be as the signet on my right hand, I
will pluck him thence, Jer. 22.24. Israel was the nearest people to God of any
people in the world, Psalm. 148. ult. with Deuteronomy. 4.7. and Moses was the nearest
to God of any of the people of Israel, yet they were excluded his Rest, for not
believing his Word; and he was denied entrance into Canaan, for not sanctifying
Gods Name.

3. He judges all according to Law. This is another requisite to suffice: He
will not condemn any for their Omissions or Commissions, but according to Law.
We count that Judge just indeed that keeps the Law, and will not upon any
account swerve from that. Our Lord Jesus, when he sentenceth those that neglect
to feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked, etc. to everlasting fire, proceeds
according to Law exactly. These persons (as has been before proved) are under
the Law of Works, and so must stand or fall for ever, as they obey or disobey
that Law. Now that Law condemns for Omissions, and not doing our Duties, as
well as for Commissions, and abounding in enormities. It says, Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law, to do
them, Gal. 3.13. Observe, the Law curses those that omit, that continue not to
do their Duties, as well as those that do the contrary.

4. He will render to every man according to his Works. He may punish, and does
in this World less; but neither in the other nor in this more than our
Inquities deserve. All men's sins are not equal, therefore all men's sufferings
shall not be equal. According to the degree of men's defilements, such shall be
the degree of their punishment. He distinguishes between sins and sins,
between them that afflict his Children, and those that relieve them not in
their Afflictions; between those that hale them to Prisons, and put them to
death, and those that visit them not in prison. He exacteth not of men more
than is meet.

He will put a difference between Heathens, who have little means to know and
worship him aright, and Jews, To whom were committed the Oracles of God, to
whom pertained the Adoption, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and
the Promises. These have greater Means and Mercies, and therefore greater Wrath
and Severity. Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath on the soul of
every man that does evil, on the Jew first, and also on the Gentiles, Romans 3.2.
Romans 9.4. Romans 2.7. You only have I known, therefore you will I punish of all
the Families of the Earth for your Iniquities, Amos 3.2. He will distinguish
between Jews and Christians that live under the Gospel. Omissions are more
tolerable, and less punishable among Heathens than Jews, and among Jews before
Christ's coming, than those Jews that lived under the Gospel, and saw Christ's
Miracles, and heard his Sermons, with those Christians that enjoy the Gospel,
Matthew. 11.21, 22, 23. It will be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon than for
Corazin and Bethsaida, and for Sodom and Gomorrah than for Capernaum, because
these lived under greater Light and Helps, and yet continued in the neglect of
Faith and Repentance.

He will not punish those that omit their Duties ignorantly (when they are
diligent to improve what advantages they have for knowledge) so severely as he
will those who neglect their Duties knowingly. God expects a life answerable to
that Light which he has given us; and if we imprison his Truth in
unrighteousness, we provoke him in the highest degree. He that knows his
Masters Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. He that
knows not his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with few
stripes. Both shall be beaten, but the former suffer more stripes than the
latter. It Is cold comfort, yet herein the Righteousness of the Judge appears,
that some who are guilty of Omissions shall have a cooler Hell than others; For
he renders to every man according to his Works, Romans 2.

CHAP. XXVIII. Practical godliness necessary.
Fourth Use of Information.
4. IF Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for Sins of Omission, for not
visiting the Sick and Imprisoned, and not relieving the Hungry and Naked: Then
it may inform us, That nothing short of practical godliness will speak a man's
estate safe at this Day, or fore-speak his estate to be comfortable at that
day. The want of this is the cause of these men's condemnation: They might
forbear injuring the Saints, they might speak them fair, bid them, Be ye fed,
Be ye clothed. They might wish them well, they might honor and respect them
(as Herod did the Baptist) for their sanctity and righteousness, yet because
they were void of this practical godliness, they gave them not wherewith to be
fed and clothed; they are banished the presence of Christ, and adjudged to the
Curses and Company of Devils.

1. A great Profession will not do without this practical godliness. Some soar
high in their Professions of, and pretenses to greater strictness, and degrees
of Grace and Holiness than others, who alas fall foully often on Earth, and
always into Hell, for lack of this practical godliness. As some great
Tradesmen, who living wholly upon their Credit with others, without any stock
of their own, quickly break and miscarry. A Profession is but as the leaves of
a Tree (a sign of fruit) not the fruit it self. There is a vast difference
between leaves and fruit. Some think that Christ had not cursed the Fig Tree,
if it had been without leaves as well as without fruit: But when by its leaves
it professed to have fruit, Vide Robinson, 1. part, 132
and invited him to it in expectation thereof, and disappointed him, he
presently claps a Curse on it, that withers it at the very roots. The Pharisees
were great Professors, made broad their Philacteries, wherever they went,
would be known for persons extraordinarily pious and religious, yet how wicked
was their state, Matthew. 5.20. Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall never enter into the
Kingdom of God; and how woeful is their Condition? Woe to you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites, (ye live in Omissions) ye neglect the great things of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, Matthew. 23.23.

2. Great Gifts and Parts will not do without this. A man may have choice
natural Abilities, rare acquired Accomplishments; yea, common Gifts of the
Spirit of God, and yet for want of this practical godliness be damned. What
amiable words come out of Balaams mouth, he speaks like a Saint; yea like an
Angel? how often have I heard his Prophesies, with great admiration and
affection? his Tongue has melted my heart; and yet he had no good works, for
all his many good words; and his lack of practical godliness ruined him. What
special endowments had they who preached in the Name of Christ, and in his Name
cast out Devils, and in his Name did many marvailous works; and yet were cast
to Devils for being Workers of Iniquity, as all are who are void of this
practical godliness, Matthew. 7.21, 23. What excellent Gifts does the Apostle
suppose a man to have the gift of Prophesing, of understanding all Mysteries,
and all Knowledge, and of all Faith, so as to remove Mountains, and yet if he
have not Charity, he is nothing, etc. 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. If he love not his
Brother, and express it not to his power, by spiritual and bodily Charity,
(which is part of practical godliness) he is nothing in Gods Eye, what ever he
may be in the eyes of men.

3. Great Privileges, with seeming performances, without this practical
godliness, will not do. They who had Tabernacle, Temple, Ark, Covenant,
Promises, for want of this were destoy'd; The Ark could not preserve them.
Afterward, when they nelected practical godliness, the Temple could not
protect them. He bids the Jews go and see what he did to his place at Shiloh
for their Iniquities. He made them monuments of his Fury, who had been patterns
of his Pity, when they neglected this practical godliness.

How meanly does God discourse of seeming Obedience to his own Institutions,
when this is neglected. Though they had his own Divine stamp on them, and were
signs of the sweetest Sacrifice, and the most acceptable Service imaginable,
and he had often taken delight in them; yet when they left off to do well,
observe his Language about them. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifice to me, says the Lord, bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an
abomination to me: Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, I
cannot bear them. What strange expressions are here of his own Institutions?
But what is the reason? Truly, the lack of this, verse. 17. Learn to do well,
seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, Judge the Fatherless, Plead for the
Widow, Isa. 1.11, to 18. And how peremptorily does he beat men off from
trusting in their Privileges, as of no advantage without this practical
godliness. Think not, says the Baptist, to say within your selves, We have
Abraham to our Father, (this was a great Privilege, for with him and his Seed
was the Covenant made, and to them were Circumcision, and the Passover, the
Seals of it given,) but what counsel does he give them? truly, to mind
practical godliness. Bring forth fruit meet for Repentance, i. e. for all the
great privilege in which you take so much pride, and upon which you lay so
much stress; yet you can never flee from the wrath to come, unless you bring
forth good fruit, fruit meet for repentance; such fruit as will speak your
hearts to be changed, such fruit as is suitable to a renewed nature. This, and
this alone is practical godliness. The Coherence in that, Matthew. 3.8, 9, 10.
deserves our Observation. And John says unto the Pharisees, O Generation of
Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come: bring forth
therefore fruit meet for repentance. And think not to say within your selves,
We have Abraham to our Father: For I say unto you, that God is able of these
stones to raise up Children to Abraham. Do not think that God is bound to, and
must save you, because ye are Abraham's Seed, for God can of stones make Sons of
Abraham. And now also the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree, therefore every
Tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.

CHAP. XXIX. The Condition of men only Civil is unsafe and sad.
5. IF Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission, for not
relieving the Poor and Afflicted: It may inform us, That the condition of men
merely civil, and negatively religious, will be woeful at that day. Why? Because
Christ will command them to depart from him into everlasting fire. Ah how
dreadful will it be to take an eternal Farewell of the Lord of Life, the God of
all Grace, the Well of Salvation; and to enter into a state of Death and Wrath,
and that for ever. If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Sinner
and Ungodly appear? 1 Pet. 3. By Sinner, I suppose, is meant the scandalous
man, who lives in Commission. It Is said of Mary Magdalen, who had been guilty
of notorious Enormities, Luke 7. For she is a Sinner. And it is said of the
Publican, (whose whole Tribe was infamous for Extortion and Bribery) That he
was a Sinner. He is gone to be a Guest to one that is a Sinner. By Ungodly, as
the very word (...) signifies, is meant one that lives in Omissions, one that
lives without the Worship of God; i. e. without the Love and Fear, the
Acknowledgment and Adoration of this God. Worship is that high Honor and
Solemn Respect that the Creature owes to God: Not to give him this, is
ungodliness. An ungodly man is one that does not seek God, nor trust God, nor
obey God; that does not own him in his Mercies as his Father and Benefactor,
nor in his Judgments as a wise Master, that would by Chastisements make him
partaker of his Holiness. Now if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the sinner and ungodly appear? If there be a difficulty in the Salvation of the
Righteous, there is a necessity of the damnation of the Sinner and ungodly. If
the Righteous get so hardly to Heaven, the Sinner and Ungodly must surely be
cast into Hell. Where shall the Sinner and Ungodly, those that are guilty of
these Omissions and Commissions, appear? They must appear somewhere, but they
can appear no where with comfort, or without unspeakable horror. Where shall
they appear? before God? why, they hate his Being, despise his Dominions,
slight his Love, disobey his Laws, and indeed seek his Life; and can they
appear before him? Can they look for a smile from his Face, who loath him
perfectly? or can they stand before his Frowns and Fury? Do they know the
weight of his Hand, the killing-darts of his Eye, and the Power of his Anger?
No surely, they cannot appear before him. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and
who may stand when thou art angry? Where shall they appear? Shall they appear
before Christ the Judge of Quick and Dead? Before him, who sometimes invited
them earnestly to come to him, and entreated them affectionately to accept of
him, and life with him. Shall they appear before him? It Is his Call which they
have despised, and his Commands which they have violated. It Is his Blood which
they have trampled on, and his Spirit whom they have grieved. They are his
Members whom the Sinners have oppressed and wronged, and his Children, and
Spouse, and Body, which the Ungodly have neglected, and not relieved. O how
glad would they be if the Rocks would crush them to pieces, that they might be
delivered from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15. Their severe Sentence which
may make every Ear to tingle, and Heart to tremble, that hears it, will proceed
from his mouth; Then shall he say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire. But where shall these Sinners and Ungodly appear?
Shall they appear before the Saints? Alas, with what face can they behold them,
whose Persons they have imprisoned, whose Estates they have plundered, whose
Profession they have derided, whose Names they have abused, and whom they have
often wished out of the way, and thought the Troublers of the Family, and Town,
and Country where they lived? If the Saints plead it must be against them, for
they cannot but as Justices agree and concur with the Sentence of the Judge as
righteous and just.

But where shall they appear? Shall they appear before the Law? No, that
condemns them for the least Omission, for the smallest Commission to Hell
fire; they are the Prohibitions of the Law that the Sinner has transgressed,
and they are the Precepts of the Law that the Ungodly has not obeyed; and
therefore the Law curses them both to the uttermost. The Law enableth Sin to
bind over the Transgressor of it to the Wrath and Curse of God: Hence it is
said, The strength of Sin is the Law.

But where shall they appear? Shall they appear before the Gospel? No, their
Omissions have most relation to the Gospel. They have not believed the truth of
it. They have not embraced the goodness of it. They have not obeyed the
Precepts of it. They rejected the tenders of Pardon and Life made to them in
the Gospel, with frequency and fervency. They would not come to their Physician
to be healed of their mortal Diseases. Though he came to them and offered his
help freely, and assured them of effectual and speedy recovery, if they would
be directed by him; yet they rejected the Counsel of God against themselves;
therefore the Gospel will condemn as surely and more sorely than the Law. Heb.
2.2, 3 John 3.19.
If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Disobedience received a
just recompense of Reward: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation.

And again, Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy?

But where shall they appear? Shall they appear on Earth? Surely there will be
no Earth then for them to appear in. That Earth which they sported so much in,
as Leviathan in the waters, and which they were fond of, and delighted in, will
be burnt up with fire, and consumed with fervent heat.

But where shall they appear? Shall they appear in Heaven? Can an unsanctified
heart enter into the Holy of Holies? No. Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 12.14. An impure Eye cannot behold such an infinitely pure Object.
When Angels (seated in Heaven as their Habitation) once lost their purity, they
soon lost that place. Heaven could not bear them; it is not as Noah's Ark, to
take in all sorts, Clean or Unclean. Into it can in no wise enter any thing
that is Unclean, Rev. 21.27. Neither could they bear Heaven. Thee spiritual
delights of that Celestial Court became unsuitable to their polluted Natures.
The rarest Dainties and most curious Delicates are altogether unsavory and
unpleasant to an aguish and distempered Palate.

But where shall they appear? If they cannot appear before God their Maker,
before the Lord Jesus Christ, before the Saints. Before whom shall they appear?
If they cannot appear before the Law, before the Gospel, before what shall they
appear? It must be in Hell, before Devils and damned Spirits, with them to
lodge and dwell for ever. Ah, the Great Day is called The terrible Day of the
Lord Jesus; and it will be a terrible Day indeed to these mere Civilians.

It is called the Day of Perdition of ungodly men. It Is to others a Day of
Consolation. Lift up your Heads with joy, for the Day of your Redemption
draws nigh. A Day of Promotion, It Is your Fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Joh. 17.24. A Day of Rest from all their Labors, and
Sorrows, and Sufferings, bodily or spiritually, Rev. 14.13. But it is the Day of
Perdition of Ungodly men. They who live without God here, must live without him
for ever; and this farthest, utmost, endless departure of the Creature from
God, who is the only Life and Heaven of him, will be a Death and Hell with a
witness. God will be God at that Day in the account of the worst of men, though
he be their laughing stock and sinning-stock at this day.

Though these ungodly ones sit aloft here in the Courts of men, and who but
they; Yet the Ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, Psalm. 1.5. At the Great
Day when they shall be judged, 1. They shall be ashamed, they shall not stand,
i. e. not hold up their heads with joy, but hang down their heads with shame,
Dan. 12. Some shall arise to shame and confusion of face. 2. The Ungodly shall
not stand in the Judgment, i. e. they shall not be justified. When they shall
be tried for their Lives and Deaths, for their endless unchangeable states,
they shall be cast and condemned. When all Adams Posterity shall make their
personal appearance before the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, to receive
their eternal doom; and when the Judge of Quick and Dead clothed with his
Majestic Robes of Glory, accompanied with an illustrious train of Angels,
shall sit down on the Judgment Seat, he shall pronounce a Sentence of
Condemnation on all ungodly Ones. If thou Lord should mark Iniquity, O Lord,
who should stand, Psalm. 130.3. i. e. If thou Lord should observe exactly the
best man's heart and life, and accordingly deal with him, not one man could be
justified. Who shall stand; i. e. righteous at thy Bar. 3. The Ungodly shall
not stand in the Judgment; i. e. they shall not conquer, when they shall be
impleaded and accused by the Devil and the Law at that day. An Army foiled, is
said not to stand before their Enemies. And again, An Army beaten is said to
fall before their Adversaries, Dan. 11.25. And the Conquerors are said to
stand, Ephesians. 6.13 The Devil will bring his large Bills of Indictments into the
Court against the Ungodly, for he is (...), 1 Pet. 5.8. A Court-Adversary and
the Law will second the Devil, and join with him in his Accusations; the
Sinners Conscience will join with both, and assent to the truth of their
Indictments. The Ungodly will have no Advocate to plead for him. Christ that
sometimes offered him that kindness, will now plead against him, and so he must
needs fall and be conquered by his Enemies.

CHAP. XXX. Sinners Conviction at the Day of Judgment. The purity of Christ's
Religion above all others.
Sixth Use of Information.
6. IF Christ will say to them on the left hand, Depart from me. For I was
Hungry and ye gave me no meat. Or if Christ will condemn men for sins of
Omission at the Great Die: It informs us, That Christ will be rational in his
most severe proceedings, even to the Conviction of the Sinners own Conscience.
I draw this from the Coherence of the verses, Christ first pronounces the
Sentence, verse. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. And then
verse. 42. he gives the reason, For I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc.
which (though at first they seem to question, yet) at last they are muzled and
put to silence. Jude tells us of solemn Condemnation and solemn Conviction of
these ungodly Ones, as the chief business of that Day. Behold he comes with
ten thousand of his Saints to execute Judgment on all, and to convince all that
are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him, Jude, 14, 15. Execution, by an Hysteron Proteron, is put before
Conviction; yet one great work of that Great Day is to convince these ungodly
Ones, and the severity of the Process is against the Ungodly.

This Conviction implies:

1. A reflection of Conscience upon all their past and former sins. Conscience,
as a Glass, shall represent to the Sinner all his lusts (which he has loved
above his Soul and Savior) in all their ugly features, and loathsome colors:
The Books at that day will be opened, Rev. 20.12. i. e. The Book of Gods
Remembrance, Mal. 3. and the Book of Conscience. Sins are not gone as soon as
done; God records them in his Book of Remembrance, and Conscience will review
them all in that Day of Vengeance. Though it could not be heard by the Sinner
in this World, for the noise of his carnal delights, and cry of his worldly
delights; yet when it sets his sins in order before his eyes in their monstrous
frightful shapes, it will thunder in his Ears as Reuben to his Brethren, Did
not I tell you of this, and say, Do not sin, and thou would not hear;
therefore all this Wrath, and Fury, and Flames, and Darkness, and Chains, are
come upon thee.

2. This Conviction implies a silencing the Sinner, that he will have nothing
to say either against God, or for himself. A man that is convinced, has his
mouth stopped. When the Spirit convinces the World of sin, the World has not a
word to say against the Sin and Guilt, which the Law charge on it. Every
mouth is stoped, and all the World is guilty before God. How often is the poor
Creature self-convinced and self-condemned here; but soon after the sick qualms
go off his stomach, and he is revived with the Cordials of sinful shifts and
excuses, wherewith he deludes himself, and presumes he may also deceive God;
but at the Great Day, as his Convictions will be more killing, so they will be
more lasting. The man will be dumb and speechless when Christ shall say, Why
did thou deny to relieve my Servants in their wants? Why did thou slight my
Blood, neglect my Worship, grieve my Spirit, and omit to obey my positive Laws?
Matthew. 22.3, 4, 5. The very Heathen who shall be imprisoned in the dark dungeon
of Hell, for imprisoning the Truth, and holding it in unrighteousness, will not
have a motion in their Breasts of accusing God for false Imprisonment. How
certainly then and how fully will the Consciences of Christians, who lived
under the Gospel, justify God, when he shall condemn them for not believing,
and not repenting, upon the Messages he sent to them of pardon and life.

7. If Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission, It may
inform us of the excellency of the Christian Religion above all other
Religions. The excellency of any Religion consists in the purity of its
Precepts, and strictness of its Commands; now no Religion is so holy in its
Commands, and so exact in its Laws as the Christian Religion. Moral Duties are
advanced by it to their highest perfection, and moral Vices are debased by it
to their lowest degradation. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, Psalm. 19. Thy
Word is very pure. Christ will condemn men to Hell at the last Day for
Omissions as well as Commissions, for neglect of known Duties, as well as for
the perpetration of gross Enormities.

1. If we consider the Religion of the Heathen, we shall find that it is vastly
inferior in purity to the Christian Religion. Among the Gentiles (who lived
without the Gospel) it can scarce be said there was any Religion at all, for
their Gods were Stocks, and Stones, and Trees, and Fire, and Water, and Beasts,
and dead Men; nay, their Precepts were so far from purity, that they commended
and commanded impurity. As among the ancient Babylonians, in the Worship of
Venus, the Women prostituted themselves to all Strangers; nay, the very Gods of
the Heathen did, according to their own fictitious Writers, patronize all their
Impieties, even by their own Patterns. Jupiter, the chief forsooth of their
Gods, who has his Name from being an helping Father, commits Incest with his
own Sister Juno, and his Daughter Minerva, Sodomy with Ganymedes, ravisheth
Europa, banisheth his Father Saturn out of his Kingdom. Venus was a Whore,
Mercury a Thief, Bacchus a Drunkard, etc. But to leave these, and speak to them
that were more sober in their Understandings, and not so vain in their
Imaginations, who had (...), the work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans
2.14. and improved it to more purpose than others; yet these pleased themselves
with a little outward civility, without any inward or outward practical
godliness. Their chief devotion consisted in abstaining from gross sins, which
might expose them to the shame of men, and the doing some external acts of
Piety, as sacrificing and mumbling over a few Prayers that were little
significant. O how vastly does the Christian Religion excel this! This Religion
of the Heathen does rather hide sin then heal it. It does not root the love of
sin out of the heart, only restrain it in the life. But the Christian Religion
does forbid sin in the Affections as well as in the Conversation, it does
abscindere as well as abscondere, cure sin as well as cover it. In the best
Heathen the fire of their Lusts was only raked up, and covered with ashes, from
the eyes of the World: But now in the Christian it is quenched, at least in
part, and shall by degrees be wholly quenched. The Christian Religion does not
only forbid all Sins, or outward Commissions, but also all Lusts and inward
Inclinations. I beseech you brethren to abstain as Pilgrims and Strangers, from
all fleshly Lusts, that war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. And a religions
Christian does not only forbear gross Commissions, but also abhor secret sinful
motions. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love, Psalm. 119.

Those among the Heathen who were the wisest, made nothing of neglecting to
give God their love, and fear, and trust, their highest Honor, and superlative
Esteem, and exactest Obedience, which are the chief of Religion. They allowed
Revenge, in case of suffering Injury; and some of their greatest Lawgivers
ordained Theft to be unpunishable, if it could be done cleanly and cleaverly,
so as not to be found out. They put away their Wives upon any small distaste,
and took others during their pleasure only. Their whole Religion has not one
Prohibition against inward Corruptions, nor one Precept for inward heart
Duties; and therefore must of necessity come short of the Christian Religion
for Purity.

2. If we consider the Turkish Religion, what a bundle of fooleries is Mahomets
Alcoran, and what a dunghill of filthiness is the Religion of his Followers.
They allow a man as many Wives as he can maintain, and encourage men to murder,
with a promise of a (Poetical, carnal) Paradise to all that shall die in the
Wars against the Christians. They obey the Lusts of their Tyrant in all things,
even to the murder of their Sovereigns nearest Relations, or chiefest Ministers
of State, against the very light and law of Nature. They do not so much as
profess to mind those heart Prohibitions and Precepts, without which all
external Holiness is but as a rotten Carcass, noisome and unsavory to Gods
Nostrils, and without any loveliness or life in his Eyes. Nay, the Popish
Religion, so far as it differs from the true Christian Religion, is impure.
They have sins that are Venial, allow publicly of Uncleanness. The Pope has a
Revenue out of the Stews; they dispense with Sodomy, incest, any Sin for money:
They place all their Holiness in some external Mortifications, which God never
required at their hands. But what does the Christian Religion do? It reaches
the Heart, and teaches the Soul: The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.

1. It directs the whole Man, and gives Laws to all the powers of the Soul, and
parts of the Body. It directs us about our Bodies and outward Conversation: It
commands to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice to God, Romans 12.1. and the
members of our Bodies as Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness. It binds
the Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hands, Feet, all the members to their good behavior:
It allows not any part to be abused to profaneness, Job 31.1. Psalm. 119. Psalm.
37.30, 31. Psalm. 34.13, 14. Romans 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. It directs us about our
Souls: The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19.7. It
changes the nature of the Soul, and opens the eye of it, and turns it from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, Act. 26.18. It directs
the mind to learn the Knowledge of God, as the richest Treasure, and choicest
Portion, and only Happiness of the Creature; 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon,
my Son, know the God of thy Fathers. It directs the Will to choose this God for
its suitable, and satisfying, and everlasting felicity, Psalm. 73.25. It limits
the Affections as to their Objects, and their motion toward those Objects. It
forbids inordinate desires after, or delight in sublumary Vanities; and
commands moderation in our love to all created Comforts. Let your moderation be
known to all men. The time is short, let them that have Wives, be as though
they had none, etc. 1 Cor. 7.29. It enjoins our love in the greatest degree to
be placed on the worthiest Object. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all thy Strength, Matthew. 22.37. And so our
fear; Fear him that can cast Body and Soul into Hell, I say unto you fear him.
It keeps all the unruly passions within their proper banks and bounds, and
preserves the superior and inferior faculties in their proper places. Now what
Religion either of Moralists or Mahometans does do?

2. As it directs about the whole man, so it directs as to every part and
passage of this man's Conversation. We need never be at a loss for a Rule, or at
a stand what to do, if we will but use diligence to know and understand the
revealed Will of God. The Christian Religion directs us in our Callings,
whether Magistrates, Ministers, Tradesmen, Soldiers, Luke 3. It directs us in
our Relations, as Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, Ephesians.
5. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3. Col. 4. It directs us in all Conditions how to demean our
selves, in Prosperity to be joyful, in Adversity to consider how God has set
the one against the other. In Afflictions to be patient and prayerful, and more
studious of a right improvement of them, than of deliverance out of them. Under
Mercies it directs us to be thankful to God, the more cheerful in his Service,
and faithful in the use of our Talents, for the honor of our Master. It
directs us in all our Thoughts, Jer. 4.14. Words, Psalm. 39.2. Works, Prove.
4.23, 24, 26. It directs us in all our natural Actions, as Eating, Drinking,
Sleeping, 1 Cor. 10.31 Tit. 2.12. In our civil Converses, Micah 6.8. In our
religious Duties, how to pray, James 5. James 1. How to hear, how to receive, 1
Cor. 11.

3. Its purity above and beyond all other Religions, appears in this, That it
forbids Evil, all Evil, nothing but Evil; it commands Good, whatsoever is Good,
and nothing but Good, Isa. 1. Psalm. 32.14 The Laws of Lycurgus among the
Grecians, and Numa among the Romans, had somewhat of good in them, but not all
prohibited, somewhat that was evil, but not all that was evil: But the
Christian Religion is of a larger extent both in its Precepts and Prohibitions.
I have seen an end of all Perfections, but thy Commandments are exceeding
broad, Psalm. 119.96. A man with the eye of his Body may behold an end of many
worldly Perfections, of many fair Estates, great Beauties, large Parts, hopeful
Families; but a man with the eye of his Soul (for by Faith) may see an end of
all earthly Perfections. He may see the World in a flame, and all its Pomp, and
Pride, and Glory, and Gallantry, and Crowns, and Scepters, and Riches, and
Treasures, turned into ashes; he may see the Heavens passing away like a
scroll, and the Elements melting with fervent heat, and the Earth with the
things thereon consumed; and all its Persections which men doted so much on
vanished into smoke and nothing. It Is easy to see to the end of all terrene
Perfections, but its difficult, yea impossible to see to the end of Divine
Precepts: But thy Commandments are exceeding broad. Of a vast Latitude, beyond
our apprehension. They are so deep, that none can fadom them, Psalm. 36.6. So
high, that they are established in Heaven, Psalm. 119.48. So long, that they
endure for ever, 2 Pet. 1. And so broad, that none can measure them. They are
not only broad, but exceeding broad. Higher than Heaven, longer than the Earth,
broader than the Sea. The Commands of God reach the inward parts, the most
secret motions and retired recesses of the Soul: They reach all the privy
thoughts. They pierce even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of
the Joints and Marrow, and discern the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb.
4.12. They reach to all our Actions, to those that seem smallest and of less
concernment, as well as to those that are greater, and of more concernment.

They reach to the manner, nay circumstance of Actions. The Divine Law takes
notice of all the circumstances of sins, as aggravations of sin. As, 1. From
the time of Gods patience toward the Sinner; These three years I came seeking
fruit, Luke 13. 2. The place where the sin was committed; The Sons of Eli lay
with the Women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, 1 Samuel 2.22. 3. From the season of committing the Sin, Isa. 58.3,
4. Behold in the day of your Fast, ye find pleasure, and exact all your labor,
etc. 4. From the Condition of the person that sins; He that eats bread with me,
lifts up his heels against me, Joh. 13.18. A familiar Friend proves a
treacherous Enemy. So Joh. 3.10. Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not
these things? 5. From the means the person enjoys; You only have I known,
therefore you will I punish for your Iniquities, Amos 4. Romans 2.7. 6. From the
manner of committing the Sin; So they spread Absalom a Tent on the top of the
house, and Absalom went in to his Fathers Concubins in the sight of all Israel,
2 Samuel 16.22. Impudency in sin does highly increase it. Were they ashamed when
they committed all these Abominations? No, they were not ashamed. But how far
are other Religions from observing, much more from condemning men for such
sinful circumstances?

CHAP. XXXI. The holiest have cause of humiliation.
8. IF Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission; I was
hungry, and ye gave me no meat, etc. Then it may inform us, That the best have
abundant cause of humiliation; for the best have in them abundant matter of
Condemnation. O how many are our Omissions every day, every hour, and by reason
of them we are obnoxious to Hell flames? Good Bishop Usher, who for Piety and
Learning, was honored through the Christian World; though he was early
converted, and feared the Lord in his Youth; though he was eminently
industrious in private, in his Family, in chatechising, and instructing, and
praying often every day with, and for them that were committed to his Charge.
Though he was a constant Preacher, and that with Judgment and Affection; Though
he was singularly famous for his many worthy pieces which he wrote in Latin and
English, yet after all this diligence and labor, when he came to die, Usher's
Life.
the last words almost which he was heard to speak, were, Lord, in special
forgive my Sins of Omission. Sins of Omission will at death lie heavier on our
hearts than we think for in life. If such a laborious person found cause of
bewailing his Omissions, surely much more cause have Loyterers as we are.

Omissions are fruits of Original Corruption as well as Commissions: It Is from
that dead stock that we are so defective in bringing forth good fruit. Paul
lays his Omissions at this door, Romans 7.17, to 23. In my flesh is no good.
When I would do good, evil is present with me, etc. Now whatsoever is the Child
of such a monstrous Parent is loathsome, and calls on us for sorrow and
self-abhorrency. Holy Job did but suspect his Children to be guilty of
Omissions, of not sanctifying the Name of God in their Hearts, according to
their Duties, at their Feasts and Meetings; And he rises early and offers
Sacrifice, according to the number of them all, Job 1.4, 5. He goes to God and
begs Pardon for them, and the blessing of God upon every one of them. It may
be, says he, my Sons have sinned, and cursed (and not blessed God, so Calvin
reads it,) God in their hearts: Thus did Job continually. Now if Job upon a
supposition that his Sons might be guilty of Omissions, was so constant in his
addresses to God on their behalf, by way of humiliation, acknowledging their
Iniquity, and beseeching his Mercy: What cause have we on the behalf of our own
Souls, who know that we often offend God by Omissions, and know not how often
we offend him by them? God may say to thee and me, Reader, Is not thy
Wickedness great, and Iniquities infinite, as he to Job, Job 20.5. Where by
Wickedness, Expositors understand Commissions, or those Sins by which we
prejudice or injure others, and by Iniquities, Omissions, by which we neglect,
according to our Duties, to relieve others. And Eliphaz calls his Wickedness
great, because, as I have showed in the first Information, they are in some
respects greater, more heinous than sins of Omission; and his Iniquities
infinite, because sins of Omission are more numerous than sins of Commission.
Corrupt Nature can much better forbear what it has an inclination and
propensity to, than do that which it has a dislike of, and an enmity against.

For their nature I have proved, that they are very ponderous, that they are
breaches of a positive Law, grieve the Holy Ghost, provoke God, defile the
Conscience; yea, and destroy the Soul for ever, (how light soever some make of
them,) and for their number they are infinite, beyond all account or
reckonings. If they were small sins, their number would compensate their
lightness; grains of sand are little, but an heap of them together is weighty,
Prove. 27.3. The sand is weighty. In many things we offend all, James 3.2. Now
how should the nature and number of these sins humble us every day before the
the Lord? What hour is there when we are awake, wherein we may not do more good
than we do? When did we in visiting a Friend, or conferring with a Neighbor,
advantage their Souls as we might and ought? Can we say that we have been as
diligent in our Callings, as watchful and exemplary in our Conversations, as
thankful for our Mercies, as fruitful under the Ordinances of God, and as
faithful in the improvement of our Talents as we are commanded to be? Do we
every day pray and read Scripture in our Closets and Families with that holy
reverence, humility, faith, seriousness and integrity which God requires? Do
not worldly concerns now and then contend with, and justle out the Worship of
the Great God, at least cause us to slip our Prayers, and adjourn the
Scriptures reading till a more convenient season? Are we every weekday
laborious in our Callings out of Conscience to Gods Precept, and not out of a
principle of Covetousness? Do we spend the greatest part of the day therein,
without diversions, by vain Companions, or needless Recreations? Are our
Affections in Heaven, and our Hearts above, while our Actions are earthly, and
our Hands are busy here below. And do we deal in all things with others, as we
would in the Judgment of sound reason that others should deal with us, Matthew.
5.12. Is our daily carriage toward our Relations sober, pious, affectionate,
exemplary, and in all things as becomes the Gospel of Christ? O how many are
our Omissions, and what millions of them are we guilty of, and therefore they
call aloud upon us to mourn for them? Others are in Hell, and must weep for
ever for them; where their Sighs and Sobs, and Prayers and Tears, will no way
advantage them. Blessed be God it is not so with us; though their Tears will
prove their Hell, our Tears, through the blood of Christ, may prove our Heaven.
Nehemiah, in the day of his solemn Humiliation with the Jews, acknowledges and
bewaileth their Omissions, their not hearkening to his Commands, and their not
minding the Wonders that he wrought for them, Neh. 9.16, 17. So Daniel, when he
fasted and prayed, and confessed his sins, and the sins of his people, bewails
their Omissions, Dan. 9.6. We have not hearkened unto thy Servants the Prophets
which spoke in thy Name, to our Kings, and Princes, and Fathers, and to all the
people of the Land, verse. 10. We have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God,
to walk in the Laws which he set before us, by his Servants the Prophets, verse.
13. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the Lord
our God. What then? why, he judges himself and his people for these sins, and
justifies God in all his severity. O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, but
to us confusion of face, as at this day, to the men of Juda and Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, verse. 7. So again, O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face: to our
Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee,
verse. 8. Omissions must be lamented in this or the other World; we must all be
ashamed of them here or hereafter; and is it not much better to bewail them
here, than to bewail them in Hell; to judge and condemn our selves for them,
than to be judged and condemned by God for them at the Great Day. Ah, at what a
cheap rate may a Christian, by Repentance, prevent that blow that will separate
him and all his happiness, and bring him to that Repentance which will ever be
repented of, but all to no purpose! Oh it is good to be wise on this side
another World.

CHAP. XXXII. Use of Trial, whether we be guilty of these Omissions or no.
Use 2. THis Doctrine may be useful in the second place by way of Examination
or Trial. If Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission,
then it concerns us to examine our selves, whether or no we are of the number
of them that shall be condemned for them at that day. Reader, it will not be
amiss for thee to retire out of the crowd of the World into thy Chamber, and
there to commune with thine own heart concerning thy present Condition, and how
thou art like to fare for the future; nay, it is of infinite weight and
concernment, and may be as much worth as thy Soul and eternal Salvation. How
many prove Bankrupts, and are quite undone for this World, for want of a timely
casting up their accounts. If they had cast up their accounts before, and
perceived how far they had ran behind-hand, they might have retrenched their
Expenses, and advised and consulted some way to have prevented their utter
destruction; but they neglected to cast up their accounts, till their accounts
cast them up, and it was too late to think of recalling what was past, or
remedying what was amiss. Thus many that are Professors, or Christians in
title, deal with their own Souls, and defer the trial of their estates till it
be too late to amend any thing amiss. If they would now in their health and
strength search and try their hearts and ways, if they found things ill, they
would have advantages and opportunities through the help of Christ to make them
better: They might seek the Lord while he would be found, and call upon him
while he is near. They might sue and seek to Christ for Eyesalve, that they
might see the things of their Peace; for Raiment to hide their Nakedness, that
it might not appear to their everlasting shame; and for Gold to enrich them for
ever, to make them more worth than both Worlds: If upon a faithful trial, they
found things well, it would rejoice their hearts, encourage them in ways of
holiness, and confirm them against Satan's Temptations to despair. But men
generally neglect their Examinations, till God comes to examine them (as the
Rulers commanded Paul to be examined) with scourgings and scorpions. They
presume all is well, hope the best, and would be sorry any should question
their estates, and thus persist in their self-deceits, till they come to appear
before God, that the gate of Mercy be shut, and the golden Scepter of Grace be
wholly withdrawn, and their estates become as desperate as the estates of the
Devils.

To urge this Use a little, Reader, consider these two particulars:

1. Consider of what weight it is, and how much depends upon this question. Am
I of the number of them that shall be condemned for sins of Omission or not? Or
am I guilty of Omissions, so as to be banished the presence of Christ for them
or not? I tell thee, thy eternal Joy or Sorrow, Happiness or Misery, Pleasure
or Pain depends on it. Do but read and consider, and then say whether it be not
of infinite weight; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you before the foundation of the World. For I was hungry, and ye gave me
meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. On the other side, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For I was hungry, and
ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Friend, are not
these weighty things that depend on the performance or neglect of these
positive Precepts? Come ye blessed of my Father. Is not a coming (close, near,
intimate, familiar, into his very bosom and dearest embraces,) to Christ a
weighty thing? To come to Christ here is so weighty, that he came to men into
this World to call them to him, Matthew. 11.28. Matthew. 9.13. But to come to
Christ there in all his Robes, and Riches, and Royalty, in all his Beauty, and
Glory, and Magnificence, will questionless be of more concern to the Soul. On
the contrary, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Is there not weight, Reader, in these words? Do thou
know what it is to bid Christ farewell, farewell for ever, to take an eternal
leave of all good? Can thou bear the extremity of our Culinary fires for a
day? Can thou dwell in everlasting burnings, or abide unquenchable flames?
Thou see all this depends upon thy performing or neglect of the Divine
positive Precepts. Does it not concern thee in a matter of such weight to be
faithful in the trial of thy self? Friend, are Life and Death? are eternal Life
and eternal Death indifferent things, or things of small moment? Are an eternal
enjoyment of God, or an endless separation from God mean or trivial things? Oh
how infinitely do they exceed and overbalance thy understanding! How short
must thou of necessity come of conceiving of these things according to their
weight? Alas, Friend, what pitiful toys and trifles are Houses, and Lands, and
Friends, and Relations, and Honors, and Preferments, I, and Liberty, and this
temporal Life, to an eternal happy Life.

2. Consider all are guilty of Omissions, even the Good as well as the Bad, and
therefore the more faithfulness, and prudence, and caution is requisite, lest
we mistake. If Saints and Sinners are both guilty of Omissions, how shall I
know whether my Omissions are such as will consist with Salvation, unless I try
and examine my self. The good man being guilty of Omissions, may fear the
dreadful Sentence of, Go ye cursed, etc. And the wicked man knowing that the
best are guilty of many Omissions, as well as he may presume upon the joyful
Sentence, Come thou blessed of my Father, etc. How shall each be rectified in
his mistake, and satisfied in the truth, but by an impartial and through
examination of himself? God has given us a Test, which is the word of Truth,
Ephesians. 1.13. whereby we may try our selves, and prevent all mistakes. Where there
is a possibility of a mistake in a business of such infinite weight, there is
sufficient ground for a serious trial; but where there is so great a
probability of mistaking, as a thing that is so easy and ordinary (because all
men are guilty too much of Omissions) there is a necessity of a faithful and
impartial trial. There is that makes himself rich, (in Temporals he is worth
thousands, in Spirituals he is rich toward God, and worth millions,) yet has
nothing, ( Orig. yet nothing, in him or to him he is nothing, he has nothing
for all his brags,) there is that makes himself poor, (speaks himself poor,
would have others think him poor,) yet has great riches, ( Hebr. yet much
substance; the man has a great Estate, but is willing to conceal it.
Merchants, who are worth thousands, do not publish or boast of their Wares or
Wealth about the City; those poor Creatures do it, who carry all their worth on
their Heads, or in their Arms.) Junius reads the words well, Est qui divitem se
jactat quum desint omnia, item qui pauperem se fingit cui substantia ampla.
There is that boasts himself rich, to whom all things are wanting; and that
feigns himself poor, yet has large substance. There is that boasts and brags
himself rich in the fear and favor of God, and will tell you of his communion
and converses with the Divine Majesty, of his love to, and delight in the Ways,
and People, and Ordinances of God; when all these things are wanting to him, he
has nothing at all in reality of any of them. There is that fains himself
poor, that dissembles (as it were) his estate, that is a Beggar (as some read
the word Poor here) in his own account, and would have all others judge him so
too; he is so covetous after more, that he over-looks what he has; and so
greedy of further seize, that he takes little notice of his present
spiritual enjoyments. If you will believe him, he is a mere Beggar, has not
one bit of bread to eat, and if his Father (in whose house there is bread
enough and to spare) do not pity and relieve his prodigal Child, he shall
perish for hunger; yet this man has much substance, is a man of worth and
wealth indeed. He is like a branch mightily laden with fruit, and an ear fully
laden with corn, which the heavier they are laden, the more they bow down to
the ground. A mere titular Christian, like an empty Vessel, may make a great
sound, but the full Vessel, that contains the precious Liquor, is silent.

I come now to the marks whereby men may know their estates. And for that end I
shall lay down several Propositions.

1. Proposition. Those that live in Commissions as well as Omissions, must
certainly be condemned at the Great Day. These bid open defiance to the
Prohibitions, Precepts, and Penalty of the Law, and dare the Law to do its
worst. Either these must be condemned, or all shall be saved. But God is of an
holier Nature than to dwell with such Sinners. They may read their doom written
under his own hand, and like the Law of the Medes and Persians, That cannot be
altered; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.5. Romans 8.5. To be carnally minded is death,
verse. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die.

2. Proposition. They who are guilty of total external Omissions, are in a
damnable Condition. This is written in broad Letters, that he who runs may read
it. They who pray not are under wrath, and the effusions of wrath, Jer. 10.
ult. They who neglect to pay their external Allegiance to the true God, and
deny him his outward Homage and Acknowledgment, shall be denied and disowned by
Christ, before his Father, and before his holy Angels. The Holy God does all
along speak of these as Heathens, Psalm. 79.6. and Sinners with a witness, Psalm.
36.1, 2, 3. and threatens that Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render
Vengeance on them, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. Those who are guilty of these total
Omissions, in regard of the matter of the Duties commanded them, are ungodly in
the highest degree, (for ungodliness strictly and properly speaks the neglect
of our Duties to God, and sins against the first Table, as unrighteousness the
neglect of our Duties to our Neighbor, and our Transgressions against the
Second Table,) and so none in the whole Scripture more obnoxious to wrath and
ruin, Psalm. 73.12. These are the Ungodly who prosper in the World, but mark
how soon they perish, verse. 18. Thou castest them down to destruction, and
utterly consumest them with terrors; 2 Pet. 3.7. Jude, verse. 4. and 15.

3. Proposition. Those who perform external Duties, and wholly neglect
internal, or please themselves in total inward Omissions, cannot be in a state
of Salvation. God will not be put off with the Body, without the Soul of
Religion. Indeed, external Duties are but the Garments or Clothes of Religion,
wherein it appears, and whereby it is known to the World; the life and power of
it consists in internal Performances, or those that are the motions and actions
of the Understanding, and Will, and Affections, as in the Knowledge of God, his
Being and Excellency, and the kindness he has for, and the love he has to
Mankind in Jesus Christ; as also in the choosing him for our richest Treasure,
and supreme Lord and Lawgiver, and in loving him with all the heart, and Soul,
and strength, and desiring his love above all the World, and delighting in his
Favor, as the Souls felicity, and seeking to please him, rather than to
command the Creation. A man without these is but the Picture of a Saint; he
has somewhat of the resemblance, but nothing of the reality of a Christian: He
has a form, but nothing of the power of godliness, (2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, to
7.) and therefore is in a state of perdition. The neglect of believing,
repenting, loving the Lord Jesus Christ, are all inward Omissions, (for these
are acts proper and peculiar to the Soul) and condemned in Scripture with the
most dreadful damnation, Mark 16.16. John 3. ult. Luke 13.3. 1 Cor. 16.22. If a
man pray, and pray wholly without Faith, and without fervency, Jam. 1. Jam. 5.
this is no way acceptable to God. All such prayers are howlings and bablings,
and of no sweet sound in Gods Ears, Hos. 7. Isa. 1.15, 16, 17. Whatsoever a man
does either by way of hearing, or singing, or praying, or receiving, if there
be not that dread of God, and love to his Name, and Faith in Christ, which are
the essentials of these Duties, all is as nothing.

4. Proposition. Those who allow themselves in partial Omissions, whether
external or internal, are in no good Condition. By partial Omissions, I mean at
sometimes, as for prayer; a man, it may be, prays in his Closet or Family
usually, but if any worldly business intervene and calls for his company, he
will as usually attend on that, and wholly omit his Closet and Family Duties
for that Morning or Evening. Or for a man to pray, as some do only at the
Evening, and not in the Morning; as if God were the God of the Night, and not
of the Day; or as some others, who will pray only upon the Lord's Day, as if God
had a right to them then, but not all the week after. Or when men perform some
religious Duties, and not others, will pray, but not read Scripture daily; or
pray, and read the Word, but not take notice of those under their Roofs, to
instruct, and admonish, and support them, as occasion is. Or some will perform
their Duties which immediately concern God, but will not be charitable to the
Poor, at least not in such a degree and measure as their Estates will bear, and
as God expects. These, and such like, I understand by partial and external
Omissions. What is meant by internal partial Omission is next to be considered.
Partial internal Omissions, are, when men oftentimes, though not constantly,
are negligent in the manner of performing their Duties; and though they be
formal, and superficial, and lazy, and slothful in the Worship of God; yet they
take little or no notice thereof. Indeed, sometimes they find some heat and
warmth, and this pleases them, but at other times they are cold and liveless
in their Duties, and this does not much displease them. They can commonly pray
as if they prayed not, and read as if they read not, and wait on God without
any suitable and considerable affections toward him, and not be disturbed at
it. These sudden heats at one time, and colds at another time, speak (the Body
out of order, and) the Soul not healthy. The next thing to be explained, is,
what is meant by allowing themselves in partial Omissions, and indeed the
stress of the Proposition depends on that. To allow themselves in these partial
Omissions notes these two things: To know these partial Omissions to be sins,
and yet to continue in them without any great disturbance or trouble of Spirit.
They must know that they are sins, otherwise continuance in them will not argue
a total want of Grace, or the predominant power of sensuality in the Soul. I
doubt not, but in many dark places of this Nation, there may be those who live
in a total Omission of some Duties, as praying with their Families, and a
strict sanctification of the Sabbath; or who yet fear God in truth, and make
great Conscience of their Conversations. These men neglect prayer, and devoting
the Sabbath wholly to God, etc. because they do not know them to be their
Duties. And where a man desires and endeavors to know his Masters Will, and
lives up to that Light God has given him, he may upon a general repentance
expect pardon through the blood of Christ for sins of Ignorance. But those who
live under the clear and plain, and full discovery of the Gospel, must know
that these Omissions are sins. Their Ministers are not so ignorant, or
unfaithful, as to leave them in the dark about such necessary Duties. Therefore
to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, James 4.
ult. The second thing in this allowance, is, to continue in these Omissions,
though we know them to be Sins, and to be little or nothing troubled for them.
And, I say, those who do so, are in no good Condition, they shall be condemned
at the Great Day. And my reasons are partly because its proper to a wicked man
to continue in sins. A sheep may fall into the Ditch and defile himself, but he
hastens out of it as soon as he can; but the Swine chooses a dirty place,
walloweth all the day long in the mud and mire. A Saint may fall into sin, but
he hasteneth to recover himself by repentance. A Sinner lives in it day and
night, Prove. 4.17. It Is their Food in the day, and their refreshment in the
night: Their sleep departs from them, unless they cause some to fall. Hence
we read, That sin is their Way, or Work, or Conversation, Isa. 55.7. Partly
because allowance of any sin is inconsistent with Grace. Sin and Grace are
contrary each to other; and therefore though they may be, and are in the same
Subject, yet they are not, they cannot be there together, but as Enemies
seeking the destruction one of another. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against Flesh; for these are contrary the one to the other. Fire
and Water are not more contrary than Vice and Grace, so that he who suffers
Vice without opposition, declares plainly that he has no Grace, for these
Enemies never meet but they fight. Therefore, Reader, examine thy self, thou
have laid down the Commission of Evil, but have thou taken up every known Duty?
Thy Reason will tell thee he is a bad Husband who drains his ground, and then
neither sows nor planteth it. It Is all one as if it had continued under
water; as good be undrain'd, as unimproved when drained.

CHAP. XXXIII. A Caution against sins of Omission, in regard of the matter of
Duties.
Ex. IF Christ will condemn men at the Great Day for sins of Omission: It may
exhort us to mind the doing of Good, as well as the forbearing of Evil, to be
as watchful against sins of Omission as well as against sins of Commission, and
make Conscience of Affirmative as well as Negative Commands. Do not think it
sufficient to forbear what is Evil, unless also thou do what is Good. It Is
good not to be evil in doing what the Law forbids, but it is evil also not to be
good in doing what the Law enjoins. The Minister is not a good Minister,
because he does not seduce, or mislead, or deceive his people, by false
Doctrine, or scandalous living, if he do not teach them the right ways of the
Lord, and be not instant with them in season and out of season, to Know, and
Adore, and Honor their Maker and Redeemer. A good Shepherd must look to good
Pastures for his Sheep, as well as defend them from Lions and Wolves. Paul
proves his Integrity by this, That he kept nothing back that was profitable for
his people, but taught them publicly, and from house to house, and that he
declared unto them the whole Counsel of God, Act. 20.21, 22, 27. The Magistrate
is not a good Magistrate, who can only say that he never oppressed or
persecuted the Innocent. He must be able to say with Job, that he relieved them
in their Necessities, and redressed them in their Grievances: I delivered the
Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help. I was eyes
to the Blind, and feet to the Lame. I brake the jaws of the Wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of his Teeth, Job 29.12, 15, 17. The Christian is not a good
Christian, that can only tell us that he is an harmless man, he does no
mischief, he wrongs none in thought, word, or deed. The barren Tree brings
forth no bad fruit, yet it is cut down for the fire. He is an evil man that
neglects what is good, as well as he that follows what is evil.

Ezekiel. 18.31.
Therefore, Reader, Cease to do evil, (but let not that suffice) learn to do
well, Isa. 1. Remember to watch against what is evil; But also to do good, and
to distribute, forget not: for with such Sacrifice God is well pleased, Heb.
13.16. To do good, and to pray in thy Closet and Family, and to read the
Scriptures, and to instruct thy Children and Servants, and to sanctify the
Lord's Day, and to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Afflictions; 2 Cor.
7.1.
forget not, for with such Sacrifice God is well pleased. Forsake the foolish,
(this is well, but not enough, and) walk in the way of Understanding.

The Law of God must be kept tenderly, as the very apple of our eyes, Prove.
7.2. The smallest dust will offend the eye, and the smallest Omission will
offend the Law. If thy Conscience be dispensatory, it is unholy. Friend, thou
have largely heard how far short a Negative Religion will bring thee of Heaven,
and can thou content thy self a moment therewith? Nay, thou have heard that
for all that thou shall be sent to Hell, and will thou rest one day or night
therein? O Friend, be wise in time, and mind positive godliness, whilst thou
have opportunity.

In these days of the Gospel, God is quick and speedy, sharp and severe with
men that are barren and unfruitful. Behold now, says the Baptist, the Ax is
laid to the root of the Tree. Behold, Consider, now at this time, when the
Redeemer is coming, whose way I am preparing; Now the Ax is laid to the root of
the Tree, Matthew. 3.10. He is now laying aside his Basket, and taking up the Ax;
yea, he lays his Ax at the root of the Tree, as one taking aim where to strike,
and how to fell the Tree with the greatest advantage; therefore it concerns
thee to be fruitful. Again, the Apostle tells us, That former times of gross
darkness were over-lookt by God, but now says he, Now his Son is come into the
World, and he reveals his Mercy and our Duty so fully and clearly; Now he
commands men every where to repent, Act. 17.29, 30. Now he exhorts fruits meet
for Repentance, or he will not wink at your Disobedience, but judge you to Hell
flames. And believe it, the Valley of Vision will prove the heaviest burden,
and the highest means will cast thy Soul into the lowest misery. Opportunities
of doing good to our own and others Souls, are choice Mercies. They are Talents
that must one day be reckoned for: Therefore says the blessed Redeemer in the
justification of Mary about the Ointment; Me ye have not always; the poor ye
have always, and may do them good when ye will; but me ye have not always. Mary
did well to improve the season she had in her hand, as knowing if once lost, it
was lost for ever.

The Apostle Paul upon this account advises the Galathians, While ye have
time, do good to all, Gal. 6.10. Nothing more sads and dulls the heart, when
one comes to die, says a Divine now with God, than his neglect of such
opportunities which God's Providence, Essex hearse, p. 19.
or his own Place, have put into his hands of doing or receiving good. Nor is
there a sharper Corrosive than the reflection upon those days and times that
have passed over him, Male aliud nihil agentem. Ah how sad and uncomfortable
will it be for thy time to be gone, when thy work is not done! when thy Sun is
setting, and the shadows of the Evening are stretching themselves upon thee,
for Conscience to give thee this salute, Thy day is passed, thy time is wasted,
the business of life is neglected, and now thine Errors can never, never be
amended. Ah what a dreadful hour will a dying-hour be to thee, when Conscience
shall plead against thee with Whips, and Scorpions, and Flames, and not the
dearest Friend or Relation thou have be admitted to plead for thee, or be able
to comfort thee! But if the day of death will be so uncomfortable, how terrible
will the Day of Judgment be? Then it is that the Saint shall reap the benefit
of all the good he has done, and the Sinner shall reap the mischief of all the
good he has omitted, or left undone. Then the idle Servant that did not trade
with his Talent, will be found an evil Servant, and as such condemned to the
Worm that never dies, and the Fire that never goes out, Mat. 25. Then the
unfruitful Factor will be found an unfaithful Factor, and as such disowned and
condemned by his Lord.

Reader, believe it, though thou may live by a Negative Religion, yet thou
can not die by it, much less stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ with
it. It Is true, even such a Religion is of high price with men, but if alone
it is abomination in the sight of God. Reader, let me reason the case with thee;
In other things all are for fruitfulness in what is good: The Husbandman would
have his ground fruitful in good Corn, as well as empty of weeds. He would have
his Cattle labor, and do him service, and thinks it not enough that they are
in the stable or fields and do him no hurt. The Master would have his Servant
industrious in his Shop or Field, or some way or other about his business, and
is not pleased to see him sit still all day, and forbear to purloin his Goods,
or fight with his fellow Servants. The Father who sends his Child to School,
would have him learn the Languages, and profit daily therein, and without this
will not be satisfied to hear that his Child sits still all day at School,
learns no Oaths or Blasphemies, calls no Names, abuses none of his Companions.
And, Reader, why should God be contented with thy harmlesness, when thou art
barren and unprofitable? Has not God as much right to thee as thou have to thy
Ground or Cattle? and art not thou as much bound to God as thy Servant or Child
is bound to thee? and why then should thou think to put God off with that in
thy self, which thou will not be put off with in thy ground, or Cattle, or
Servant, or Child? Besides, I must tell thee thou art not harmless, if thou
do no good, though thou live not in the Commission of gross Evils. The Tree
in the Garden that brings not forth good fruit is hurtful, though it bring not
forth evil fruit, partly because it cumbers the ground, and takes up room to no
purpose; partly because it draws the moisture of the earth to it, and so
hinders the thriving of those Trees that are near it, who, but for them, would
be more fruitful. So if thou neglectest what is good, though thou do no open
scandalous evil, thou art mischievous and hurtful in the place where thou
live. Thou take up the room of a Member that might be serviceable to God
and his Country. If thou were gone, there might be one in thy House, Place,
Lodging, kept and maintained by the Great Housekeeper of the World, with the
same Mercies with which thou live, that should adorn the Gospel, glorify the
Name of God, and edify the Souls of others; and do thou no harm then by
hindering such a one? Is not the Drone hurtful, which idleth all the day, and
lives upon the Bees labor, and forces them sometimes to want, because of her
Theft? Is not the Wem in the Body hurtful, when it serves to no use; yet sucks
away the nourishment from other parts of the Body. Does not that Factor wrong
the Master who imploys him, if he let his stock lie still, though he do not
waste it in Riotousness, and Drunkenness, and Filthiness, when the Master might
have had one in his place who would have traded with it; and (probably) have
improved it to his great advantage? Did ever any Merchant trust a Servant with
a stock to lie by him? Nay, is Nature it self content with the removal of what
is oppressive? does it not long and breath after what is perfective? Is not the
presence of malum, what is evil, a burden? So the absence of bonum, what is
good, occasion of complaint? There is ingrafted within us not only Bados, a
depth of distaste against feared Evils; but also Hiatus, large desires after
known Good. As Nature, much more does Religion call men off what is bad, and
provoke men to what is right, and just, and good.

Reader, let me come up a little closer to thee; What is it that I am advising
thee to? Is it any thing that is evil? If it be, reject and renounce it. Is it
not to be good, and to do good? I will tell thee what I would desire of thee,
and then do thou judge whether I advise thee as a Friend, or whether my Counsel
be worth harkening to or no?

1. Take heed of external Omissions. If thou have been faulty herein, I would
advise thee every day to mind Prayer, Scripture, watchfulness over thy Heart,
Tongue, and Actions, diligence in thy Calling, faithfulness in thy Relations,
and to do good to others as thou have opportunity. Hereby thou will acknowledge
thy dependence on, and subsistence by the blessed God, to whom thou art bound
by millions of Obligations: Hereby thou will procure his Protection of thy
Person, Provision for thy Family, and Benediction on thy Calling, and all thine
Undertakings. And is this ill Counsel, to direct thee to the way how to procure
his Favor which can sweeten the bitterest Condition, and turn the most
loathsome Prison into a lovely Palace, and an Hell of misery into an Heaven of
Mercy? Friend, do I advise thee for thy hurt, when I advise thee daily to walk
and converse with the blessed and glorious God? Is not his Law worth observing,
his Glory worth advancing, and his Service worth minding, and his Love worth
accepting, when he can make thee miserable or happy with a word, in an instant;
when thou and all thou have are in his hand every moment, to be disposed of for
Good or Evil, altogether at his Pleasure, when he can with the breath of his
Nostrils, with the blast of his Lips, with a glance of his Eye, send thee to
Hell, where the Worm never dies, and the Fire never goes out? Friend,
consider it, Is it not good advice to wish thee to sue and seek to him, to pray
to and please him, upon whom thine unchangeable Felicity or Misery depends,
and who shall judge thee to thine everlasting state of Life or Death? Is it not
good to have the King thy Friend? how many Pleasures may he do thee? and how
many Favors may he bestow on thee? But how much better is it to have the King
of Kings thy Friend? What Pleasure is there which he cannot do thee? what
Favor which he cannot bestow on thee? He can give thee Earth, Heaven, Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, Life, Health, Food, Raiment, Friends, Relations, his Day,
his Word, his Ordinances, his Love, his Image, his Peace, his Joy, his Spirit,
his Son, Himself, every Good, any Good, all Good. O how blessed is he that has
this God! But, Reader, would thou have all these without so much as asking
for them? We say, they are poor Favors that are not worth asking. Sure I am,
these Mercies are of more value than thine Understanding can conceive; and
therefore must deserve more Prayers, and Tears, and Groans for them than thou
art capable of giving. Do not any day, upon any pretense, omit to offer up thy
Morning and Evening Sacrifices. Remember, so often as thou neglectest
Morning-Prayer, so often thou art all the day naked, destitute of thy spiritual
Guard, and exposed to all manner of Evils and Enemies, and do fore-speak thy
self an evil Day; and so often as thou omittest Evening-Prayer, thou presumest
upon sleep, and rest, and safety, without God's leave, and fore-speakest thy
self an evil Night? What did Thomas lose by one Omission. Jesus appeared the
first day of the week to his Disciples, but Thomas, says the Text, was not
there, Joh. 20.24. But what is the issue of this Omission? truly, by his
neglecting this opportunity of confirming his Faith, he falls into a desperate
fit of Unbelief. When the Apostles told him, That they had seen the Lord, He
presently answers, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the Nails, and
put my finger into the print of the Nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe, Joh. 20.24, 25. Ah what had become of Thomas, if infinite
Majesty had not stooped to recover him!

2. Take heed of internal Omissions. In the next place I advise thee to look
seriously to the manner of thy performances, to be sure that thou worship God
with thy Heart and Affections. This is the chief, and substance, and heart of
thy Performances, according to which they shall be accepted or not. In all thy
Addresses draw nigh to God with an humble Faith and Confidence, as to a Father,
ready, able, and willing to supply all thy wants, and answer all thy Doubts,
and to grant all thy Prayers and Desires; as also with a cheerful reverence and
awfulness, as to a God infinite in his Being, and in all his Perfections,
between whom and thee a poor worm there is an infinite distance. In every Duty,
Let thy Faith in Christ, thy Love to God, and thy Repentance from dead Works be
exercised. Hereby thy Duties will be more comfortable to thy self. Men that
perform Duties in a round, out of custom, or for fashionsake, have no pleasure
therein, are backward to them, untoward at them, and careless after them. They
come to them with trouble, as to that to which their hearts have a reluctance,
and go from them with joy, as from that which was burdensome and tedious to
them. But when men pray with a sense of their wants, and beg mercy, with hope
in the blood of Christ, and have their love and joy acted in their Duties, how
sweetly do they come off? nay, how pleasant are they in the very performance of
them? Communion with God in them brings peace and comfort indeed. Now, Reader,
do I advise thee to thy hurt, when I advise thee to the life of a Saint, to the
life of an Angel; to a life of love, and joy, and delight in the Father of
Mercies, and God of all Consolations? Is not this Life the Suburbs, the
Earnest, the First Fruits of the life of the Blessed, of the life of those
heavenly Courtiers, who bathe themselves without intermission in Springs of
Joy, and in Rivers of Pleasures? And by this care of thine about the manner of
performing thy Duties, they will be the more acceptable to God. He commands the
Heart, Prove. 23.26. delights in truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. and is
nigh to them that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 34. How pleasing would it be to
thee to know thy prayers and readings to be pleasing to God; Jer. 30.21. And I
will cause him to draw near and to approach unto me: (i. e. with welcome and
acceptance,) for who is this that engages his heart to approach unto me? If
thou bring thy Heart to a Duty, God will bring his Ear to hear thee.

In the prosecution of this Use, I shall, first, lay down some Arguments or
Motives to enforce it.

2. Lay down the cause of these Omissions, which are so frequent among us.

3. Prescribe somewhat for the Cure and Remedy thereof.

CHAP. XXXIV. Arguments against Omissions. The positiveness of our Rule, and of
Gods Mercies.
I Begin with the first, viz. The Arguments to move us to mind positive Duties.

1. Consider the Law which God has given us for the Rule of our Lives, is both
positive and negative; and therefore our Obedience must be such. What need
positive Precepts, but to require positive Practices? Single Prohibitions would
have sufficed for a negative Religion. The Law is holy, (in its Commands that
immediately concern God) just, (in what it commands concerning our Neighbors)
and good, (in what it commands concerning our selves) Romans 7.12. Look to the
Moral Law, every negative command has a positive Precept. Take the Prophets
all along that speak in the Name of the Lord, and we shall find that they still
enjoin Duty, as well as forbid Sin, Deuteronomy. 12.29. to the end. Take heed that
thou be not snared by following the Nations that are destroyed before thee; and
that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How did these Nations serve
their gods? even so will I do likewise. Here is Sin forbidden: But mark also
Duty is commanded, What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Nay, a Copy of this Law both
positive and negative must be written out by the Magistrate, that we might
observe it; and it was also written in a Book by Moses, and put into the Ark,
as a witness against the Israelites, if they should not observe it, Deuteronomy.
31.24, 25, 26. Joshua succeeds Moses in his Charge over the Jews, and in his
Commands to them both affirmatively and negatively, Joshua 23.7. Samuel follows
after and speaks the same Language, Serve the Lord with all your heart, fear
him, and serve him in truth: And turn ye not aside, for then ye should go after
vain things, which cannot profit or deliver, for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12.20,
21, 24. David does the like, Depart from evil, and do good, Psalm. 34.14.
Solomon writes after his Fathers Copy in the very qualifications of those whom
he entreats Mercy for. If they sin, and afterward bethink themselves, and
turn, (i. e. from their sins,) and return unto thee with all the Heart, and
with all the Soul, then hear thou from Heaven, from thy Dewlling Place, 2 Chronicles. 6.36, to 40. Isaiah calls on men not only to forsake their evil ways and
evil thoughts, but also to return unto the Lord, Isa. 55.7. Jeremiah cries to
his people, Not to oppress the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widows; and
also thoroughly to execute Judgment between a man and his Neighbor, Jer. 7.5,
6. So Ezekiel and the rest of the Prophets, Ezekiel. 18.21. Our Savior in his
Exposition of the Law, does forbid what is Evil, and command what is Good,
Matthew. 5.43, 44. So Matthew. 7. per tot. The Apostle St. Paul commands Not to be
conformed to the World, there is the Prohibition; but to be transformed, by the
renewing of our mind, proving what is the good, and perfect, and acceptable
will of God, there is the Precept, Romans 12.1, 2. Again, Put off the works of
Darkness, put on the armor of Light. Put off the old man, which is corrupt
according to his deceitful lusts. And put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Lie not one to
another, but speak the truth. The Apostle St. James tells us, Religion
consists in Negatives and Positives also, James 1.21, 22, 26, 27. So St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12. St. Joh. 3.9, 10. Jude, verse. 21, 22,
23. Thus we see through the whole Bible the Mind of God, by his Messengers, to
be Positive as well as Negative, and this Mind of his he has ordained to be
the rule of our Hearts and Lives; and what shall we answer when we shall be
called to an account for our Disobedience? To what purpose is a Rule, if it be
not followed? and to what end is the Penalty denounced against the Ungodly, if
it be not executed?

This is the Voice of the Law of God, and therefore, Reader, either thou must
betake thy self to practical godliness, or else disown the Scriptures for thy
rule and square. Thy Duty must (at least in thy desires and endeavors) carry
some proportion to thy standard and rule, or else thy Religion is a mere
cipher, and signifies nothing.

So far as the best come short of the Law they sin, 1 John 5.3. Sin is a
transgression of the Law. And that because the Law is given to him as a rule of
Life, God has therefore qualified it with the porperties of a Rule: 1. A Rule
must be perfect, and not defective, not redundant; The Law of the Lord is
perfect, Psalm. 19.7. 2. A Rule must be plain, not dark; All her ways are plain
to him that understands. 3. A Rule must be published and known, otherwise
it is a snare to entrap men. God has proclaimed his Law; The Command is not
hidden from thee, nor far off, Deuteronomy. 30.11. It Is not in Heaven, that thou
should say, Who shall go up for us thither, and fetch it thence, that we may
hear it, and do it? Nor beyond the Seas. But the Word is very nigh unto thee,
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, (12, 13, 14, verses,) that thou may do them.
4. A Rule is that by which men shall be judged, so is this Law, Joh. 12. 48.
The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day.

2. The Mercies of God to thee are positive as well as privative; and why
should not thy Duty be suitable to the Divine Bounty. God is not only a Shield
to defend thee from evil in thy Body, in thy Soul, in thy Person, in thy
Relations; in thine Outgoings and in thine Incomings, by Night and by Day, at
all times, and in all places; but he is also a Sun to refresh thee with good,
with temporal good, Food, Raiment, Friends, Relations, Sleep, Liberty, Wealth,
esteem in the World, etc. With spiritual good, with Sabbaths, Scriptures,
Sacraments, seasons of Grace, with the tenders of Pardon, and Peace, and
Adoption, and eternal Salvation, upon excellent and equitable terms. And what
reason can we give why our Obedience should not bear a proportion to his
Beneficence. He is a Sun and a Shield, and gives Grace and Glory, and
withholds no good things from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.

Shall God withold no good thing from thee, and can thou find in thy heart
to deny the doing of any good thing for him? Is his Bounty of so large an
extent, as to comprehend protection from all Evil, and the fruition of all
good? and must thy Duty be so narrow and scanty, as if he did not deserve so
much as he requires? Is it honest to receive or buy in by one Measure, and to
return and sell out by another? Diverse Weights and diverse Measures, both of
them are abomination to the Lord.

A Weight and a Weight, a Measure and a Measure, one to buy with that is large,
another to sell with that is less; I only allude to it. It Is abominable for
thee to receive of God by the largest measure, and to return to him by the
least. Reader, if thou art born of God, and guilty of these partial temporary
Omissions, consider it seriously, let ingenuity plead for God. When he first
wrought upon thy Soul, he did not only translate thee out of the Kingdom of
Darkness, but also bring thee into the Kingdom of his dear Son. He did not only
turn thee from Satan, but also cause thee to return to himself. He brought thee
out of a state of Wrath, and brought thee into a state of Love and Favor, 1
Pet. 2.9. He redeemed thee from those Enemies which had carried thee Captive,
Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, Romans 6.11. Ephesians. 2.3, 4. Heb. 2. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. But this is not all, he has also brought thee into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God, 1 John 12. 1 John 3.1. He has delivered thee
from this present evil World, (that its affrightments, its allurements, that
all its power and policy shall not be able to destroy thee,) but this is not
all, he has made thee an Heir of a better World. Of a Child of the Devil, thou
art made a Child of God, of a Slave to sin, a Citizen of Sion; nay, he does not
only free thee from damnation, and the curse of the Law; but also give thee the
blessing of eternal life in and with himself among his innumerable Company of
Angels, and the Congregation of the Firstborn. Now, Reader, judge whether it
be not very disingenious to receive from God all sorts of Mercies, and to give
to God not half the Duties we owe to him. How can thou mete to God one
measure, and expect from him another? Friend, God does not put thee off with
half-Happiness; and why should thou put him off with half-Holiness?

CHAP. XXXV. Arguments against Omissions. Christ purchased positive as well as
negative Holiness, and our Privileges oblige to both.
3. COnsider Christ died to purchase positive as well as negative godliness for
men; and will thou disappoint him of the Fruits of his Death? Indeed, if it had
been possible for him to have bought man's deliverance from sin, without the
re-impression of Gods Image on the Soul, he had been but half a Savior, and
made us at the most but half happy: But according to the Apostles phrase, he
saves perfectly, or to the utmost, upon all accounts, and in all respects, Heb.
7.25. and in order thereunto, bought man off from sin, and unto the Service of
God. He redeems us from sin: We are redeemed, says the Apostle, from our vain
Conversation received by tradition from our Fathers. Not with corruptible
things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without spot and blemish, 1 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19. He redeems also unto his own
Service, Chap. 3. verse. 18. of the same Epistle, He suffered, the Just for the
Unjust, to bring us to God. He died, that we might die to sin; and he died,
that we might live to God. He suffered, to bring us off from our cursed
loathsome Lusts; and he suffered, to bring us to the Fear, and Love, and
Service of the blessed and glorious Lord. We have both these ends of our
Saviors Sufferings mentioned in Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself (his Death is
called a giving himself, because it was voluntary, and a freewill Offering) for
us, (here is his Passion; but what ends had he in his eye? truly both these,)
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, (make us negatively religious, in
freeing us from the bondage of sin) and purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works; i. e. make them positively holy. None are purified
without positive qualifications, and gracious habits in the Soul. To be
purified unto himself, is to be thus qualified for the honor and service of
Christ. And to make it more plain, the Apostle tells us, To purify unto
himself a peculiar people, (a people that shall disown all other Lords, and all
other Work, and shall be his Servants, and do his Work only,) zealous of good
works. He did not die only to make men good, and to enable men to do good; but
also to cause them to do good with heat, and heart, and fervency of Spirit.
Nay, it is evident, that to make men positively pious, was the main and
principal end of his Passion; and that his delivering us from sin, was only in
order to this, to his adorning us with Sanctity. As a man cannot put on new
Robes till he has first put off his old Rags, so a man cannot put on the new
man, the beautiful Image of the heavenly, till he has put off the old man, the
abominable Image of the earthly Adam, Luke 1.74, 75. We are delivered out of
the hands of our Enemies, that we should serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our lives. He plougheth up the fallow ground of
the Heart, and kills the weeds of sin, in order to the casting in the seed of
Grace into the Soul.

Now, Reader, consider, if Christ died to purchase positive Holiness for thee;
what hope can thou have of an interest in his Death without it? Can thou
think he bought one for thee without the other, or that thou may be a partial
sharer in his Death? And what will thou do without an interest in his
Sufferings? Except he wash thee in his blood, thou have no part in him; and if
thou have no part in him, thy part must be among Devils and damned Spirits.
Again, will thou by thy Omissions deny and deprive Christ of that Service,
which he has bought so dearly? Alas, how little is it that thou art able to do
for him, when thou do all thou can! And how much did that cost him? what
pangs and throws did he bear? what rage from men? what wrath from God? how did
he wrestle with the Frowns and Fury, with the Power and Policy of the World and
Hell? And after all this, do thou grudge him that poor Service, for which he
was hungry, and thirsty, and weary, and tempted, and betrayed, and crucified?
Whether we live, says the Apostle, we live to the Lord; whether we die, we die
to the Lord: whether we live or die, we are the Lords. To this end Jesus died
and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and Living, Romans 14.7,
8. Thou would take it ill thy self to be denied the Service of that, for
which thou have so dearly paid. O think of it, when thou art guilty of
Omissions in the matter or manner of Duties, I now rob Jesus Christ of that
which he bought with his most precious blood, and let him see the travail of
his Soul upon thee, and be satisfied.

4. Consider the Privileges thou enjoyest call aloud upon thee to mind
positive Holiness, and to do good as well as to forbear evil. I am sure thy
Privileges are positive, and so should thy Piety be. What is the Gospel but a
Cabinet of precious Jewels, a River of living water, a Case of the richest and
costliest Cordials, a Counterpart of Heavens eternal Court-Rolls, concerning
the Philanthropy, or kindness of God to Mankind, wherein are all sorts of
blessings for Body and Soul in every condition treasured up. The enjoyment of
it is a special singular Privilege, the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.8, 9. The Ministration of Righteousness far above the Legal Ministration. The
Psalmist tells us, The Laws God gave to the Israelites were a special
distinguishing Mercy; He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with every Nation; as for his
Judgments they have not known them, Psalm. 147.19, 20. But his
Gospel Dispensation is an higher and greater Favor. But what does this
Gospel-Priviledge call for? surely positive as well as negative godliness. The
Grace of God (the Gospel is so called, because it declares it to us, 2 Timothy
1.10. and interests us in it as an Instrument thereof, Romans 1.16.) which
brings Salvation, (which proclaims Life upon holy Conditions) teaches us,
that denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, (Commissions against the first
and second Table, but that is not all,) we should live righteously, soberly,
and godly (righteously toward men, soberly in relation to our selves, godly in
the Duties that concern God,) in this present evil world. The Gospel allows of
Omissions no more than the Law, and is so far from indulging men in sin,
because it has mercy for the penitent Sinner, that it adds stronger
Obligations to Obedience, and threatens more severe condemnation to the
Disobedient, 2 Cor. 5.15, 16. Heb. 10. Again, the Promises which have in their
bowels all the good of Heaven and Earth, all the blessings of this Life and a
better, which are as much worth as both worlds, 1 Timothy 4.8. which are exceeding
great (in their quantity) and precious, (in their quality) 2 Pet. 1.4. and the
peculiar portion of Gods own Children, Heb. 6.17. who are the only Heirs of
them, and all others strangers to them; and therefore miserable, and in an
hopeless and desperate Condition. These Promises are so far from excusing or
exempting from these positive Duties, that they engage us the more firmly to
them, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore, dearly beloved, these Promises, (that God
will be our Father, and we shall be his Children, etc. Chap. 6. verse. 18.) let
us cleanse our selves from all pollutions of Flesh and Spirit, (but this is not
all) and perfect holiness in the fear of God. The Promises do not only bind to
Purity, but also to Proficiency therein, till we come to perfection; And
perfect holiness in the fear of God. The Covenant of Grace, which is a Mine of
unsearchable Riches, a Book wherein every leaf, nay every line speaks Love and
Life; which contains more mercy in it (even the boundless God) than Heaven and
Earth are able to contain; this requires positive as well as negative holiness,
Deuteronomy. 26.17. nay it engages for both, Ezekiel. 36.25. From all your Idols and
from all your filthiness will I cleanse you: But more than this, 26, 27,
verses, I will take away your heart of stone, and give you a heart of flesh. I
will put my Spirit into you, and ye shall keep my Commandments, and do them. So
that all these Privileges are to no purpose, if we be not provoked by them to
do good, and perform the Duties which are the Conditions of them. Reader, think
of it, why should God give thee Precepts, to direct thee about the matter and
manner of performing thy Duties and Promises, to encourage thee to diligence
and faithfulness therein, if thou may live in the Omission of them? Surely
such infinite cost calls for some great care and conscienciousness in thy
Conversation. Might not God by virtue of his Dominion over thee, as grand
Proprietor of the Universe, have required this at thine hands? but when he is
so gracious as to sue to thee, and to allure thee, and seek to draw thee by
such Cords of love, will thou stand out and deny him? O blush for shame, that
thou have neglected so long the wooings, and beseechings, and entreaties of
such a glorious Gospel, and such precious Promises, and such an inestimable
Covenant! The greater the Charge God is at with thee, the greater should be the
Service thou do him. Where the ground is well dunged, and dressed, and
watered, and manured, a greater Crop is expected by the Husbandman. I must tell
thee, Friend, that thou will one day find, That to whom much is given, of him
much will be required, (Luke 12.48.) and that God expects Returns answerable to
thy Receipts. Do not imagine, as some vainly have done, that the bare enjoyment
of these Privileges will save thee; I must tell thee, and that from Gods own
mouth, they will be so far from it, that they will make Hell fire the hotter
for thee, and much deepen thine eternal condemnation, Matthew. 11.21, 22, 23.
Jer. 7.3, 4. Amend your ways and yours doings, and trust not in lying words,
saying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord
are these. Such Privileges without positive holiness do but usher men to an
hotter Hell.

CHAP. XXXVI. Arguments against Omissions. We profess our selves Gods Servants,
and all our Religion will come to nothing without positive holiness.
5. COnsider you are the professed Servants of God, and will you not do your
Masters business? You are baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; you own your Baptism, by your attendance on God (though but sometimes)
in public Ordinances. You wear the Livery of Christ before the World, and if
any ask you, what you are? you say a Christian; or whose you are? you say you
belong to Jesus Christ. And, Friend, will you pretend to be Gods Servant, and
neglect his business? This is but to put a mock and cheat upon him; like him in
the Gospel, who when he was bid go work in the Vineyard, said, I go, but went
not. If I be a Master, where is your fear, Mal. 1.7. If God be your Master,
where is your fear of displeasing him, either by neglecting what he enjoins, or
doing what he forbids. True, Servants are not at their own, but at their
Masters pleasure and disposal, as the Centurions Soldiers, when the Master
says, Go, they go, when he says, Come, they come; when he says, Do this,
they do it, Matthew. 8.9. The Redeemer himself, when he took upon him the form of
a Servant, and became so to his Father, Phil. 2.7. Isa. 53.10. did not what he
himself would: I came not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me, Joh. 6.38. And as the Father gave me Commandment, so do I, Joh. 14.31. And
to show his faithfulness in that relation, when he came to die, he tells his
Father, I have glorified thee on the Earth, and finished the work thou have
given me to do, Joh. 17. Nay, the very irrational and inanimate Creatures are
the Servants of God, and as such do him positive service. The Psalmist speaks
of the Heavens and the Earth, with the Creatures therein. All are thy Servants,
at thy beck and bidding, at thy call and command, Psalm. 119.91, If thou speak
to the Sun, it rises not; if thou speak again, it will stand still; if thou
speak a third time, it will move faster or slower, which thou please.

If thou command the Stars, they will fight in their courses against thine
Enemies, and serve thee faithfully after their manner, as their Lord of Hosts.

Nay, those Creatures which seem most stubborn and rebellious, being Gods
Servants, are pliable to his pleasure. Fire, and Hail, and stormy Winds, fulfill
his Word, Psalm. 148.8. Reader, what do thou think of these examples, thou
see the Highest, the Heir of all things, when he became his Servant, did his
Will and Work, for thee fulfilled all righteousness, and went about doing good,
Act. 10. And thou see the lowest Beings, Gods Servants, do not only forbear
doing evil, but after their manner, analogically they do good, and positively,
serve God; and will thou content thy self with a bare forbearance of what is
evil, and be shamed by inanimate Creatures, who according to their natures in
their places do good. Why do thou call thy self a Christian, if thou will not
follow the pattern of Christ? and how can thou profess thy self Gods Servant,
if thou will not do him Service? Know ye not, says the Apostle, that to whom
ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey,
Romans 6.16. Either obey God as a Servant ought, or disown him to be thy Master.
Can he be said to be thy Servant, who neglects thy work, though he do thee no
mischief? Another man's Servant in this respect may as properly be said to be
thine; for as he minds not thy business, so he does thee no prejudice. I must
speak plainly to thee; if thou allowest thy self in these Omissions, thy
practices give the lie to thy profession, and thou art the Devils Servant,
though thou wearest Gods Livery. I shall end this Head, with commending to thee
the counsel of Christ; You call me Lord and Master, and thou say well, for
so I am. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, and gone about
doing good, how much more should you my Servant.

6. Consider all your Religion is nothing, and will come to nothing, if you
live in the neglect of Gods positive Will. And will you deny your self once and
again in forbearing many things that would delight and gratify your Flesh, and
possibly incur the anger of your profane Neighbors, for not running with them
to the same excess of riot, and then lose all for want of doing what is
commanded thee. Would not thou think him a foolish Husbandman, that should
take care for the casting out the stones, and plucking up the weeds out of his
ground, and then lose all his cost and pains for want of sowing it with good
seed? Would it not vex a Scrivener, after he had taken much pains, and spent
much time about a large Deed, or Conveyance, after he had taken great care to
write it fair, without any blots, to be forced to write all over again, for his
omission of some material passage in it? The Apostle writes to the Elect Lady,
2 John 1.8. Look to your selves that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward. If he that does not persevere in
well-doing, may deprive himself of all the benefit of his good deeds which he
has already done; what benefit can they expect, who never began to do good?
How can their good works follow them to their comfort into the other World, who
never did any? Or how can God Register their Prayers, and Watchings, and
Fastings, and Weepings for Sin, and acts of Devotion in his Book of
Remembrance, who never minded them, Rev. 14.13. Mal. 3.7. Christ tells us,
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man according
to his Works, Rev. 22.12. Now, Reader, if thou contentest thy self in thine
Omissions, what Works have thou for Christ to reward? all the reward of a
negative Holiness is but a cooler Hell, and, God knows, that is small
comfort. Thou have no work of Faith, or labor of Love, or patience of Hope, or
fervency in Prayer, or breathings and longings after conformity to, and
communion with the blessed God for Christ to Record and Reward. The Holy Ghost
when he tells us, That God will render to every man according to his deeds,
presently subjoyns, To them who by patient continuance in well-doing (i. e.
positive Holiness,) seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, everlasting
life, Romans 2.6, 7. Virtutis est magis honesta agere quam non turpia, as he said
well. It Is rather the property of Virtue to do things laudable, than not to do
things loathsome.

A negative Christian in Gods account is no Christian; and though he may stand
for somewhat among men (that are no better than himself) yet he is a mere
Cipher in the account of God. God sees that as he is not outwardly bad, so he
is not inwardly good; and that he is at a greater distance from Piety than from
Profaneness, and he looking most to the heart and bent thereof, Psalm. 51.7. 1 Samuel 15. must needs loath a filthy unclean Conscience under a fair civil
Conversation.

A Tree may be full of Vermin, when the green leaves may hide them from the
eyes of men. So the vermin of Pride, and Unbelief, and Hypocrisy, may crawl
in thy Heart, though thy civility may hide them from the sight or suspicion of
thy fellow Creatures. We say, All is not Gold that glisters, much less is
shining-civility sincere sanctity. The Jews who obeyed some of Gods Laws,
because they lived in the wilful breach of others, are said to have done
nothing of all his Commands, Jer. 32.23. And they came in, and possessed it (i.
e. the Land of Canaan) but they obeyed not thy Voice, nor walked in thy Law:
They have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do. It seems
strange that the Indictment should run so high, as to accuse them of the breach
of every Law, and the neglect of every positive Precept? surely the Jews
offered Sacrifice, circumcised their Children, kept the Passover, observed
their new Moons and Sabbaths, and did many things which God commanded them to
do; and yet here they are charged to do nothing that God commanded them to do.
Truly, because they had not a conscientious eye to every known Duty, but
allowed themselves in the Omission of some, God reckons that they obeyed him in
none, and deals with them as if they had done nothing of all that he commanded
them. Now, Reader, if they who perform some positive Duties, are counted by God
as performing none, if they wilfully neglect any, what a pitiful nothing will
God reckon thy Religion, if it be wholly negative, without any positive
Obedience at all. Though brass Coin be not so bad as Leathern, yet not being so
good as Silver, it is little accounted. Though thou art not as bad as the
scandalous, yet if thou art not as good as the truly pious God will not esteem
thee. For what is highly esteemed of men, may be an abomination in the sight of
God.

Reader, weigh this Argument; would thou lose all the pains thou take to
forbear what is evil? art thou contented to work all thy days at the
Labour-invain? Can thou be satisfied that thy negative Religion should be
counted at the Great Day a Nullity, or no Religion at all? Little do thou
think how deep it will cut thy heart to find thy civility judged by God himself
to be but varnished Heathenism, or glistering Impiety. The young man who was
more than a mere negative Christian, thought his condition safe and sound; but
when Christ discovered him insincere, he went away as heavily as he came to him
hastily. Probably thy hopes are great; but I must tell thee, thy disappointment
will be the more grievous; when thou shall find thy self deceived, and that
thou have all thy life long been a labourious Loyterer, and done nothing. The
greater rise thine expectation had, and the higher thy hope was, the more
bruising will thy fall be, and the heavier thy heart for ever.

CHAP. XXXVII. Arguments against Omissions. God deserves our positive Obedience
before all others; and true Sanctification cannot be without it.
7. COnsider God deserves your positive Obedience as well as your Negative.
Friend, if God has thy negative Obedience, some other has thy positive, (for
I cannot suppose thee idle all the time of thy life) either the Devil, or the
World, or the Flesh: Man cannot live without a Master, whose work and business
he will do. Now let thy Conscience judge which of these deserves thy Service
best. If as Alexander said (when asked of his Kingdoms, who should inherit them
after his death,) Let them be given to the most worthy. Thou will for the
future give thy Affections and Conversation to the most worthy, I doubt not but
thou will quickly give them to God. For the Devil, surely thou will not for
shame put him in composition with God. Is not he an old Serpent, solicitous
night and day with his wiles, and snares, and devices, to deceive thee? And is
not he a roaring Lion, seeking continually how he may devour thee? 2 Cor. 11.3.
Ephesians. 6.11. Rev. 12.9. 1 Pet. 5.8. Is not his emnity such against God, that he
hates thee for his sake, and improves all his power and policy to bring thee to
be a partaker of the same misery and wretchedness with himself? and is he fit
to be thy Master? Art thou willing to be his Servant? yet I must tell thee, if
thou wilfully neglectest the work of God, thou art of thy Father the Devil, if
the Devil and his works thou do, Joh. 8.44. And remember, the Redeemer had
not died to subdue the Devil to us, if it had not been cruel bondage for man to
be enslaved to him, Heb. 2.

For the world, what is in it that should deserve thy service? I am sure God
made the World for thee, and not thee for the World; and the end is more
excellent than the means: God made the World to serve thee, and not thee to
serve the World. Is it Riches that thou payest thy Homage to? Ah how infinitely
inferior are they to thy spiritual Soul! Is it not a rare lovely sight to see a
noble Heaven-born immortal Spirit truckle, and bow, and submit, and be a drudge
and slave to white and yellow dust, to the guts and garbage of the Earth? Is
not this a fine sight think thou, for thy Love and Desires, and Joys and
Delights, like Moles to be grovelling in the Earth, when high and noble Objects
worthy of them are always before thee expecting them?

Or is it the Honor of the World which thou adorest? Do thou know what an
Idol thou have set up in thine heart? A Vapor, a Wind, the stinking breath of a
company of ignorant vile people, who understand nothing of true worth or
excellency. Where is this? or what is this God whom thou worshippest? a
fashion, (...), 1 Cor. 7.31. a mathematical Figure, somewhat in show, nothing
in substance, (...), a fancy, Act. 25.23. that has an existence in the brain,
but no where else. It Is as an echo to the Ear, which is a voice, a buz, a hum,
and no more. It Is as a Picture to the Eye, which has some shape, but no life.
In brief, honor of the World is so poor, so pitiful, so inconsiderable a
thing, that a wise man would not give a farthing for it.

Or is it Pleasure, that bewitching Bait, that sugared Poison, which has caught
and killed many? Thou know not what thou do, when as the Apostle says,
Thou servest diverse lusts and pleasures, (Tit. 3.2, 3.) reckoning it as the
misery of man by nature. What is this pleasure, but the satisfaction of thy
senses, and the delight thou have therein, which the Beasts may enjoy above
thee. Let Conscience judge, are brutish Pleasures worthy to domineer and bear
sway over a mind that is large enough to grasp both Worlds, and an heart
capable of the Joys and Pleasures of glorious and blessed Angels? Reader, if
the World were worthy to be thy Master, or its Treasures, or Honors, or
Pleasures, did deserve thy Service, the Redeemer might have spared his pains
and passion, when he gave himself to this present evil World, Gal. 1.4.

Or is it the Flesh thou art so fond of? why, that is but a poor piece; it is
deceitful, and will cozen thee, Jer. 17.9. It has such a depth of deceit in
it, that neither thou nor any other Creature can fadom it. And is it good to be
a Servant to so treacherous a Master? it is dying, and will forsake thee, Psalm.
73.25. It must shortly be laid in the dust, become food for Worms; nay, be
turned into dust. And can thou think this clod of Clay, this lump of Earth,
this sink of Filthiness, this receptacle of crawling Vermin, a fit Master to
rule over a Soul that is of Celestial extraction, of a spiritual angelical
Nature, and of an eternal duration. Surely, Reader, thou art no debtor to the
Flesh, to live after the Flesh, Romans 8.12. Thou owe thy Flesh nothing, but
care and watchfulness to keep it under, and to subdue it, that it lord it not
over thy Spirit. If thou servest the Flesh once, thou servest it too much by
once; for thou art no debtor to it, and do not ow it the least Service
imaginable, but in subordination to thy Soul and Savior: Surely then, if
neither the Devil, nor the World, nor the Flesh deserve thy positive Obedience,
God must. Reader, let me come up a little closer to thee; I pray who has laid
most Obligations on thee, God or they? To whom art thou most indebted to God or
to them? Did they give thee thy Being, when thou wast nothing? Did they form
thee and fashion thee in thy Mothers Womb? Was it by them that thou wast born?
Did they look after thee in thine Infancy, and cause Mercy all along to grow up
with thee? Have any of them protected thee in thy Dangers, supported thee in
thy Difficulties, supplied thee in thy Wants, or delivered thee out of thy
Distresses? Who spreads thy Table, and blesses thy Food to thee every day? Who
makes thy Bed, and commands sleep for thee every night? Whose mercy is it
thou live, Gods or theirs? and through whose compassion is it that thou art
not consumed? Whose visitation is it that preserves thy Spirit? Who defends
thee night and day from Devils and damned Spirits, who watch continually to
drag thee to their own Den and Dungeon of Darkness, and who has relieved thee
with all the Mercies which ever thou have enjoyed? and is all this nothing to
engage thee to his Service? Does all this care of thee deserve nothing from
thee again to God? But, Friend, to come up one step nearer to thee; Did God, or
any of them, send his only begotten Son to redeem thee out of the hands of the
Law and Divine Justice, and to purchase for thee a state of Peace, and Love,
and Adoption, and everlasting Life? Did they, or any of them, bear the Curse of
the Law, and the Wrath of an infinite Majesty, and the Rage of the Fiends of
Darkness, to deliver thee from them, and to make thee blessed? O Reader, where
are thy Wits? what is become of thine Understanding? If he that sends thee in
all the good thou enjoyest, and freeth thee from all the evil thou escapest,
does not deserve all thou have and art; who does I know not. Have thou laid the
thousandth part of those Obligations on any Child or Servant thou have, which
God has on thee? Did thou make them? do thou preserve them? can thou
redeem them? Alas, thou art but a poor Instrument in the hand of God, to convey
some small matters to them; yet thou expectest positive as well as negative
Obedience from them; and why should not God, who has laid such millions of
Obligations on thee, look for the like from thee? Once more, to whom will thou
call in thy day of Distress? To whom will thou cry in thy time of trouble, to
God, or any of those three forementioned? Masters, is it to them, or to God
that thou will lift up thy Hands, and Eyes, and Heart on thy sick, on thy dying
Bed, when all thy Friends and Kindred will be insignificant and helpless to
thee, and Devils will wait on thee to devour thee? Who is it that offers thee
an unchangeable state of Pleasure and Happiness upon excellent and equitable
terms, that entreats, and invites, and wooeth, and courteth thee to accept of
freedom from misery, and Hell flames, and eternal damnation; and also to
embrace his tenders of fullness of joy, and a Crown of Life, and a Kingdom of
Glory for ever and ever? Ah Friend, little do thou know how much thou owe
the blessed God. I am sure thou can not deny him any part of thy Heart or
Life, if thou will give him what he deserves, thy Conscience must tell thee
that it is his due. And then if thou will give every one his due, why should
thou put by the glorious Lord? If thy Friends, thy Neighbors, thine Enemies,
all must have their due: I beseech thee do not deny God, but let him have thy
positive Obedience, which is unquestionably his due.

8. Consider Sanctification, Repentance, or sound-saving Conversion, consists
in positive as well as negative Holiness; nay, more especially and principally
in positive Holiness, as that which consummateth and perfecteth the work. And
how then can thou have any grounded hope that thy condition is safe without
it? When the Prophet mentions that Repentance which is never to be repented of,
that Repentance which shall find Mercy, and obtain Pardon; he enjoyneth both,
Isaiah 55.7. An aversion from Sin, and a Conversion to God, as their supreme
and chiefest good. When the Apostle mentions that Sanctification, which is the
inseparable concomitant of Justification, and the constant effect of our Union
with Christ, he mentions both. Reckon ye also your selves to be dead unto sin,
(freed from it Laws, as a dead Wife from the Laws of her Husband, and disabled
unto its Service, as a dead man is unto the actions of life; here is negative
Holiness,) but alive unto God, (obliged unto his Laws, as a living Subject is
unto the Laws of his Sovereign, and enabled unto his Service, as a living man
is unto actions that are suitable to life; here is positive Holiness,) through
Christ. This is the root upon which Sanctification grows as the fruit, Romans
6.11. So verse. 18. Being then made free from Sin, ye became the Servants of
Righteousness. Being delivered from the former Usurper, they became obedient to
their rightful Lord, and served him.

Now, Friend, what will thou do for an evidence of Repentance and
Sanctification, which are of such absolute necessity, that thou can not be
saved without them, Luke 13.3. Heb. 12.14. If thou neglectest positive
godliness, indeed thou may flatter thy self with an hypocritical Repentance,
but a sincere one respects both parts of the Law. An Hebrician observes that in
the word Tamim, which signifies upright or perfect; there is a great Tau, to
note that an upright man observes, the whole Law, from the first to the last
letter thereof. He may be too critical, but this is certain, the true Penitent
chooses the way of Obedience, as well as refuses the way of Disobedience. He
is described by this Character, He chooses the things that please God, Isa.
56.4. He does not only refuse the things that displease God, but also choose
the things that please him; yea, and because they please him. The natural
Votary is, what he is, from the good temperament of his body, which makes him
more gentle and pliable than otherwise he would be. The moral Religionist is,
what he is, from the improvement, or rather misimprovement of his natural
Reason. The Civilian is, what he is, from fear of man, or out of respect to
man; He is still in the bond of Iniquity; but he is so careful to line his
Fetters, that they do not clink to the disturbance of others, or to his own
shame. But the true Christian is what he is from Conscience of, and love to the
Will of God; and as he at his first implantation into Christ brings forth this
good fruit, so he continues in it to the end of his life. He that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5.

As Naturalists observe of the Bees, that they are laborious in their youth,
and do not dispense with themselves to be idle in their age; but as they
increase in dextrousness, so also in laboriousness, being more early at work
than the younger; nay, when their Bodies are over-spent, and their wings
ragged, they will venture abroad to work, though they often prove too weak to
return home. Thus the right Convert flourishes as the Palm Tree in his youth,
and is fat and flourishing, and brings forth fruit in his old age, Psalm. 92.12,
13, 14.

CHAP. XXXVIII. If God should omit his care of us a moment, we are undone. And
if Christ had omitted the least in our Work of Redemption, we had been lost
irrecoverably.
9. COnsider, if God should omit his care of thee, and neglect thee as often as
thou omittest his Service, and neglectest him; nay, if he should withdraw his
positive Providence from thee one moment, what would become of thee? thy Body
would be turned into a dead loathsome Carcass, and thy Soul would be haled by
Devils to Hell fire. Is it not more just that God should neglect thee, than
that thou should neglect him? and has he not much more reason to neglect
thee a moment, than thou have to neglect him days, and months, and years? He
has no Obligation to thee, thou have thousands to him. All he does for thee is
mercy, mere mercy; not only beyond but contrary to merit: All he requires of
thee, and all thou can do for him, is Duty, and that which the greatest
Justice calls upon thee for. Now if thou art unwilling to be neglected by God,
why should thou not be as unwilling to neglect God? Is thy safety of greater
concern than his Glory? or must thy Pleasure be preferred before his? Will thou
not make that golden Rule of Christ the rule of thy actions with men, to deal
with them as thou would have them to deal with thee; and will thou deal
otherwise with the blessed God? Must he remember thee at all times, in all
conditions; keep thee night and day, lest any hurt thee, support and supply
thee every moment, and thou forget him days without number? Is this fair or
honest dealing?

Reader, Let me tell thee, upon him thou live, by him thou movest, and from
him thou have thy Being. Thou can not think, or speak, or act in the least,
if he should suspend his care of thee; thine Eyes could not see, nor thine Ears
hear, nor thy Mouth taste, nor thy Hands or Feet move, if his Providence does
not concur to them. If he should but withdraw his manutenency, and the hold he
has of thee for the smallest pittance of time, thou would drop into the
bottomless Pit. The flames do not depend more on the Fire, nor the streams on
the Spring of water, than thy Life, and all thy Comforts for this and the other
World do upon God; and will thou provoke him to leave thee? He has said, with
the froward he will show himself froward, Psalm. 18.26. That he will walk
contrary to them that walk contrary to him, Lev. 26.24.
and that he will forsake them that forsake him, and pay men in their own Coin;
2 Chronicles. 15.2.
and will thou venture him any longer? Others have felt the truth of those
threatenings, and do thou think to go unpunished? Surely if common ingenuity
will not move thee to remember him night and day, who remembers thee with
Loving Kindness every minute; yet the Divine Severity may fright thee from
forgetting him, lest he forget thee for ever. Believe it, if he leave thee,
Wrath, and Death, and Hell, and Damnation, and Devils will soon find thee. Thou
can now depart from him, by thy neglect of his Worship, and be merry and
cheerful notwithstanding; but if once he depart from thee, though but for a
moment, thou art undone eternally. Woe be to thee, when I depart from you, Hos.
9.12. Thy Friends, and Relations, and Creature Comforts may depart from thee,
and it may be well with thee; but if the Fountain of thy Life, the God of thy
Health, the Father of all Mercies depart from thee, woe will be to thee. Heaven
and Earth cannot make him blessed, or hinder him from being extremely cursed,
whom God leaves and forsakes. Alas, if the Heavens omit to give us its showers,
or the Sun omit to dispense its influences, or the Earth omit to yield its
increase; where are we? what can we do? how lamentable is our condition? Those
Persons that were purer than Snow, that were whiter than Milk, that were more
ruddy than Rubies, or than polished Saphires, their Visage is blacker than a
coal: They are not known in the streets, their Skin cleaves to their Bones, it
is withered, it is become like a stick, Lament. 4.7, 8. The Children and the
Sucklings swoon in the streets, Lam. 2.11, 12. But if our case be so woeful,
when Creatures omit their accustomed kindness to us, what will it be if God
should omit his care of us?

10. Consider, If the Lord Jesus Christ should omit the least in the Work of
thy Redemption, thou would be undone for ever. Had Christ been as unwilling
to save thee to the uttermost, as thou art to serve him to the uttermost, what
would have become of thee? Friend, Jesus Christ trod the whole Wine Press of
his Fathers Wrath alone; had he left but one drop of that bitter Cup of Divine
Wrath for thee to drink, it would have caused thy Belly to swell, and Bowels to
be troubled, and Bones to ache, and whole Body and Soul to suffer extremity of
Torments for ever. When Christ undertook to interpose between thee and his
Father, to stand as a skreen between thy poor Soul and a consuming Fire, he
omitted not the least that was requisite for thy good. Though it was hard work,
painful work, amazing work, such work as neither Men nor Angels durst
undertake; yet when thy Miseries and Necessities required it, he did it. He did
not omit to contend with Earth, and Heaven, and Hell for thee: He did not omit
to drink of the Brook in the way, of the Cup of his Fathers Wrath, and to tread
the Wine Press of his Anger alone, that he might obtain Favor and Life for
thee. He omitted not the least in point of satisfaction to his Fathers Justice,
he desired not the smallest abatement of those vast sums which thou thou did
ow to the Divine Majesty, but paid the utmost farthing for thee. He never gave
over till all was finished, till all the Tipes were verified, all the Promises
accomplished, and all the Demands of his Father fully answered, Joh. 19.28. He
omitted nothing in point of application of the Purchase which he had bought for
Sinners. As he died to make satisfaction for us, so he ever lives to make
intercession for us. As he died to make his Will good, (for a Will is not of
force as long as the Testator lives, Heb. 9.17.) wherein he gives Pardon, and
Love, and Life to his people; so he lives to see his Will made good, that his
chosen might enjoy whatsoever his boundless Love and Grace had bequeathed to
them. He died, that he might be a legal Testator; and he lives, that he might
be his own Executor.

Now, Reader, did Christ omit nothing which related to thy Salvation, and will thou omit any thing that relates to his Service? Did he not shrink back when
thy Miseries called him to bear that burden which made the Earth to quake, the
whole Creation to groan, and would have broke the backs of Angels and
Archangels, and all the heavenly Host, if they had put their shoulders under
it; and will thou shrink back from that easy Yoke and light Burden, which he
calls thee to take upon thee? Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Why do thou
use him thus, as Absalom said to Hushai. Is this thy gratitude to the Lord
Jesus Christ, why do thou serve him so? 2 Samuel 16.17.

When the most righteous God demanded full satifaction for the breach of his
Law, by the Nature that had transgressed it, and resolved, that if he had it
not, the whole Posterity of Adam should perish; when his Wrath was breaking in
like a Flood to overwhelm the whole World of Mankind, and neither Man nor Angel
durst stand in the breach to divert this deluge of Fury, when the Knife of the
Laws Curse was even at the Creatures throat, as Abraham's at the throat of
Isaac. Thy Redeemer called to his Father, O Father, Father, hold thine hand,
slay not those poor Creatures; I have provided a Sacrifice, such as thou will
accept. I know that Beeves, and Goats, and Lambs are not the Sacrifices for Sin
which thou would have, (what proportion has the blood of Beasts to the
infinite demerit of Sin) but I know what Sacrifice thou would have; thou
would have me to offer my self upon the Cross as a Sacrifice to thy Justice,
(that the whole World might know the Holiness of thy Nature, the Righteousness
of thy Law, and thine infinite kindness to thine Elect,) Well, I come to do thy
Will, O God. Though the Task be so great, and the Work so grievous, that no
other dares so much as touch it; and though I am wholly free, and none can
oblige or compel me to it, yet I will undertake it. Now, Reader, was Christ so
forward, so willing to obey such a Command of dying a cursed, painful, shameful
death, that he tells his Father, I delight to do thy Will, O God; and art thou
so backward to obey his Commands, and to walk in his ways, When his ways are
ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace, Psalm. 40.6. Heb. 10.5. Prove.
3.17. Was Christ so careful and tender of thee, that he would not omit any
thing needful for thy good; and art thou so careless and forgetful of him, as
to omit that which is of such concernment to his Glory? Friend, bethink thy
self, does not thy Redeemer deserve fairer dealings at thy hands? Heathens and
Publicans would not be so base and unworthy to their Friends and Benefactors.

CHAP. XXXIX. Arguments against sins of Omssion. The new Nature in Believers
inclines them to positive as well as negative Holiness, and the profit will
answer the pains.
11. COnsider if thou art a Believer, thy predominant new Nature inclines thee
to positive as well as negative Holiness. And shall this be given thee in vain?
shall God be at such cost and charge, as to infuse a principle of life into
thee to no purpose? Pray observe what end God has in this regenerating Work.
Of his own Will begat he us again, by the Word of Truth, that we should be a
kind of First Fruits of his Creatures, Jam. 1.18. Where we have the causes of
Regeneration: 1. The efficient Principal, He. 2. The moving, His alone Will. 3.
The formal, Begat us again. 4. The instrumental, The Word of Truth. 5. The
final, That we should be a kind of First Fruits. God begets us again, that we
should be devoted to him; as the First Fruits of all the sheaves were
consecrated to God, and that out of thankfulness to him, for his innumerable
blessings, Prove. 3.9. Romans 12.1. The First Fruits were holy to the Lord, and so
should all Christians be. Again, he tells us his design in giving a new Spirit,
and putting his Spirit into them, That they may walk in his Statutes, and do
them, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. So that it is Sacrilege, and God-robbery for a Christian
to employ himself to the use of any but God, because he is devoted to God; and
it is also below a Christian, as for a man to live as does (...) Beast; for him
that has a noble Di^ine Principle to live as other men. As all the Children of
the first Adam derive from him a depraved Nature, which inclines them not only
to omit what is good, but also to do what is evil; therefore his Seed (...)
known by both those signs, Psalm. 36.3, 4. Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. So all the Children
of the second Adam derive from him a renewed Nature, ( For they are made
partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.) which does not only take them off
from what is evil, but also put them forward to that which is good, Romans 6.11.
As the Branches derive from the Root that sap and moisture which enableth them
to fruitfulness; so the Christian draws that Virtue from Christ, even in his
first Conversion, that inclines him whilst he lives to bring forth fruit to
God, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his Workmanship, created in Jesus Christ unto good
Works, which God has ordained that we should walk in them. Mark, this new
piece that is indeed Gods Masterpiece (for the New Creation does far excel the
old Heavens and Earth,) is formed in Christ as the efficient Cause unto good
Works, unto such Works as flow from the Spirit of God as the Principle, as are
according to the Will of God, as the Rule, and for the Glory of God as the end,
Gal. 5.20. Gal. 6.16. Phil. 1.11.

Each Convert has ^^^munion with Christ in his Death, and also in his Life; He
knows Christ, and has fellowship with him in his Death, whereby he dies to
Sin: Hence he is said to be dead and buried with Christ, Romans 6.6. knowing
this, that our old man (so Sin is called, because it is nigh as old as man, is
full of subtilty and craft, and should be always decaying and dying,) is
crucified with him, (i. e. Christ, whom Sin crucified, and whose Death
crucifieth Sin,) that the body of sin (sin is said to have a body, because it
consists of many members, Col. 3.5.) might be destroyed, (for as the life of
Sin gave Christ his deaths-wound, so the death of Christ gave Sin its deaths
wound,) that henceforth we should not (willingly, cheerfully, customarily,)
serve sin as our Lord and Master. And as the Convert has fellowship with
Christ in his Death, so also in his Resurrection. That I may know him, and the
power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. i. e. Have experience (for it is such a
knowledge he speaks of) of the power and energy of the Life of Christ, to
quicken me unto new Obedience.

Besides, the true Convert has the Law of God written in his Heart, which
cannot but move him to the observation of the Law in his Life, Psalm. 37. Heb.
8. According to the predominant principles that are in every man's nature, such
are his inclinations, whether to God or evil, and such are ordinarily his
practices. As a bowl moves this way or that way, according as the Bias
inclines.

Now, Reader, Consider, either thou art a Believer or not: If thou art not, it
concerns thee speedily to look about thee, lest thou die in this estate, and be
damned for ever, Joh. 3. ult. If thou art a Believer, it would be very strange
for thee to continue in any Omission, for all this while thou actest against
thy nature. It Is very much easier to sin with thy nature than against it. A
wicked man that has knowledge, cannot sin with such pleasure and easiness as
another, because he does in sinning oppose and fight with Conscience within
him; but it seems harder for thee, for thou do not only offer violence to
thine enlightened Conscience, but also to the new Nature that is implanted in
thee. By thy Omissions, thou do not only sin against thy natural Light, but
also against thy new spiritual Life. It Is hard, we say, for a man to thwart or
cross nature, Naturam expellas furca, etc. and will thou take such pains to
disobey thy Gods Precepts? The Devils Servants do his Will, but it is with
their own whole Wills, according to their own inclinations; they do not cross
themselves to please him. But thou can not neglect the Will of God, but it
must be in part against thine own will, and against thine own inclinations; and
will thou displease thy self to displease God, and walk contrary to thy self,
that thou may walk contrary to God. This is the part and guise of the most
spiteful, envious, and malicious Enemies, and I am sure it is impossible for
thee (if a Believer) to be such an enemy to God. God did purposely endue thee
with a new Spirit, that thou might live to his praise, Isa. 43.21. This
people have I formed for my self, and (new made and molded them) they shall
show forth my praise. Now how is the praise of God spread in the World, but by
good Works, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before others, that they
seeing your good works, may glorify your heavenly Father, so Joh. 15.8.

Again, it would be marvailous if thou should not follow thy own natural
propensity and inclinations. For a dead man to lie still, and not stir, nor
perform any actions of life, is nothing strange, none expects any other; but
for a living man, one that has a principle of life to do so, would be
accounted little less than miraculous. For a man dead in Sins and Trespasses,
that has no Spirit of Grace to enliven his poor Soul, to lie still in his
idleness, and slothfulness, and carnal security, and to neglect the performance
of the Duties of a spiritual Life, is no wonder; but is it not a wonder for one
that is quickened in Christ, Ephesians. 2.5. created unto good works, fitted and
formed for them, Ephesians. 2.10. that has Jesus Christ living in him, Gal. 2.20.
and a principle of holiness inclining and inabling him hereunto, should omit
those actions that are proper to life. I beseech thee, Friend, do not displease
thy self, and cross thy very Nature, to disobey thy God; surely he is worthy of
more dutiful behavior from thee.

12. The Reward will answer the Work, and the profit of positive Holiness will
answer all thy pains. I confess Obedience to the affirmative part of the
Command, (to pray, and hear, and give to the Poor, etc. with those
qualifications, and in that manner which God commands,) is much harder than
to the Negative; and to do good is much more difficult than not to do evil; but
thy labor shall not be in vain. I have told thee already all the reward of a
mere negative Holiness, is a cooler Hell; but I must tell thee now, that the
reward of positive Holiness will be a glorious, and blessed, and endless state
of happiness in Heaven. A negative Holiness shall not have so much as a full
negative Happiness; it shall not abolish, only abate the Torments of Hell; and
the reason is, because such Holiness is counterfeit and hypocritical: But
positive Holiness shall have both, a full negative and positive Happiness. God
will do him good, that is good, and does good, Psalm. 125.4. And if God
undertake to do good to a person, he will do it to good purpose. Man's doing
good, which is his positive Holiness, is little; yea, nothing to God. My
goodness extends not to thee, says David, Psalm. 16.3. But Gods doing good,
which is his positive Bounty, is effectual, yea all in all with man; therefore
when he would speak in few words the great kindness he had in store for his
people, he only tells them, Jer. 32.40. I will not turn away from them to do
them good. And verse. 41. I will rejoice over them to do them good. Nay, though
negative godliness obtains only at present some respect from men, and hereafter
fewer stripes from Hells Jailer; positive Holiness has a far greater, and
another manner of reward, both here and hereafter. In the doing of thy Commands
there is great reward, Psalm. 19. In the forbearing thy Prohibitions there is
some reward, but in the doing thy Commands there is great reward. Positive
Holiness has meat in its mouth, affirmative Obedience is its own recompense.
It brings that calmness and serenity of mind, that nothing else can do.
Negative Holiness may do somewhat toward a negative quietness, i. e. a freedom
from those dreadful horrors and terrors which sometimes seize those who commit
gross unnatural sins; but positive Piety brings positive Peace. Great peace
have they which love thy Law, Psalm. 119. 165. and nothing shall offend them.
They are not only freed from those gripes of Conscience with which many others
are afflicted, but they have that spiritual joy and heart-comfort which the
World is a stranger to, Gal. 6.16. Faith which is not the least part of this
holiness, fills the Soul with joy; yea, with joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
Romans 15. 1 Pet. 1.8. I may appeal to the experience of a Christian, whether
ever he find more comfort, than when he has done his God faithful Service, and
whether ever their hearts are more heavy, than when they have been negligent of
their Duty. David and the Israelites were almost transported, their hearts
leaped for joy that they had offered so willingly and liberally toward the
building of the Temple; then the people rejoiced, for that they offered
willingly, because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the Lord; and
David the King also rejoiced with great joy, and the wine of their joy was so
strong, that he was forced to give it vent. Wherefore David blessed the Lord
before all the Congregation, and said, Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel, our
Father for ever and ever, etc. 2 Chronicles. 29.9, 10, 11, 12, etc. But mark, God is
so tender of this man that minds his Duty, that he will suffer no wind, no
ill wind to blow upon him. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them. None must knock at their door, to disturb them of
their rest. All the Creatures must be kind to them for his sake; they must have
nothing done to them which may be offensive.

Yet this is not all the profit of Holiness here, (though I shall pass to the
next) much less in the other World. As I said before, a positive Holiness shall
have a positive Heaven. The Christians avoiding what is evil, through the blood
of Christ, shall be recompensed with a freedom from Hell; and the Christians
doing what is good through the same meritorious cause, shall be rewarded with
the fruition of Heaven. The two Servants that had (not hid their Talents in a
Napkin, as the negative Christian does, but) traded according to his trust, and
improved his stock faithfully in doing good, as he had opportunity; is
commended by his Master for a good and faithful Servant, and honored with his
Masters own happiness. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. No less will
content his large liberal heart than his own joy for his holy Ones, a joy so
great that it cannot enter into them; their narrow Vessels can never hold such
an Ocean, therefore they must enter into it, and be immerst and swallowed up as
it were in this vast Sea of Pleasure and Solace. But, Reader, consider in this
Chapter before the Text, verse. 34. What will be the profit of this sort of
Piety, how infinitely the gains will exceed the pains, were they ten thousand
times more than they can be. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World; For I was hungry, and ye
gave me meat, etc. How does every word speak Love and Life, every syllable drop
Myrh and Mercy. In which we may observe the welcome those that are fruitful
Christians shall find from Christ in the other World. We have, 1. The estate
they shall be invested with, and that is a Kingdom. 2. Their Title to it, and
that is by Inhetance from their Father; Ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom. 3. Its preparation for them, Prepared for you from the Foundation of
the World. 4. Their formal introduction into it; Come ye blessed of my Father.
5. The qualification of the persons that shall inherit this Kingdom, (I was
hungry, and ye fed me,) such as feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked. 1.
Observe, Reader, for thine encouragement, to mind positive Holiness, the estate
thy loving and bountiful Father has provided for thee, when thou come to
age. It Is no less than a Kingdom; thou shall be a King now (and enjoy a Kingdom
then, He has made us Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6.) with Palms in thy
hand, Rev. 7.9. (of which the door of the Holy of Holies was made, 1 Kings
6.33. an emblem of perfect Victory over all thine enemies,) and Robes on thy
back, Rev. 19.8. (of perfect Purity, spotless Innocence, and Meridian Glory,)
and a Crown on thy Head, James 1.12. (such a Crown as will never wear, never
waste, but endure; and therefore called Incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25.) and reign
with Christ for ever and ever. Reader, has a Kingdom nothing of amiableness in
it to allure thee? What fighting, and killing, and swearing, and forswearing is
there for an earthly Kingdom? O what should thou not do for an heavenly
Kindgom! Where, 1. Is the greatest Glory, ( a far more exceeding Weight of it,
2 Cor. 5.17, 18.) 2. The strongest Security, ( a Kingdom that cannot be shaken,
Heb. 11. No Devil or subtle Serpent can crawl into the Celestial Paradise.)
3. The brightest Splendour, ( transparent as Crystal, Rev. 21. Wherein the
Inhabitants shall shine as the Sun, and much more lustrously, Matthew. 13.) 4.
The highest Attendants (Cherubims and Seraphims standing as Servants or Porters
at the twelve Gates of the City, Rev. 21.12.) 5. The greatest Power, ( the
Saints shall inherit all things, Rev. 12.) Judge that World which now censureth
and judges them, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. and 6. the most pure and perfect satisfaction,
in every power and part of Soul and Body, (There is fullness of Joy, and rivers
of Pleasures,) and verse. 7. eternity to complete their felicity; 2 Pet. 1.11.
So an entrance shall be administered into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

2. The Title, Inherit the Kingdom. It comes to them not by their Purchase, but
by Christ's Purchase; therefore called the purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14.
Until the Redemption of the purchased Possession. It comes not to them by their
goodness, but by Gods Gift. Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. It comes not to them by their
Obedience, but by Inheritance from their Father. Christ is Gods natural Son and
Heir of all things, by him Believers are Gods adopted Children, Gal. 3.26. Ye
are all the Children of God through Faith in Jesus Christ: and if Sons, then
Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.

3. Its preparation for them from the Foundation of the World. When God first
erected the stately Fabric of Heaven and Earth, probably he made the empirean
Heaven the place of the blessed; for at first, when he laid the Foundations of
the World, the Morning-Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy; therefore it is likely the place of their Residence was made. Besides, it
was prepared in the Decrees of God; they were destinated to a Diadem before
they had a being.

4. Their formal admission into it, Come ye blessed of my Father. Come from all
Sin, from all Sorrow, all Sufferings; Come from Babylon to Sion, from a barren
Wilderness, where is no water for a thirsty Soul, to a fruitful pleasant
Paradise, where are all sorts of luscious and heart-chearing Rarities. Come,
where have ye been all this while? how could ye bear my absence so long? what
have ye done in a Valley of Tears, a Bochim, a place of weeping, so many years?
When he calls them to die, his Voice need not be unpleasant to them. He does
but call them as a Father his Child, out of the shower into his house. Come my
people enter into the Chambers, shut the door, hide your selves for a very
little moment, till the Indignation be overpast, Isa. 28.20. Come Child, go to
bed, I will cause the dust to be a soft Couch of repose to thee, and when thou
awakest in the Morning of the Resurrection all shall be well with thee; but his
Voice at the Resurrection will be sweet indeed; Come Child, O come dear Child
into my Arms and Embraces; come into my Heart, come into my very Soul. Come and
take possession of my dear bought Purchase; Come and inherit the Kingdom
prepared for thee. Come Child, and enjoy all that Honor, and Treasure, and
Joy, and Delight, and Happiness, which thou have so often prayed, and wept, and
watched, and sighed, and sob'd for. Come Child to thy Fathers House, sit down at
his Table, drink of his new Wine, and eat of his hidden Manna, and feast of the
Tree of Life, that grows in the midst of Paradise for ever and ever.

5. The qualification of the Persons that shall partake of this Possession,
they are such as feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked, etc. For I was hungry, and
ye gave me meat; thirsty, and ye gave me drink. Reader, do thou not observe,
that those who mind this positive Holiness, are the blessed of the Father, and
the Heirs of the Kingdom, and will thou neglect? A Kingdom makes the greatest
difference among men. The height of any ones ambition can be but a Kingdom; and
will not a glorious joyful eternal Kingdom move thee?

CHAP. XL. Arguments against sins of Omission. God delights chiefly in our
doing good; and our opportunities for doing good will quickly be gone.
13. COnsider, God takes most pleasure in our positive Holiness. It Is true he
is pleased to see men deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; but nothing to that
pleasure which he takes in seeing them live righteously, soberly, and godly in
this present evil World. He likes ceasing from evil, because it is agreeable to
his Word; but he likes better doing of good, because it is more conformable to
his Will, Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness.
Thou meetest him with the riches of Mercy, who works what is good with
alacrity. If he come to thee, thou will not cast him away; nay, thou will run
to meet him, and embrace him. As the Father of the Prodigal ran to meet his
returning Son, Luke 15. And as one at odds, but willing to be reconciled, tells
us, He will meet his Opposite halfway. And I may say of Gods meeting a Soul
that works Righteousness, as God tells Moses; Behold, Aaron thy Brother comes
to meet thee, and when he sees thee, he will be glad at his heart. Behold, thy
God and Father comes to meet thee, and when he sees thee, working
Righteousness, he will be glad at his heart; nay, so glad, that the
disadvantage of a man's Country shall not hinder him of this kindness, Acts 10.
And Peter said, I perceive now that God is no Respecter of persons; but in
every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of
him. God proclaims to all the World, That he delights in such a man's way,
Psalm. 73.23. and therefore his Word which he has given us for our Rule herein,
is called his good and acceptable Will, Romans 12.2. And the reason is, because
such persons are most like God, therefore they have most of his love and
delight. God is a pure Act, and so cannot but approve of them that are active.
He is ever at work, Joh. 5.17. Hitherto my Father works, and I work. And its
righteousness he is always working, The Lord is holy in all his Ways, and
righteous in all his Works, Psalm. 145. He is good, and does good; so that those
who are positively holy, do most resemble him, and so do most delight him. We
all take most pleasure in those Children that are our exactest Pictures.
Reader, art thou negatively holy; Can thou say, I am no Drunkard, no Glutton,
no Adulterer? thou may say this, and be like the Devil, for the Devil himself
may say as much. Can thou say, I am no Thief, no Swearer, no Blasphemer, no
Sabbath-breaker, no Trader with false Weights or false Measures, no Bearer of
false witness against my Neighbor? A Beast may say as much, and thou may be
free from these sins, and yet like a Beast. But if thou live in the love and
delight of the blessed Majesty, doing his pleasure, this is to be like an
Angel, Psalm. 103. And doing good to others, this is to be like God, and this is
that which takes his heart. Common humanity is much affected with one that
abounds in goodness, and is rich in good Works; therefore the Apostle tells
us, That for a good man possibly some may even dare to die, Romans 5. The reason
of which is, because the people of the Jews were divided into three sorts of
Persons; there were Reshagnim, or (...), the wicked or ungodly, those who lived
without the Worship of God, and walked in profane courses; there were also
Tsidikim, or (...), the just or righteous, men of rigid righteousness, or
severe innocence; and Chasidim, or (...), the good and liberal, men of large
Hearts and open Hands, to do good to others; who as public Conduits, are of
public advantage in the places where they live. Now says the Apostle,
Scarcely for a righteous man; that is, for a man of austere Justice will one
die; but for a good man, a man full of good works, one that is bountiful to
others, and useful in his Generation, a man would even dare to die. Humanity is
so taken with doing good, that a man can be contented almost to die for such;
much more must goodness it self, and the Fountain of all Goodness be affected
therewith. He tells us, That he is a God who executes Kindness, Judgment, and
Righteousness: For in these things I delight, says the Lord. Both in doing
them my self, and seeing them done by others, Psalm. 11. ult. Mich. 6.8.

What think thou, Reader, of this motive to good Works, would thou not
delight the heart of God? How long have thou by thy Omissions grieved him, and
is it not yet time to rejoice him? How often have thou displeased him? how many
millions of times? and will thou not now please him? Thou daily see, that
though he has no Obligations to his Creatures (but the contrary) he does them
good, and gives them food and fruitful seasons, and fills their Hearts with
gladness. And will thou not do thy utmost to glad his Heart, who has above all
apprehensions obliged thee? Truly, he does not deserve the name of a rational
Creature, who does not above all things seek to please his Maker; and there is
no way hereunto like abounding in well-doing. Therefore the Apostle begs for
the Colossians, That they may be filled with the knowledge of his Will. Why?
that they might keep their Light in a dark Lanthorn, or have it as men wear a
Glass-eye, for show, and not for use; or that men might be able to talk the
more of Religion, and the things that appertain thereunto? No, That ye might
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, (...), to his whole liking and
delight, that ye might please God. I, but how may this be done, he presently
tells us how, That ye may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work. There is no such way to please God, as
fruitfulness in every good Work. It rejoices the Husbandman to see his Trees
laden with fruit, to see his Fields covered over (as the Psalmists phrase is,
Psalm. 65. ult.) with Corn, and to see his returns answer his Cost. And it
rejoices the blessed God, to see an Heart that has long lain fallow, and been
barren, full of faith, and love, and humility, and heavenly-mindedness, and all
the fruits of Righteousness; and so a Life that has been idle and
unprofitable, abundant in acts of Piety, Charity, and the like. David, who
served the Wills of God in his Generation, he of all men was the man after Gods
own heart.

14. Consider, thou have but a little time to do good in, therefore it concerns
thee to set speedily upon it, and to be diligent at it. Alas, how short is thy
whole Life, from the Womb to the Tomb; It Is but a shadow that flees away, and
continues not; a Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away, it is nothing, Job 14.2. James 4.14. Psalm. 39.6. And how much of this time
is gone, has been spent as a tale that is told, impertinently, and to no
purpose, in doing nothing, or in doing that which is worse than nothing, Psalm.
90.9. How short that time is that remains God only knows; for thy time is
in his hand, not thine own; surely then it behooves thee to redeem the time, to
make the most of it, and whilst thou have it, to improve it for the doing of
good, O Friend, have thou loyter'd so long; is thy work so great, thy day to
work in so short; and yet is it not time to bestir thy self? Is death at thy
door? art thou within a step of eternity, within the view of the other World,
and yet will thou not up and be doing? Can any assure thee of standing in the
Vineyard another year; nay, another month; nay, another day; and is it not yet
time to be fruitful? Do thou not see that as Laborers are sent into the
Vineyard at all hours, so they go out of the Vineyard at all hours. Thou owe
a debt to Nature, to the God of Nature; the day of payment is not expressed,
therefore it may be demanded at any time. Reader, though some fruit falls from
the Tree by reason of its maturity; yet how much more is blown off, or cudgeld
off, whilst it is green? Do not thine eyes see Coffins and Graves of all sorts
and sizes? And will thou be as the silly Beasts, who though the Butcher come
one day to the Field and fetch away one, another day and fetch away another to
the slaughter; yet those that remain neither miss them that are gone, nor dread
their own destinies. O Friend, what do thou think to do, when time is gone,
and death comes? will thou stop the Sun of thy Life in its career? Will it hear
thy Voice, and obey thy Command? Or will thou call to Time, as Isreal's General
did to the Sun; Stand still, that I may be avenged of all my Sensuality, and
Idleness, and Pride, and Impenitency, and all my spiritual Enemies, which have
robbed me of God and Heaven? Do you imagine Time will be at your beck? Or are
the apprehensions of the King of Terrors, and of a dreadful Day of Judgment,
and of an amazing Eternity, no whit rousing or awakening to thee?

Can thou believe a dark night of Death a fit time to trim, and adorn, and
attrire thy Soul in, for the love and embraces of the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Now God gives thee a day, but of how many hours, whether longer or
shorter, thou can not tell. Thy life is fleeing away, Time's Chariot moves
swiftly: Yet a little while the Light is with thee, walk while thou have the
Light, lest Darkness come upon thee, Joh. 12.35. Two things especially occur in
these words, 1. Now thou have time, yea opportunity, make much of it, improve
it to the utmost; Walk while thou have the Light. God allots thee a due time
for bringing forth: Hence it is Observable, That God gave the Fig Tree three
years to bear in; other Trees, as the Olive and Nut-Tree required more time,
but so succulent a Plant as the Fig Tree needed no more; nay, says A Lapide,
If the Fig Tree bear not the third year, it will never bear. God never
expected Brick without allowing Straw, nor requires his Rent before
Quarter-day, or the time of payment comes. 2. Thy time, or at least thine
opportunity is very short; therefore work much in a little time, whilst thou
have the Light; Yet a little while the Light is with thee, a little while and
the Light will be taken from thee. A little while, and the light of Life; a
little while, and the light of means, and helps, and seasons of Grace will be
taken from thee. And what then? truly, then darkness will come upon thee, (a
dark Grave will be the receptacle of thy Body, and a dark Dungeon will be the
receptacle of thy Soul, if thou now loyterest,) and darkness is no fit state,
nor a dark night a fit time to walk or work in.

Darkness is dreadful, and every thing seems more frightful in the night. If a
man's house be on fire in the night, that he hears the noise and rattling of the
flames, sees no way of escape for himself, his Wife, and his Children; O in
what a plight is he? he stands naked in his Chamber, at a loss what to do, he
is full of horrors and terrors, to be conceived by none but himself. How pale
is his Countenance, and how heavy his Heart, when he sees the flames seizing
his Chamber, when they come near his Body; he is almost drowned to death with
grief and sorrow before he is burnt to death with the flames. So it is, when
the night of death surpriseth the Loyterer, that has neglected the doing of
good, when Conscience is in a flame about his ears, and frights him with the
fore-apprehensions of the unquenchable burnings, and with cutting reflections
upon his former negligence and unprofitableness; the man is quaking and
trembling, not knowing what to do: Is that a time to put on the Armor of Light,
when he is putting off his natural Life? Is a dark night of fear and amazement
a time to seek God in, or to work out his own Salvation? Ah Friend, it is too
great and weighty a work to be done in an instant, and the poor Sinner is too
much astonished to set about it. If the fear of a danger gone, and over, kill a
Nabal, and make his heart like a stone; what will the fear, the certain
knowledge of wrath, of the wrath of a God, of the everlasting wrath of a God to
come, do to a poor Sinner? O Friend, make use of time while thou have it. Work
the work of him that sent thee while it is day, for the night comes when no
man can work, Joh. 9.4.

CHAP. XLI. The grand cause of sins of Omission. An unregenerate heart, with
the cure of it; a renewed nature.
I Proceed now to the second and third particulars, viz. The cause and cure of
sins of Omission; I shall recite one more general and principal Cause, others
more special, and less principal, and join the Cure to the Cause.

1. The grand Cause of these sins of Omission, is an unregenerate Heart. Where
the ground is unplowed, and lies fallow, no Fruit can be expected; Weeds may
grow, good Corn cannot grow there: When the Heart is not broken up by
Repentance, but hardened through custom and continuance in sin, no fruits of
Righteousness, no Faith, no Love, or Humility, etc. can be expected there. Can
the Leopard change his spots, or the Blackamore his skin? no more can he that
is accustomed to do evil, learn to do well, Jer. 23.13. Natures Fruit will be
according to its Root, whether sweet or sour. There must of necessity be a good
Foundation laid, before there can be a good Superstructure of Holiness reared.
An unrenewed Heart has no tendency toward it, and Nature will work little
farther than its own inclination. The Water will run as the Tide carries it.
Nay, the unregenerate Heart is contrary to religious Duties, has an hatred and
abhorrency of them, no wonder then if it live in the Omission of them. The
Carnal Mind, Lady Reason her self, the chief and principal faculty of man, is
enmity against God, It is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be,
Romans 8.7. He who is an enemy to a man's Person, will never be a friend to his
Precepts; much less will he who is enmity against Gods Life, be subject to his
Law. There is an impossibility hereof, Neither indeed can be. Till the Heart be
changed, it will never like the Divine Commands, that are so contrary to its
lusts; and till it be brought to love them, it will neglect Obedience to them.
When the Will, the great Commander, is set against the Laws of God, how can any
of the other faculties submit to them? As in fleshly lusts, the titillation is
from sense and appetite; but the consent of the reasonable Will, is, that which
makes it a vice; so unto good, the inclination may possibly be from example or
education, but the royal assent of the Will is that which makes it a virtue.
The Devil finds it no hard work to part Sin and his Duty, whose Will never
chose it, and whose Heart never loved it; but it will be much easier to part
him and his Duty, whose Will and Heart have an enmity and reluctance against
it. If a Lads calling does not suit his genius, he seldom comes to do any thing
well, or to be expert at it; much less when he hates it. The Scholar who loves
not his Book, will hardly proceed from the degree of a Dunce; much less he who
loatheth his Book. If the nature of a man be contrary to God, and his Ways, the
presence of God is troublesome to him, Job 21.14. They say to God, depart from
us; and the Worship of God is tedious to them. When will the new Moon be gone,
and the Sabbath be over. And the Precepts of God are Fetters and Cords to them,
Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us.
Common gifts of the Spirit, as Illumination, Convictions, sudden flashes of
Affection may do somewhat against this distemper of Nature, but the virtue of
that Physic is soon spent, and then it returns to its former illness. Colors
not laid in Oil, will soon be washed off.

Indeed, how can it be expected, that a Body separated from a Soul should stir
or move; and much less can it be expected, that a Soul without Christ, its
life, should pray, or hear, or watch, or do any thing according to the Will of
God. Paul tells us, I live, i. e. to God, according to his Will, doing what is
good: But how comes this about, at whose cost does he keep house; yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. I may thank my Lord Jesus, I am beholden unto him for
all ability unto sacred actions: And the life that I live in the Flesh, is by
Faith in the Son of God. It Is from Christ alone that I receive supplies of
strength and virtue to live to God. What will then become of the Unregenerate
person, who is without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. He who has not the Son, has not
life. And he who has not life, I am sure cannot live to God. The Apostle fitly
joins them together, Trees without fruit, twice dead, i. e. certainly dead, or
dead indeed, Jude, verse. 12. Where the stock is dead, the branches must needs
wither; and if they wither, there is little likelihood of fruit.

Besides, an unregenerate Soul is necessitated (as to internal Omissions, in
regard of his want of spiritual life, so) to external Omissions, in regard of
his engagements to his carnal interest. One is possibly married to Profit, and
when that calls him, he must go, though Closet or Family, or any other Duties
bid him stay, Matthew. 8. No man can serve God and Mammon, but he will love the
one, and hate the other; or despise the one, and cleave to the other. When once
there comes a competition between godliness and gain in the life, it will
quickly appear which has the greatest sway and predominancy in the heart. The
young man would not follow Christ, because his Estate denied to give him leave.
Had he been less rich, he had been (probably) more religious; but having once
espoused the interest of his Wealth, he could not leave it, though he left God,
and Christ, and Heaven for it. Another is engaged to Pleasures, and when they
require his presence, it cannot be supposed that he will deny them for the
exercises if Religion, which are so painful to him. Herod may pretend fair for
Religion, and profess some kindness to the Baptist, but when his Dalilah
commands, his love to her over-comes his fear of John; and instead of doing
many things, or any thing that was good, he cuts off that Head which had a
Tongue in it so bold, as to reprove him for his sin. A third is wedded to
Honor, and if that be inconsistent with Holiness; as sometimes the case may
be, he will neglect his Duty to God, to pay his Homage to this Diana. Jehu will
do one good work, because Gods and his interest were both conjoined. His
slaughter of Ahabs Sons and Prophets tended to settle him the firmer in his
Throne, and so his ambition called for the same with Gods Command. But Jehu
will omit another good work, he will not destroy the Idolatry at Dan and
Bethel, because there his interest and Gods were divided; for though God
enjoined the destruction of Idols in one place as well as another, yet Jehu was
fearful as his Predecessor Jeroboam, that the Crown would not be fast on his
Head, if the people should have gone up to Jerusalem to Worship; therefore when
his carnal interest forbids what God commands, he disobeys God, to serve that.
There is no unsanctified person in the World, but has some worldly interest of
his own superior and paramount; nay, in many things opposite and contrary to
the interest of God; and therefore though he may obey God, while both those
Interests can agree and walk together in the same way, yet when there is a
necessity of their parting, he will cleave to that which has the predominancy
within him. Where God has some residence, and is entertained but as an
underling to the Flesh, when it comes to this pass, that one must be turned out
of doors (for they cannot agree long together) you may easily guess which it
shall be.

The Cure of this, Reader, must be (if thou art not born again) to get a new
heart. An old heart will never serve for, or enable unto the acts of new
Obedience. The water will rise no higher than the Fountain head a whence it
flows. If you would have a Clock to move regularly, and the hand without to
go true, you must have the wheels and poizes right within. A good temperament
of Body may cause a propensity to some things that are honest; but that
excellency must be of little worth, that has its Original from man's basest
part, (as those materials are me^^, which arise out of the potentiality of the
matter,) and truly that honesty deserves not the name of Virtue, being not
quickened with the command of Reason. An exact Constitution may help a man to
be mild, meek, courteous, modest, shame-faced; but these cannot be adopted into
the Family of goodness, because here, as they say, in the motion of the
Serpent, the tail leads the way to the Head; the Body rules and governs the
Soul, and the man's perfection is from his meanest and worst part. Besides, the
cause of all this seeming-virtue is mutable and mortal. Age, or Sickness, or
change of Air, or of Condition, may alter a man's good nature; and then where is
his Religion? Truly, as a Comet, it came without giving notice, and goes away
without giving warning. The Cause being taken away, the Effect cease.

Improved Reason will do more toward Religion, than a sound bodily
Constitution; but yet the Moralists, for all their Reason, were far enough from
being religious. Indeed, reason rightly improved, is a special help, a
serviceable Handmaid to Religion; but as they used it, or rather abused it, it
became an Opposite and Enemy to Religion. The Mind or Understanding, which is
the supreme faculty of the Soul, they set up in defiance of Revelations, and
with it they outface Illumination. (...), the natural man, animalis homo, he
that has no more than a reasonable Soul, perceives not the things of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Natural Light will not help a man to see
spiritual Objects; (because there is no proportion between the Faculty and the
Object) and because it cannot apprehend them, therefore it condemns them as
foolish and ridiculous. It has its high thoughts, and carnal reasonings, and
vain imaginations, in which strong holds, Lust shelters it self against all the
Convictions of our own Spirit. And as the Moralist deifieth his Understanding
in opposition to Faith, so he idolizeth the liberty of his Will in opposition
to the special Energy and Virtue of the Holy Ghost. Liberty, says the
Philosopher, I have by Nature; that is, a freedom to choose Good or Evil, I
have in common with the rest of Mankind, but goodness to that liberty, or an
application of it to the choice of good rather than evil; this I have from my
self, my Reason, and I am beholden to my self for it. So that, as Austin says,
if this be true, Si nobis potest libera voluntas ex deo est, quoad hoc potest
esse, vel bona, vel mala, bona vero voluntas ex nobis est; melius est id quod a
nobis quam quod ab illo est, De peccat. merit. lib. 2. cap. 18. If our Will be
free from God, it may be good or bad; but if it be good from our selves, better
is that which we have from our selves, than that which we have from God. In
short, this moral Votary differs from the natural, that the Original of the
latters Religion, is the Constitution of his Body, of the formers is the chief
faculty of his Soul; but neither of these can make a man religious, for where
the Vitals are tainted, and the inward parts infected, it is in vain to use
Plasters or outward Medicines. Indeed, here is the great fault of both the
former, that they take no notice of the depravation of man's nature, which alone
would convince them of the necessity of a change. They who have crazed
Principles, and cracked Brains, cannot see any defects in themselves, being
prepossest with an Opinion of their own perfection. Both the Naturalists and
the Moralists are so far from knowing the plague of their own hearts, that they
count every thing of Nature rather lovely than loathsome. And as among the
Moors, blackness is counted a beauty, because it is common and general, and they
see no other. So with these men, the vitiosity of Nature, which is the seed of
all evil, is commended for the spring of Virtue. Indeed, they are in love with
their Disease, and instead of Health, have this unhappiness, that they feel not
their own sickness; so that neither the one nor the other can be religious, or
perform those Duties which God requires.

Regeneration is absolutely requisite to this; He that lays not that for his
Foundation, can never build a Temple for God, he must needs prove a Bankrupt;
that is, worse than naught when he begun. Some tell us, that Trees shoot above
ground as much and no more than they do under ground. I am sure there is no
more godliness outwardly in the Life, than there is inwardly in the Heart. If
the fear and love of God be the great spring to set all the wheels a going in
the ways of Religion, then all is right, but till then nothing is right. If
there be not the Oil of solid Grace in the Vessel of the Heart, to feed
Profession in the Lamp and Holiness in the Life, both will quickly sail.

When God intends that his people should walk in his Statutes, keep his
Judgments, and do them; what does he for them to prepare them and enable them
thereunto? truly this, he regenerates them, and changes them, and puts a
new principle into them: I will give them a new Heart, and a new Spirit, Ezekiel.
36.26. I will cast them in the fire of my Word, and though they are old, tough
untoward metal, I will melt them, and soften them, and they shall run into my
mould. But how can this be? Nature will still run into its old temper; though
it may be a little altered in its form, yet it will still continue the same in
substance and matter. No, I will put my spirit into them, and they shall walk
in my Commandments, and do them. My Spirit shall renew and quite alter their
Spirits, it shall turn the stream of their Hearts from the World and Flesh unto
God, and shall be in them a principle of spiritual life and motion,
srengthening them to walk in my Statutes, and to keep my Commandments, and do
them. The natural Spirit would have served to done natural actions. The Spirit
of the World would have served for a man to have walked according to the course
of the World; but no less than a new Spirit can serve for a new life, and
nothing below the Spirit of God can help unto a faithful walking with God.

Two things, Reader, I would specially commend to thee, without which thou
can never rightly obey any positive Precept; and they are to make sure of a
change in thy Judgment and thy Heart.

1. Make sure of a change in thy Judgment concerning Sin and Obedience. By
nature thou have looked on Sin, as Achan on the Wedge of Gold, and David on
Bathsheba as lovely and desirable; thou have beheld it through the Devils
Spectacles, and so have judged it elegible, if still thou art of the same mind;
though thou may for shame or fear forbear it a while, yet as two Lovers
parted by their Parents contrive and conspire how to meet together, and do find
some opportunity or other concurring with their desires; so thou will find some
time to give thy old beloved Lusts a visit, and as close and fond embraces as
ever. There is a necessity of being renewed in the Spirit of thy Mind, if thou
would not be conformable to the World in sin and folly, Romans 12.2. Formerly
thou have looked on Holiness as a mean contemptible thing, as a foolish
ridiculous thing, as a fruitless unprofitable thing, Joh. 7.48, 49. 1 Cor.
2.14. Job 21.15. Mal. 3. and thereupon have turned thy back upon it: If thou
art still of the same Opinion, thou will be still of thine old ungodly
Conversation. Till thy Mind be enlightened to see the beauty of Holiness, the
excellency of Obedience, the equity of the Divine Precepts, the Right and Title
that God has to thy Person and Service, thou will never perform Duties to any
purpose.

Till thou art turned from Darkness to Light, thou can never be turned from
Satan to God, Acts 26.18. They must be renewed in knowledge after the Image of
him that created them, who would put on the new man, which is after God, is
created in righteousness and true holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. This
illumination is requisite in order to the second thing; there must be a change
in the Judgment, before there can be any in Affections.

2. Get thy Heart changed about Sin and Obedience: If there be not a loathing
in thee of Sin, and a love in thee to Holiness, thou will not much or long
forsake the one, or follow after the other. By nature thou love Sin as thy
Meat and Drink, Prove. 4.17. as thy Dainties, Psalm. 141. as thy Members, Col.
3.5. as thy right Hand and right Eye, Matthew. 18. as thy self, Matthew. 16.24. Now
whilst this love continues, thou can never leave sin. As the Dog may forbear
the meat on the Table whilst the Servants eye is on him, for fear of the
Cudgel. But when he can come at it alone and escape, he will fall to it
greedily. If from a Conviction of the great evil of Sin, thy Heart be not
brought to abhor it; though some qualm of Conscience, or sharp Providence may
make thee desist from it at present; yet when these Distempers (as thou
countest them) are gone, thy Stomach will come; and as one recovered of an
Ague, thou will fall too more greedily, and feed on it more largely than ever.
By Nature thy heart is set against Obedience. Thy Voice is, I will not have
this man to Rule over me. The Voice of thy Heart, which was the Voice of their
Lips; for they spoke plain English. As for the word that thou have spoken to us
in the Name of the Lord, we will not do it, Jer. 44.16. Both the King and his
Laws are odious to thee, and how then shall they be obeyed? If thy Heart
continue thus bent against Holiness, do thou think thou can mind it? All
thy shows, and shadows, and flourishes, and profession, and privilegdes, and
purposes, and promises, will signify nothing for Holiness, or against Sin;
till thou can say with David, I hate every false way: but thy Law do I love,
Psalm. 119. He is hardly separated from his Master, be he God or Satan who is
bound and fastened to him with the heart strings of love. And the Devil shall
find it a tough task to rob Christ of that Servant, who takes pleasure and
delight in his work. Therefore, Reader, thy judgment must be altered, that thou
may judge of Sin and Holiness aright, and thereby thy heart be brought out of
love with Sin, and in love with Holiness; and then the work of Piety will go on
pleasantly, and thou will cheerfully obey the Divine Commands. His Statutes
will be thy Songs, whilst thou art in this house of thy Pilgrimage, Psalm. 119.
O how readily will thou set about thy business, when the Laws of God are the
joy of thy heart, Psalm. 119.111. And thy delight is in his Law, Psalm. 1. when
thou have a nature in thee that inclines, and inableth, and ingageth thee to
godliness, when thou can savor and relish Duties and Ordinances, and taste
them more pleasant to thy Soul, than ever the greatest Dainties have been to
thy Body.

If thou would be truly and positively holy, thou see, Reader, a necessity
of Conversion; without it thou can no more act holily, than a dead man can
move, or a stone walk, or the Tide of it self turn backward, when in its full
strength and career. What then will thou do? For I must confess withal, that
this regenerating Work, which is a resurrection from the Dead, and a new
Creation, is altogether beyond thy power. Thou can as soon stop the Sun in
its course, and Seal up the influence of the Stars, as convert thy self. But to
encourage thee, know that there is help to be had; God has proclaimed himself
the Author of it; James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us, (and his Word and
Ministers the Instruments of it) by the word of Truth. so Acts 26.18. 1 Cor.
4.15. So that thy work must be to wait on God in his Word, and to beg hard of
him, that he would be found of thee in his own way. Alas, how should thou
fill Heaven and Earth night and day with thy Cries, and Groans, and Tears, and
Prayers; when thou considerest, except thou live to God, and walk after
the Spirit, thou art lost for ever; and without a new Heart and new Spirit thou
can not live or walk so, and none but God can do this for thee. O Friend,
fall down on thy knees before him, acknowledge thy unworthiness; urge God with
his Promise, I will give you a new heart, and a new Spirit will I put into you;
and I will take away your hearts of stone, and give unto you hearts of Flesh.
And I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my ways, etc. Ezekiel.
38.26, 27. God cannot deny his own handwriting, he will make good what he has
spoken. Look up to Jesus Christ to plead for thee, who died to purchase
Holiness, and delights to see that paid which he has bought; and has God
engaged to him, That he shall see the travail of his Soul, to his satisfaction,
Isa. 53.10. and persevere in so doing, knowing thou shall reap in time, if thou
faintest not.

CHAP. XLII. Another cause of sins of Omission. Ignorance, with the cure of it;
laboring after knowledge.
2. ANother cause of sins of Omission, is Ignorance. They who know not their
Masters Will can never do it. Let Papists say, That Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion; the Word of God, and our own experience do loudly speak the contrary;
Ephesians. 4.18. They are estranged from the life of God, (i. e. a life of
Holiness, a life in Heaven,) through the ignorance that is in them, because of
the blindness of their hearts. A blind man may well miss his way, and a blind
Mind can never do his work. Whatever the World talks of their honesty and
goodness, notwithstanding their ignorance, Without knowledge the mind is not
good, Prove. 19.2. They presume to excuse their dark Heads with their good
Hearts, but these two are inconsistent. A dark Cellar is not fuller of Vermin,
nor a dark hole of dust, than a dark Heart is of filthiness, Hos. 4.1, 2. They
who want the knowledge of God, are under the dominion of the Devil. He is the
Ruler of the darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6. And I am sure the unclean Spirit
never bears sway in a clean Heart, nor this evil Spirit in a good Heart. No, as
the Eagle, he first pecks out the eyes of his prey, and then devours it. How
easily is a blind Soul conquered and killed by the enemies of his Salvation?
What Error will not an ignorant Creature swallow down? he is like water, ready
to take the impression and form of what Vessel you please to pour him into,
Matthew. 22.29. Our Savior tells the Sadduces, That they erred, not knowing the
Scriptures. And the Apostles told the Corinthians, who doubted at least about
the Resurrection, (as the Sadduces denied it) Some have not the knowledge of
God, 1 Cor. 15.32. What crime will not an ignorant man commit? Knowledge to the
Mind is as Light to the World, which discovers our way, and thereby prevents
our wanderings; but it is no wonder at all for men in the night, and darkness of
ignorance, to go astray, or to stumble and fall. If a man walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because he sees not the light of this World, Joh. 11.9. Why do we
think Sin is called a work of darkness, truly, not only because it is from the
Devil, the Prince of Darkness; and he that does evil loves darkness, hates the
light, and it is the way to blackness of darkness; but also because it is
conceived in the Womb of a dark Heart: The Prince of Darkness may beget what
Monsters he pleases on such Persons, 2 Timothy 3.3. Ignorant women were laden
with diverse lusts. No soil fuller of such weeds, than that which is not manured
with knowledge. St. Paul's ignorance was the ground of his wasting the Church
at such a cruel rate. I was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, injurious, but I did it
ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. That Monster Sin, which the Sun hid his head as
ashamed to behold the Murder of our Lord Jesus Christ, had ignorance for its
Mother: Acts 3.15. Ye killed the Prince of Life, verse. 17. And now Brethren, I
wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers. So the Apostle
Paul, Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Now if
ignorance be the cause of such grieveous Commissions, it must much more be the
cause of Omission; for in all these Commissions there are great Omissions: but
I shall show particularly that Ignorance is one cause of sins of Omission.

We are bound to love God, and that with all our Hearts, and with all our
Souls, and with all our Strength, Matthew. 22.37. But is it possible to love one
whom we are ignorant of? Did ever any fear an unknown Evil, or desire or
delight in an unknown Good? Are not the greatest Rarities, and richest Jewels
of the World, that are undiscovered, undesired. The Apostle says, He that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? 1 John 3. I am sure he that does not so much as see God with the eye of
his Soul, his Understanding can never love him. We say, What the eye sees not,
the heart grieves not; it is as true, what the eye sees not, the heart loves
not.

Who can obey Divine Precepts, who is ignorant of them? or fear Divine
Threatenings, who does not know them? or be allured by Divine Promises, who is
altogether a stranger to them? God, and Christ, and Pardon, and Life, and
Promises, and Covenant, may stand long enough knocking at the door of an Heart
fastened with Ignorance, before they will find admittance. It is our Duty, our
great Gospel-Duty, to believe in Christ, Joh. 6. This is his Commandment, that
ye believe in him whom he has sent, 1 John 3.23. But ignorance hinders this,
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, Romans 10.10. Who will
trust a mere stranger, especially in a matter of weight? I had need to know him
well whom I trust with my Soul and Salvation, with all I am worth for this and
the other World. A wise man will not venture his Estate, much less his Life,
least of all his Soul with one of whose integrity, and faithfulness, and
ability, and responsibleness he has not good assurance. The Psalmists saying
is, They that know thy Name, will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. They who know thy
Grace and Goodness, thy Promise, and Power, and Truth, they will trust thee,
but others will not. Paul's hope could not have been so high, nor the Wine of
his joy so brisk, when his Death drew near, had it not been for his great
acquaintance with him with, whom he had ventured his all; 2 Timothy 1.12. I know
whom I have believed, (how willing, how ready, how able to save me,) and what I
have committed to him, he is able to keep for me against that day. Knowledge is
so requisite to Faith, that it is once and again put for Faith, Isa. 53.10. 1
Cor. 2.2. Joh. 17.3. Phil. 3.8, 9. but Ignorance is Faiths great hinderance.

Again, Our Duty is to repent even pain of eternal perdition, Luke 13.3. Matthew.
11.22, 23. But ignorance causes men to omit this as well as the other. Where
there is a vail upon the Understanding, there is ever a caul upon the Heart and
Conscience. As in the night season, we have always the hardest Frosts and the
coldest weather. Therefore the Holy Ghost tells us, when Israel shall repent
and turn to the Lord, The vail shall be taken away, 2 Cor. 3.16, 17. While the
vail remains, they are still turning more and more from God, till wrath come
upon them to the uttermost; but when the Vail shall be taken away, that they
shall see the evil, and mischief, and loathsomeness, and folly of those ways
they have turned to; and also for the beauty, and amiableness, and bounty, and
kindness of that God they have turned from, then they will quickly return unto
the Lord. Indeed, men may thank their Ignorance for most of their Omissions,
especially the Heathen, and many Christians who live in dark corners of the
Land. I, and many who are as void and empty of Knowledge, as the Heathen who
live under the Gospel. Many of these neglect Family Duties, Closet-Prayer, a
strict Sanctification of the Lord's Day, edifying others to their power as
opportunity is offered them, and several others, because they do not understand
them to be their Duty.

Reader, the cure of this must be for thee, if ignorant, to labor after the
Knowledge of God, and thy Duty to him. When David leaves his charge with his
Son Solomon, to serve and worship the blessed God, as the great business of his
life; Mark how he begins with the means thereof, and concludes with the motive
thereto. And thou Solomon my Son, know the God of thy Fathers, and serve him
with a perfect heart and willing mind: If thou seek him, he will be found of
thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
As if he had said, Solomon, thou Son of my Love, thou Son of my Vows, I am now
dying, and going to my long home; Nature and Grace, my love to thee, and to
God, do both strongly incline me to desire thy welfare, and to wish thee well
eternally; I know not better how to speak and declare it, than by charging and
commanding thee, that whatever thou omittest or neglectest, thou would adore
and worship the God of thy Fathers, and that not formally and customarily, but
solemnly and sincerely, with a perfect Heart and willing Mind; and to this end
there is a necessity of thy knowing him. Till thou know his Grace and
Goodness, thou will never love him; till thou know his Holiness and Justice,
thou will never fear him; till thou know his Promises, and Power, and
Faithfulness, thou will never trust him; and till thou know his boundless
Sovereignty and Dominion over, his unquestionable Right and Propriety in the
works of his Hands, thou will never obey him; therefore study the knowledge of
this God of thy Fathers, that thou may serve him; for be assured, he will not
be mocked: But with the Upright, he will carry himself upright; and with the
Froward, he will carry himself froward, Psalm. 18. If thou live after the
Flesh, thou shall die; if thou walk after the Spirit, thou shall live. If
thou seek him in his own way, with all thy Heart, as the great work and
business of thy Life, he will reveal himself to thee, and be found of thee in a
way of Grace and Favor; but if thou embrace the World, or the Flesh, as thy
Sovereigns or Portions, and so cast him off; be confident he will forsake and
cast thee off for ever, and then what will Devils do to thee, and what misery
will not surprise thee? Friend, God affords thee many helps for knowledge, and
will thou not labor after it? shall men stumble, and fall into Hell, for want
of doing their Duties; and neglect to do their Duties for want of knowledge,
and that in the clear Sunshine of the Gospel, as those do that live in the
night and darkness of Heathenism and Paganism? Reader, will thou not see at
Midday, at Noonday? shall neither the Works nor Word of God teach thee the
knowledge of him? Would thou do the Will of God or not? if thou would not,
I have no more to say to thee, But the Lord have mercy on thee. If thou
would, as thou must, if ever thou be saved, Matthew. 23. Thou see a necessity
of knowledge, for can thy Child or Servant do thy Will, if they be ignorant of
thy Will. Is it rational to expect, that one who knows not what thou would
have, should do what thou would have? Why can not thou make thy Beast as
pliable, and as obedient to thee as thy Son? Is it not because thy Beast is not
so capable of understanding thy mind as thy Son is? Nay, if thou should do
what God commands, and not know that he commanded it, thou could not obey him
in it; for all Obedience consists in doing what God bids us, because he bids
us, Psalm. 119.5, 6. For unless his Authority do principally sway the
Conscience, in our subjection to what he enjoins, it is nothing worth. God hates
blind Sacrifices, Mal. 1. Reader, would thou have high and honorable
thoughts of God? would thou have awful and reverential apprehensions of God?
would thou have Heart and Life wholly at his Command, then know him, Psalm.
78.1. In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel. How comes his Name to
be so much reverenced, and praised, and admired in his Church more than in all
the World beside; but because there he is better known. In Judah is God known;
thence his Name is so great in Israel. Father, the World has not known thee,
but these have known thee, Joh. 17. So that, Reader, if ever thou would
esteem, and honor, and love, and obey God, get the knowledge of him. This is
spiritual life, and the seed of eternal, Joh. 17.3. Be not brutish in the
shape of a man, as the Horse and Mule which has no understanding, Psalm. 32.9.
Psalm. 49. ult. Psalm. 92.6. but take any pains in hearing, and reading, and
meditating, and in conferring with others, that thou may get knowledge. They
shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. The Merchant ventures
to and fro, from Port to Port, in a wooden bottom, to increase his Wealth, and
get some precious Pearls. Knowledge is a Jewel of much greater value; Let no
labor be thought too much for it, especially cry after Knowledge, and lift up
thy Voice for Understanding; seek her as Silver, and search for her as for hid
Treasure: Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2.4, 5, 6.

CHAP. XLIII. Another cause of sins of Omission, Idleness, with the cure of it.
3. A Third cause of sins of Omission, is Idleness. Negative Holiness requires
no great pains; a man may forbear Drunkenness, swearing, lying, stealing, etc.
without any great labor. A man may keep his Bed, or his Chair all day, and so
do no hurt. Some men, as the Historian observes, Tacitus.
are sola socordia innocents, do no mischief (not because they dare not, God
having forbidden it, but) because it would cost them some pains to do it. Their
Heads must work to plot and contrive it, and their Hands to manage and execute
it. There is a sluggish temper and poorness of spirit in many men, who prefer a
mean quiet before a treasure with labor. The Sluggard would do evil as other
men, only he is unwilling to lose his sleep and ease, as they do to accomplish
their wicked designs; and he would do good as others, (I mean in regard of the
matter of Duties) only he is loath to be at the labor. Negative godliness
requires only a siting still, and a forbearing to meddle with such and such
things which God has prohibited; but positive Godliness (if to any purpose)
requires industry, and zeal, and activity, and the putting forth our strength
and spirits, which makes the idle Wretch take his leave of it. The slothful
Servant could let his Talent lie still in the Earth, and not lay it out in
gaming and rioting, etc. and continue his slothfulness; but if he had improved
it, in trading for his Masters profit, he must have gone up and down, and taken
pains.

It Is easy to forbear cursing, and swearing, and blaspheming the Name of God;
these may suit well with a torpid idle person, but to call on the Name of God,
to pray fervently, to pray without ceasing, to lift up to the Soul in prayer,
to pour out the heart, to stir up ones self to wrestle with God, to seek him
with all the heart, with the whole heart; this will require some pains and
labor, and this makes him forbear it. Again, it is no great pains for a man to
keep himself from hearing lascivious, vain, backbiting, or flattering, or evil
Language; a man may but forbear coming into such company, or depart from them,
when he understands them about such wickedness; but for a man to hear the
Word of God, with reverence, as the Word of God; with meekness, as willing to
be governed by it; with Faith, as believing all the Promises and Threatenings of
it to be of unquestionable certainty, and with a resolution to practice it, as
knowing we shall be judged by it at the day of Christ; this will cost some head
and heart work, which the sleepy Drone is unwilling to come to.

Again, the right performance of Duties in regard of the manner, requires much
more pains than in regard of the matter; therefore they who take upon them a
Form, deny the power of Godliness; and who are not guilty of external, are yet
of internal Omissions. How many pray or mumble over a few words Morning and
Evening to God, (and are pleased with it, as if therefore all were well, and
think God pleased too,) who never trouble themselves with minding that
reverence, humility, uprightness, sense of want, Faith in Christ, importunity
of desires which God expects in every prevalent Prayer; and the reason is,
because the former is so easy, and the latter so laborious.

Besides, for a man to examine his own heart frequently and impartially, and to
call himself to a strict account what he has been and done in the World, and
what is like to become of him, and to befall him for ever; for him to take the
Looking-Glass of the Law of God, and therein to behold his Heart and Life, and
having compared his practices with the Divine Precepts, which are exceeding
broad, to accuse, and judge, and condemn, and loath, and abhor himself; for him
to lay himself low before the Lord, and to acknowledge and confess with shame,
and anger, and grief, his filthiness and wickedness, and to beg Pardon and
Grace, as earnestly as one that believes, if his requests be denied, his poor
Soul is damned for ever. Friend, Friend, this is hard and painful work, and the
idle man will not meddle. Once more, he that will be positively holy, must
watch himself in all his ways, must watch for opportunities of Service to God;
he must catch at them, and improve them, when he has them put into his hand;
he must stand always upon his guard, to defend himself against his enemies; and
be as a Sparrow upon the housetop, to look about and consider where he may
pick up any spiritual food for his Soul; he must design, and study, and
contrive how he may spend his time, and parts, and strength, and estate to the
best advantage of his Lord and Master; and think nothing too much, no pains, no
labor, no not his blood for his Lord's Honor; and will a sluggard that lies
with his hands in his bosom do this, or any part of this? Ah Friend, the sleepy
World dream of Happiness upon easy terms, as if they could walk to Heaven in a
pleasant Meadow, or be carried to Heaven in a Down-bed; but it must not be, it
cannot be; Difficilia quae pulchra. Can thou obtain any thing that is
excellent, unless thou art diligent? Does the Tradesman get an Estate, who is
not industrious to look after his Customers, his Books, and whatsoever concerns
his Calling? Can he who sits still in his Chimney-corner, and neither minds
buying in, nor selling out; nor takes care how things are ordered in his Shop,
ever exspect to be rich? Reader, if ever thou will make any thing of it, there
is a necessity of shaking off this slothfulness. I must tell thee, an idle
person is the Devils Cushion, his own burden, unlike and loathsome to God, and
a wem in the Body Politic where he lives. To cure this, Reader, I must say to
thee, as the Apostle to the Ephesians, Awake thou that sleep, arise from the
dead, Ephesians. 5.14. Friend, thy work is not to be done sleeping; God-work,
Soul-work, Eternity-work is not to be done sleeping. Laboring, wrestling,
fighting, striving, running, are not to be done sleeping, Joh. 6.27. Genesis
32.24. Matthew. 6.13. 1 Cor. 9. Do thou think to attain everlasting Pleasures,
and not to take pains? Does God value his blissful Mansions at so low a rate,
as to throw them away upon those who slight them, and judge them unworthy their
utmost endeavors? Is the price of Heaven fallen since the Redeemers being in
the World? then it was, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness
thereof, Matthew. 6.33. And strive to enter in at the strait Gate, Matthew. 7.33.
And labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, Matthew. 6.27. And is
it now laze and loyter, and be blessed for ever. Though God does not exspect
from thee a natural price for his Son, that is impossible for Men or Angels to
give; yet he does exspect that pactional price which he has set down in his
Word, as the condition of those that shall have a part in him.

Reader, do thou know what pains the Merchant takes for corruptible
Treasures, how he ventures his life in a wooden-bottom, and a tempestuous
Ocean, and is every moment in danger of death; how he sails from Haven to
Haven, disposing and exchanging Commodities, trading and trafficking with
persons of diverse Countries and Languages, and all to get a little wealth; and
if worldly Pearls cannot be had without pains, do thou think the Pearl of
great and inestimable price, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the fruits of his
precious blood may be had for nothing. I tell thee, as God valued his Son at so
high a rate, as to accept of his temporary sufferings as fuller satisfaction to
his Justice on the behalf of millions of Souls; than if they had fried millions
of millions of millions of years in Hell; so God will make thee value and prize
him, if ever thou partake any benefit by him. And if thou once come to know
his worth, and to esteem him accordingly; thou will think no toil, no sweat;
nay, no blood too good or too much for him.

Friend, ponder the work of positive Godliness, and then judge whether
diligence be not requisite. Closet-Duties, as praying, reading, self-examining,
and Family Duties must daily be performed, and that with life and vigor, and
all the Soul, and all the strength: Thy earthly Calling must be followed with
heavenly affections; and whilst thy Occupation is amongst men, thy Conversation
must be with God. In all Companies, and at all Seasons, and in all Conditions,
thou art to be in the fear of God, and watchful over thy self, that thou do
nothing to displease him, and solicitous how thou may do that which is most
pleasing to him. Thou must love God with all thy heart, when he seems most
angry with thee; and trust in his goodness, when he inflicts never so great or
so many evils on thee. Thy duty is to believe in a crucified Christ, and so
venture thy Soul on the death of another, upon the bare warrant of Scripture;
thou art required to deny, and bemoan, and abhor thy self, as near and dear as
thou art to thy self, to mortify thy earthly members, and to cut off thy right
hand, and pluck out thy right eye. Not a Relation, not a Condition, not an
Ordinance, not a Providence, but calls for Duties, suitable Duties to be
performed, and not one of these Duties but calls for suitable Graces to be
exercised. Besides, ere these Duties can be performed, and these Graces
exercised, many strong and sturdy lusts must be subdued; the allurements on one
hand of a flattering, gaudy, giddy, skin-deep World, as Babies to please
Children, trampled on; and its afrightments, as Cloths stuffed with straw, to
scare Birds, must be despised. I, and all the Powers and Policies of Hell
combated with, and conquered. And, Friend, can all this be done with thy hands
in thy Pocket, or without pains. It Is in vain to think of freedom from
Omissions, whilst thou lie on the bed of Security. Water corrupts, and
breeds venomous Creatures, whilst it stands still; it is preserved sweet by
motion, as we experience in running-streams. The unused Iron rusteth, whilst
that which is used grows daily more bright. Neither Nature nor Art will
afford us any thing that is good without labor. The ground will not yield its
fruit, unless the Husbandman dung, and plow, and dress, and harrow it. Can any
Artist make an excellent Clock, or Watch, or curious Vessel without pains? And
will thou presume of Holiness and Heaven without it? The Heavens are ever in
motion for the benefit of this lower World, and never stand still but by a
Miracle. The Earth is always laboring to bring forth fruit for our profit and
delight, and never idle and barren, but as cursed of God for man's sin. Adam in
his estate of Innocence, was by God himself taught a Lesson of Industry, and
commanded to till the ground. Our blessed Savior was not idle; but when he
undertook the work of man's Redemption, went up and down doing good, denying
himself his sleep. A great while before day he was at prayer, Mark 1. and he
prayed all night. He denied himself his Food when he was hungry, and
disappointed of Food at the Fig Tree; he goes not to an house to eat, but to
the Synagogue to preach. He denied himself his ease and pleasure, and all to
follow his business, Joh. 9.4. As he said, so he did; I must work the work of
him that sent me whilst it is day. And did Christ contend, and fight, and
strive, and wrestle night and day before he was crowned, or could enjoy the Joy
set before him; and do thou think to have all for nothing?

Reader, to conclude this Head consider, Romans 12.11. Not slothful in business,
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Where we have the Duty (I am persuading
thee to) commanded by the Apostle (in regard of its great weight, extraordinary
difficulty, or backwardness to it,) both ways: 1. Negatively, not slothful in
business; i. e. you will do nothing at it if ye be sleepy or slothful; the
business is not such as may be done in a dream. As idleness is the burial of
our persons, so slothfulness is the burial of our actions. It Is bad to be slow
at our business, but much worse to be slothful. 2. Affirmatively, fervent in
Spirit; this is the greatest diligence possible. Fervency is the heat and
height of the Affections, and is as contrary to slothfulness as fire to water.
When the powers and faculties of the Soul are wound up to their highest pitch
in the Service of God; then a man may be said to be fervent in Spirit. The
labor of the body is nothing to the labor of the brains, and the sweating of
the outward man is little to the industry of the inward man. He that has the
heart of a man, may command his purse and hands, and what he has. Fervency of
Spirit, or intension of Mind about any business, will call in his time, and
wealth, and strength, and all to its assistance.

2. The Duty is urged by an high and weighty reason, serving the Lord. It Is the
Majesty, Excellency, Purity, and boundless Perfection of the Object, which
requires such warmth, and life, and heat, and fervency of Spirit in those that
adore him. Though we may make bold with our fellow-dust and ashes, with those
that are of the same make and mould with our selves; yet the most High, he
whose Name alone is Excellent, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, to whom the
whole Creation is less than nothing; he is not to be made bold with. His
immense Being and Perfections command the highest and the hottest affections.
The greatest Prince must not be put off with less than the greatest Present.

CHAP. XLIV. Another cause of Omissions, is vain excuses men have, that
Omissions are little sins, with the cure of it.
4. A Fourth cause of sins of Omission, is a Presumption, or false Opinion that
men have concerning them, and so they think to excuse them.

1. That they are little sins, and so not much to be minded.

2. That the performance of them would be unseasonable at this or that time,
and so they are put off to another time that never comes.

3. That when they are called to the performance of this or that Duty, they
neglect it with this excuse, that it is but one Duty they live in the neglect
of, or it can be no great matter for once to omit it. Reader, I shall handle
these severally, and show first, that these foolish excuses which men please
themselves with, do cause Omissions, and then direct to the cure of each
severally.

1. The first excuse is, that Omissions are small sins, and this Opinion is
generally rooted in all men. Because they do not fly in the face of Conscience,
disturb the light of Reason, trouble the Societies where, and debauch the
persons amongst whom we live, as some sins of Commission do; therefore thy
fancy (for it is but a fancy) that they are light and little, and no great
matter is to be made of them. When once a man has sucked in this poisonous
Opinion, no wonder if his heart swell, and his life swarm with such sins. For
when his Nature has a reluctance against the positive Precepts, (much more
than against the negative) and his lazy temper sets him farther off, and he
believes that they are Peccadilloes, and little taken notice of by God; yea,
that a pardon in the High Court of Heaven is allowed in course for such small
offenses; what should hinder but he should abound and continue in them to the
end of his life, unless his judgment of them be altered.

In all our converses and dealings, we are most careless about matters which we
judge to be of small concernment. For it is judged a part of folly to be very
solicitous about toys and trifles. If I have a slight cut on my Finger, or my
skin razed, I possibly let it go, and am nothing troubled about it; but if a
bone be broken, or a vital part infected, I am not a little perplexed, and
quickly apply the best means for the cure of it. The less I apprehend the
danger to be, the less care I take to prevent it.

We see it by experience about the Laws of men, that those Laws, the breach of
which they presume will be generally winked at, and little taken notice of by
the Magistrate (as relieving Beggars, and several others,) are seldom observed,
and men at most are indifferent whether they keep them or no; but for those
Laws which they believe will be severely reckoned for, if men break them; as
those against Thefts, Murders, Ravishments, Treasons, and the like; these they
will be tender of, and take care lest they should incur their penalties. Truly,
so it is about the Laws of God; we do usually make some conscience of those
Laws which we apprehend have Death, and Hell, and Wrath, and Damnation
attending the breach of them; but those Laws, the breach of which we presume is
no great matter, and little minded by God, we are careless and indifferent
about.

To cure this, Reader, consider these three or four particulars.

1. I grant, that there are degrees of Sin: All sins are not of the same size,
nor every Sinner of the same stature. All ordinary Births which Satan begets
upon the hearts of men are not of the same bigness; yet sometimes we find
Monsters born. Some sins are compared to Camels, others to Gnats, Matthew. 23.24.
Some to Motes, others to Beams, Matthew. 7.3. Some to Talents, others to
Farthings or Pence. Our Savior tells us of a Creditor who had two Debtors, the
one owed much more than the other, Luke 7.41. So Luke 16.5. Some sins are
pardonable, other sins unpardonable, Matthew. 12.31. Wherefore I say unto you,
all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. The Stoics (as Tully
observes in his Paradoxes, and the Jovinians, Epist. 29. cap. 1.
as St. Hierom testifies in his Second Book against them, sided with them,)
held, That all sins were equal, because all sins are aberrations from the rule,
and a going beyond the bounds; but it is to be considered that some may wander
farther from their rule, and out of their way than others. Some may shoot wider
than others, though both miss the mark.

A sin against the First Table, caeteris paribus, is greater than a sin against
the Second, 1 Samuel 2.25. as being more immediately against God. Whereas all sin
has its sinfulness from its opposition and offensiveness to so infinite a
Majesty, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned. Thus we read that
Witchcraft and Idolatry, which directly disown God as the greatest sins, 1 Samuel 15.13. And our Lord Jesus, when asked what was the first and great
Commandment, answers, To love the Lord our God with all our hearts, etc. Matthew.
22.11. Spiritual sins are greater than bodily sins; 1. As those by which we
most imitate the Devil, who is for spiritual wickednesses in high places,
Ephesians. 6. All sin is from Satan per modum servitutis; but these sins per modum
imaginis. 2. As those sins by which we most directly oppose God, who is a
Spirit, Joh. 4.24. and therefore God most directly sets himself in battel-array
against them. 3. As those sins that defile and pollute most the chiefest part
of man, his spirit, in which regard the Apostle calls them filthiness of
spirit; and distinguishes them from the filthiness of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7.1.
4. As those sins which are the spring of all bodily and outward sins; Out of
the heart proceed Murders, Blasphemies, Thefts, etc. Matthew. 15.19. 5. As those
sins have more of the heart and spirit in them; the malignity of sin, in regard
of its Object, is from the immensity of that God against whom it is committed;
in regard of its Subject, it is from the degree of that heartiness and
willingness with which it is committed. To back-slide in heart, is more than
back-slide from God with our tongues, and deny him vocally, Prove. 14.14. Such a
one shall be filled with his own ways and wickedness. To err in heart, is the
provocation indeed, Heb. 3.10. To err in heart is much worse than to err in our
heads; the more of the heart and spirit in any Service, the more lovely and
acceptable to God; the more of the heart and spirit in any sin, the more
loathsome and abominable to God. 6. As those sins which have their full scope
and swing. In bodily sins a man is curbed, as in Uncleanness, by the weakness
or weariness of his Body; in Prodigality, and Luxury, and Pride, by the
weakness of his Estate; in Murder, by his Antagonist's strength, or his fear of
the Law, or want of opportunity: But spiritual sins have none of these
obstacles or hindrances. He whose Body is so weak, that he cannot know one
Woman, may yet in his Spirit defile hundreds in one day. He whose Estate is so
small, that he can scarce maintain himself, will yet in his thoughts keep a
Table for a Prince, throw away hundreds upon provision for the Flesh, and be as
great an Emperor as he pleases. He whose sickness, and lowness of quality,
and want of a convenient season, hinders him from doing his Neighbor the
least actual injury, may yet in his Spirit slay more than Sampson did with the
jawbone of an Ass in a much less time.

Sins against Knowledge are greater than sins of Ignorance. Our Savior tells
the Jews, That if they had been blind, they had had no sin; but because ye say
ye see, therefore your sin remains, Joh. 9. Sins against knowledge are sins
against our own light, and thereby we offer violence to our selves, Romans 1.21,
to 28.2. More daring to God; for he who is ignorant of his Masters will, cannot
do any thing, or omit any thing to dare him or to provoke him, because he does
not know what is displeasing to him; but he who knows what God would have,
and omits what he commands, or does what he forbids, may rather be supposed
to commit the one or omit the other, because of his enmity to God. 3. As more
against the mercy of God. Knowledge is a great mercy: The Understanding of Man
is the Candle of the Lord. And sins against it are therefore the more
provoking, because against the Divine goodness, Joh. 15.4. These sins against
knowledge make way for the sin against the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32. Heb. 6.4,
5, 6. Sins against the Gospel are greater than sins against the Law. Those sins
are against the natural Law, the moral, and the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. and
are committed in the face of the Sun, as they are against the clearest Light,
so they are against the sweetest Love, and therefore the more sinful. A Taper
in the hand of a Ghost makes it look the more ghastly; This is the condemnation,
Joh. 3.19.

Sins repeated and reiterated, are much greater than sins once committed:
Hereby the habit of Sin is strengthened; frequent acts root the habits. Hereby
the long-suffering of God is abused; for the more patient he is, the more he is
provoked, Romans 2.4. As in Numbers, one in the first place stands but for a
single one, in the second place ten, in the third place for an hundred, the
fourth place for a thousand; so here, each Repetition is a great aggravation;
Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his heart, shall be (see the
grievousness of his punishment, not afflicted, but) destroyed (the quickness of
it) speedily, (and the irrecoverableness of it) and that without remedy. It Is
one thing to fall into the water, another thing to lie there; it is the latter
that drowns men.

The Sins of the people of God are greater respectively than the Sins of
others; therefore they are said only to do evil, as if all the World beside
were innocent, Jer. 32. The Children of Israel and the Children of Judah have
only done evil before me. Deuteronomy. 32.6
1. As these Sins are committed against the greatest Obligations on Gods part,
against the electing, calling, pardoning, adopting, saving-love, each of these
is an aggravation of Sin. God accents Isreal's Sin from his special kindness,
Hos. 11.1. Although I was an Husband to them. 2. As they are committed against
the most solemn engagements on our part. Every of Gods people does expressly
before God, Angels, and Men, promise and covenant to be the Lords, wholly,
universally, and eternally the Lords. The Israelites avouched God to be theirs.
And David swore that he would be Gods obedient Servant, Psalm. 119. I have
sworn, and I will perform, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. And it is
no mean Sin to be guilty of Perjury. God aggravates the Sin of his people by
this, They all like men have transgressed the Covenant. 3. As these Sins are
committed against the greatest helps to Obedience; An enlightened Mind, a
renewed Will, sanctified Affections, an awakned Conscience, and a principle of
Life or new Nature, are all opposed and resisted by their Disobedience. This
cut the heart of David, that God made him to know Wisdom secretly, Psalm. 51.6.
4. As the Sins of these men cause God to be more blasphemed and dishonored
than the Sins of others, Levit. 22.31. Nathan tells David, By this deed thou
have given great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14.
Indeed, these by falling into sin after their Repentance, seem to repent of
their Repentance, and to lick up their Vomit.

Sins of Omission may be greater in respect of the person committing them, a
Believer, in regard of the means the Offender enjoys. The Word of the Divine
Grace, in regard of the matter he omits, the Duties of the Gospel, and in many
other respects than Sins of Commissions in others, who have not such
circumstances.

It is very evident, and cannot be denied, that Sins are unequal; for though
Original Sin, as the Logicians say of Substantia, be not capable of magis and
minus, of intension or remission, of aggravation or diminution; yet actual sins
are like qualities and quantities which receive more or less addition or
substraction, and have their Latitude and Degrees. For this cause under the Law
there were diversity of Sacrifices for diversity of Sin, Levit. 4.

2. I answer, that no sins are little simply: Though there is a difference of
sins considered comparatively, and so sins may be said to be little, if
compared with those that are more heinous; yet no sins absolutely considered
are little. The least Sin resembles the Earth, which though but a point to the
Heavens, yet is a vast immeasurable Body in it self.

1. Because all sins are against a great and infinite Majesty. Reader, it is the
excellency of the Person whose Authority is contemned, and Commands violated,
and whose Name is dishonored by sin that gives sin its name, speaks its
heinous Nature, and is the highest aggravation of it, Numb. 32.23. and this is
done in all Sins. Friend, till thou can hear of a little God contemned,
abused, disgraced, and resisted by Sin, speak no more of little sins in excuse
for thy allowance of them, Zach. 1.5.

2. Because the price paid to make satisfaction for all sins of what size or
sort soever, was a great price. It is the blood, the precious blood of the Son
of God, Live. 5.17, 18.
and that only that can wash away the least Sin, 1 John 1.7. Aaron must offer
Sacrifice for pollution in a man's dream, that he never thought of possibly but
in sleep. And for the Sins which the Jews committed ignorantly, not
understanding them to be any offense to God; and in answer to those Types our
Redeemer is said to die for the ignorance, the errors of the people. Reader,
till that thou can tell of a Sin so little, that somewhat less than the death
of him who was God will satisfy for it, call no Sin little.

3. Because no little punishment is the due and desert of every Sin. The wages
of Sin is Death, and Hell, and infinite Wrath of an Almighty God; and therefore
its the wages of every Sin, Romans 6. ult. A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.
Because fire as fire burns, therefore every fire burns; because Sin as Sin
damneth, therefore every Sin damneth. So that all Sins bring greater
intolerable eternal Sufferings. Endless banishment from the blissful presence
of God and Christ, everlasting burnings amongst Devils and damned Ones, is the
desert of every Sin. Reader, when thou can tell of a little Fire, and little
Torments in Hell, and little horrors and terrors of Soul, there to be the fruit
of Sin: Call not any of thy sins little. Another thing, Reader, I would
advertise thee of; No Sin is little to him who thinks it so. Sins may be said
to be mortal or venial: 1. In respect of their own Nature, and so no Sins are
venial; but the least is mortal. 2. In respect of the Divine Favor. 3. In
regard of the Issue. In the two last respects, all the sins of such as believe
and repent are venial; not in the Popish sense, so as to be in their own nature
no transgressions, but praeter-transgressions of the Divine Law, and not
properly sins, but analogically, but they are venial, as God for Christ's sake
does forgive them. Either those Sins which they term venial, are forbidden by
the Law of God or not; if not, they are no Sins, or the Law of God is
imperfect; if they be forbidden, they are mortal. For cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do it, Gal. 3.10.

3. I answer, suppose Sins of Omission were little, yet it is folly and madness
upon this to allow of them. A mote in the eye is a little thing, it hinders
our sight of the Sun, and is big enough to put us to great pain, and to disturb
our whole Body. The Flies and Lice of Egypt were little Creatures, but great
Plagues. The sting of a Be is a little thing, but it puts us to grievous
torment. He who refused to give a few crumbs, was denied one drop, Luke 16.21.
A fly spoils an Alablaster Box of Ointment; a little poison spoils much
wholesome Liqour.

1. If they were little, yet they are Sins, and that enough to set a good man
against them. It Is as much Treason to Coin a penny, as a twenty shillings piece;
because the Royal Authority is as much violated in the one as in the other.
There is the same rotundity in a little Ball or Bullet, as in a great one. The
Authority of God is as truly despised in the breach of the least Commandments,
as some are called, as in the breach of the greatest, as others are called,
Matthew. 22.36, 37. A sprig of Wormwood has the same bitterness with the Plant.
A drop of Seawater has the same saltness with the Ocean. The smallest Sin is
a breach of the Royal Law as well as the greatest, 1 John 3.4. Though the
Object may be different, yet the Command is still the same. And the wise man
tells us, That the Law must be kept as the apple of the Eye, which is offended
by the smallest dust, Prove. 7.2. The brats of Babylon must be dashed against
the Wall, as the strongest men must be destoyed.

It Is worth the while to observe in Scripture how lesser Sins (being of the
same nature) have given to them the names of the greater. Malice is called
Murder, lustful looks Adultery, sitting at Idolatrous Feasts (though which no
thought of worshipping the Idol) Idolatry, Job 31.27, 28.

This is argument enough against the smallest Sin, that it is a Sin. As the
Will of God is the highest motive to Obedience, so also against Disobedience.
All Sin, as Sin, affronts the Divine Dominion, as if he had not Authority to
command us; and to the Divine Wisdom, as if God did not know what were fit for
us to do, and to forbear; and to the Divine Grace, as if he had no respect to
our good in his Precepts; and is not this sufficient reason for our hatred of
it, and watchfulness against it?

Reader, I Know thou would not venture upon a spoonful of Poison, but would
consider its of the same nature with a pint or a quart; and why will thou
venture on any Sin, be it never so little in thine eye, when it is of the same
nature, a transgression of the same Law, a contempt of the same Lord with the
greatest. It is Murder to stifle an Infant in the Womb, as well as to kill a
grown person.

Reader, whatsoever has the nature of Sin, must be the Object of thy hatred,
let it be comparatively little or great.

2. These little sins (if they be so) will make way for greater. Little wedges
open the way in the most knotty wood for bigger. As Thieves, when they go to
rob an House, if they cannot force open the doors, or break through the Walls,
let in a little Boy at the window, who unbolts and unlocks the door, and so
lets in the whole Rabble. Thus the Devil, when men startle at greater sins, and
by them he has no hopes to get possession of their Souls, he puts them upon
those sins which they think little, and by these insensibly enters; for they
once admitted, open the doors of the Eyes, of the Ears, and of the Heart too,
whereby the whole Legion enter, and rule and domineer in their Souls to their
ruin. Men do not, indeed they cannot imagine the woeful consequences of
neglecting their watch against the least Sin. How many who have been so modest
and maidenly at first, that they would not so much as give a lascivious person
the hearing, when he has spoken wantonly; yet by giving way to their own
foolish thoughts, have at last prostituted themselves to their pleasure without
any shame. Sinners increase to more ungodliness, when they once venture down
hill, they know not where nor when to stop. Workmen bore holes with little
Wimbles, which make way for the driving of great Nails.

When Pompey, says Plutarch, could not prevail with a City to billet his Army,
he yet persuaded them to take in a few weak maimed Soldiers; but those soon
recovered strength, and let in the whole Army, to command and govern the City.
Thus Satan by sins of Infirmity prevails at length for sins of Presumption.
Great storms arise out of little gusts; and Clouds no bigger than the palm of a
man's hand, comes in time to cover the whole Heavens. The greatest River is fed
with drops, and the biggest Mountain made up of atoms. As Sylla said, when (in
his Proscription time, that he slew so many) one pleaded for the life of
Caesar, In uno Caesare multi Marii. In one little Youth, many old subtle men;
so in one little Sin, there may be many great ones. When one evil Spirit has
got lodging in the Heart, he prepares it, and makes room for seven more wicked
and worse than himself.

Keepers first ply their Deer with little Beagles till it be heated and blown,
and then they put on their great Buck-Hounds. So the Devil first plies us with
little sins, afterward when we are used to them with greater. One circle made
with a stone in the water, makes way for a second greater than it, the second
for a third greater than that, etc. Rivers (far from their Springs) grow as
they go along greater and greater, and enlarge their Channels, till at last they
empty themselves into the Ocean. Thus Sin incroacheth by degrees upon the Soul,
if it can get but one of its claws into us, it will quickly follow with its
head and whole body. A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Unfaithfulness
to God is first discovered in the smallest matters, then it proceeds to greater
things. As the decay of a Tree is first visible in its twigs, but by degrees it
goes on the bigger Arms, and from them to the main body.

As it is the nature of a Cancer or Gangreen to run from one Joint or part of
the Body to another, from the Toe to the Foot, from the Foot to the Leg, from
the Leg to the Thigh, and thence to the vital parts. Do we not sometimes see a
whole Arm imposthumated with the prick of a little Finger, and have we not
sometimes heard of a great City betrayed, by the opening of a little Postern.
These little sins will grow to great ones, if let alone. Time will turn small
dust into stone. The poisonous Cockatrice at first was but an Egg. General
Norris received a slight wound in the Irish wars, which he neglected, whereupon
his Arm gangrened, and both Arm and Life were lost together.
Small Twigs will prove thorny Bushes, if not timely stubbed up.

3. The least sin is damnable. The smallest bit of sin is a murdering morsel,
Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do
them. To eat a little Leaven seems a small thing, yet it is a cutting off from
Israel, Exodus 12.19. Gathering a few sticks on a Sabbath, looking into the Ark;
nay, touching the Ark, are all punished with death.

It Is observable how God urges the Command to abstain from blood (which seems
a small matter) with this argument; as they desire God to do any good for them
or theirs, Deuteronomy. 12.22, 23, 24. and upon pain of death. Friend, a little thing,
a prick of a thorn festring, the kernel of a Raisin, a small bone in thy Throat
may deprive thee of thy natural life; and these little sins, as thou call
them, may hinder thee of eternal life. A small leak in a Ship unstopt, may sink
it. A dram of poison diffuseth it self to all parts, till it seize and strangle
the vital Spirits. A Penknife will stab mortally, and kill a man as surely as
a Sword. A Pistol will kill as dead as a Cannon. Caesar was slain, as some
report, with Bodkins. There are other Diseases mortal beside the Plague. Some
have been eaten up by Bears and Lions, others by Mice and Lice. It Is spiritual
Murder to stifle and suppress the Conceptions of the Spirit in thy Soul, as
well as to do open despite to the Holy Ghost.

The Rabbis reckoned up 613 Commandments of the Law, and distinguished them
into greater and lesser; the lesser they judged might be neglected with little
or no guilt, but what Scripture makes deadly, men must not make indifferent.
Gods thoughts are not as their thoughts in this particular, Ezekiel. 18.3. The
Soul that sins shall die, without a distinction. Thou may say of Sin, as Lot
of Zoar, It is but a little one, and my Soul shall live; when thou have much
more cause to say as Jonathan, Behold I have tasted but a little honey, and I
must die, 1 Samuel 14.43. I have been guilty of a little Sin, and without
Repentance, I must die eternally for it. A little spark may kindle such a fire
as may burn down a whole City.

4. How little soever they should be in their own nature, they become great by
thy allowance. The nature of Sin stands not so much in the material part of it,
which is often little, but principally in the form or anomy, which is the
breach of Gods Law, and also in the manner or carriage of the heart in its
Commission. A Sin may be great in abstracto, as the fact is measured by the
Law, and as the matter of it may be, and yet small in concreto; and by
circumstances as not allowed of, or domineering in the Soul. On the other side,
a Sin may be small, as measured by the Law, or according to the nature of the
fact; and yet great by circumstances, as liked and approved by us. In a
Corporation, a man of a great Estate and Quality may be an inferior and
underling in point of Authority and Sway; and one that is of small Estate or
Degree may be chief Governor. Sick Bodies love to be gratified with some
little bit which they love, though it never so much favor their Disease. As
some Favors we receive from God are little in their kind, but great in their
circumstances, and so very engaging to the Creature; as to have a little Food
sent in, when a man is starving, etc. So there are some Sins which may be small
in their nature, but by the time when, or wilfulness of the Sinner, may be very
great. For a man to commit a Sin materially greater, is not so great a Sin as
to commit a lesser with deliberation. To commit actual Adultery out of
ignorance, or for want of advice, is not so great a Sin, as for a man to be
guilty of adulterous thoughts with allowance, and advisedly. Reader, take heed
of this, for thou will find at last that it will be an hard thing to give them
comfort, who sin with counsel, though in small matters. A sin little in its
nature, the more it is allowed, and the more wilfully committed, the greater it
is; nay, it may be much greater than Sins materially greater; if these be not
committed plena voluntate, with a full consent of will. As a little stone
thrown with a strong Arm will do more harm than a much greater stone thrown
with a weak Arm. So a little Sin committed with security, deliberation, and
allowance, will more wast the Conscience, and wound the Soul, than far greater
out of infirmity and inadvertency. Petty Princes usually prove the cruellest
Tyrants, and do the most mischief to their Subjects. Friend, do thou not
consider where ever Sin reigns, it is horrid heinous, most defiling and
damning; and thy little Sins may reign as well as great ones. There have been
Kings of Countries, (as here in England in the time of the Heptarchy) nay, of
Cities among the Grecians, as well as Emperors of vast and large Dominions.
There are Mayors and Constables commanding in chief in their places, as well as
Justices and Judges. A little hair hanging in the pen may make a great blot,
and thy little Sins allowed, will very greatly defile and wound thy Soul. In
this sense, what the Philosopher says is true, (...), are (...), the smallest
errors prove most dangerous, Arist. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 8.

5. The baser and unworthier art thou to fall out with thy best Friend for a
little small matter. Ah, how great is thy ingratitude to disobey, and provoke,
and displease, and dishonor the blessed God, to whom thou art so infinitely
obliged for a poor small business? And what folly and madness is it to forfeit
the Divine Favor, and incur his Anger, and to expose thy self to infinite
torments for a trifle, a babble, a light, little, inconsiderable thing. God
aggravates the Sin of the Jews, and threatens them severely for it, Amos 2.6.
That they sold the poor for a pair of shoes; that they sold what was of so
great value, his people for a pair of shoes, so poor and mean a price. Friend,
how will he deal with thee, if thou sellest thy own Soul and eternal salvation,
the blood of thy Savior, the love of thy Father, and all the joys and delights
of the other World, for a pair of shoes; for that which thou thy self
acknowledgest is but a small and little matter. Truly, the less the thing, the
greater thy contempt in denying to do it. Ah, who will stand with his God for a
tittle, for a small matter? Truly, the less the matter is, the greater is the
malice that will offend and provoke God for it. How great is the unkindness to
stand with God for a trifle? How little do thou esteem thy God, the God of
all Consolation? how little do value his Love and Grace, and Favor, and
endless fruition, to part with all for little or nothing?

The less, Reader, the thing is for or about which thou sinnest, the greater is
thy Sin. Believe it, that by which thou would excuse thy sin does increase
it. It has been formerly said, If a man will break his faith, it should be for
a Kingdom, for something of worth; yet this Sinner were a loser, though by
breaking his Faith, he could gain the whole Earth; what then is that man who
will lie and forswear himself for a penny. Though no man should presume upon
Sin, because its present profit will be great; yet there is more unkindness,
more folly, and more sinfulness in sinning for a little. Some like Eagles, will
not stoop at flies, scorn to sin for a small matter; others as Ants will be
busy about the least dust, will break the Law for a very little; the former
are bad, the latter worse.

6. The less they are, the more they call for thy care and caution; for they
are the harder to be cured. As a wound made with a Bodkin, if deep, is hardlier
cured than a wound with a Sword, because the Orifice is so small, and presently
almost closes up, and so the wound bleedeth inwardly, often to the death of
the Patient. It Is much more difficult for the Mariner to avoid Quicksands, that
are hurried hither and thither, then known Rocks, though Sands are small
things, and Rocks are great vast bodies. Besides our proneness to despise and
slight them, causes our more frequent falling into them, as also our lying
longer in them without repentance.

7. Small Sins are not expiated without infinite satisfaction, and must they
then be dallied with? there is more malignity in the least sin, than the whole
Creation can expel; and more Venom than Men and Angels can antidote against.
Friend, consider it, thou say they are little sins, therefore I may live in
them. Did Christ die for them, and will thou live in them? Do thou not know
what prodigious drops of sweat, what clods of blood, what strong cries, and
groans, and prayers, the least Sins cost thy Redeemer? Do thou not know that
their weight was so heavy (as little and light as thou fanciest them to be)
that they pressed and bruised his blessed Body, that they oppressed and amazed
his blessed Soul; yea, that they made him, who is valor and courage it self,
obedience and dutifulness it self, love and pity it self to shrink and draw
back, and pray against his Duty to his Father, and his own Mercy to fallen man,
and decline the very end and errand for which he came into the world. Reader,
think of it. As Austin says, what matters it whether a Ship be overwhelmed
with one great Wave, or sunk by a small Cranny in the bottom, whereat the water
enters drop by drop. And elsewhere, what eases it a man to be pressed to
death with an heap of small sand, more than with a sow of lead; or to be
strangled with a pack-thread rather than with an halter.

Reader, I would not have thee think any of thy sins little. It Is unbecoming a
Christian to entertain such a thought of his sins; nay, it greatens his sin,
for him to presume it is little. As we should not lessen the Mercies of God,
but always think them great, and too great for us, and our selves less than the
very least of them; so we should never lessen our sins, but judge the least of
them great, and the lightest of them heavy, and every of them too great and too
heavy for us to bear; and upon these accounts loath and leave them. Friend,
think of what I have said of little sins, and certainly thou will be of another
mind than to allow of them, because they are little; and rather reject them,
because they are sins. Is there any thing that God hates but sin, and must that
be the Object of his hatred? Is there any thing that offends God, or grieves
his Spirit, but sin, and will nothing delight and please thee, but what
provokes and displeases him?

4. I answer, that Omissions are not little sins. I have already largely
proved, that in some respects, and as they may be circumstantiated, they may be
much greater sins than sins of Commission. Reader, consider what is written in
the danger of sins of Omission before the Uses, and then judge whether they are
little sins or no.

Are they little sins which do most oppose the Mind and Will of God, which make
way for whole herds of Sins of Commission, and which do exceedingly grieve the
good Spirit of God? Are those little sins which God complains of so frequently,
threatens so severely, and punishes with such dreadful Judgments; on their
Bodies, on their Souls, in this World, on both eternally, in the other World
without any remedy? But, Friend, consider farther;

1. Can that sin be little which denies God the highest Honor, and greatest
Homage, and chiefest Respect which the Creature owes to him? What is that
which is the choicest Jewel in the Crown of his Glory? whence do the greatest
Revenews of his Honor flow? Are not our highest esteem, our hottest love, or
strongest trust, and our most reverential awe of his sacred Majesty, the best
and the most we can give him; and can the omission of these be a little sin?
The forbearance of Commissions is but the skirt, and garment, and outside of
that Obedience which we owe to God; it is the giving up our hearts and souls to
him, in our most enlarged desires after him, and spiritual delights in him, and
superlative valuation of him, which he requires of us, and principally looks
after, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God. Surely, if any sin be little, it is that which incroacheth least upon
the honor of God, not that which injures so greatly his Royal Prerogative. He
that robs his Sovereign of some petty goods, cannot be so great a Transgressor
as he who would rob him of his Crown and Kingdom.

2. Is that a little sin which provokes God to inflict the greatest
punishment: Either we must believe that God punishes men more or less,
according to the nature of their offenses, whether greater or lesser, or else
we must accuse him of injustice. The Apostle undertakes to prove him righteous,
because he renders to every man according to his works, Romans 2.5, 6. If so,
where he inflicts the greatest Judgment, there must be the greatest sin. Now
all Divines conclude, the punishment of loss, which they say is for our
Omissions, to be far greater than the punishment of sense, which is for our
Commissions. It Is the general assertion, That departing from God, and all good
for ever, will vex and torture the Soul, more than the flames of Hell can pain
and torment the Body. Therefore it is observable, that our Savior sometimes
speaks as if all the misery of the damned were privative, and did consist in
their banishment from him. Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you.
Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity, Matthew. 7.23. This is all. Poena damni
poenalior est quam poena sensus, Chris. As the Sinner has neglected to do
good. They have left off to be wise, and to do good. So he shall be banished
from all good, and that for ever. The Omission of good was his Sin, and the
amission of good shall be his punishment. As he delighted not in blessing, so
it shall be far from him. Ah how far will that be from the poor Creature, which
shall never never come to him. Friend, If the pain of loss be greater than that
of sense, (for which cause in Scriptures, and Fathers, Hell Torments are called
damnation,) and this pain of loss be the punishment of thy Omissions, then it
must needs follow, that Omissions are greater Sins than Commissions, and for
that cause more severely plagued by God. The presence of God is the Heaven of
Heaven, Psalm. 16. ult. In thy presence is fullness of joy; and the loss of God
is the Hell of Hell. They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Which loss is the fruit of Omissions,
and therefore, Reader, do not presume them little.

3. Is that Sin little which Christ could not satisfy for, without his
observation of the whole Law. There was requisite that Christ might be a
complete Savior, both active and passive Obedience, His active answers our
Omissions or Sins against the Precept; what was neglected by us, was performed
by him; and his passive answers our Commissions or Sins against the
prohibition; because we do much evil, he suffered much evil. Now though we
think this was a small part of his Humiliation, yet upon serious consideration
we shall find it otherwise. For him that was the great Lawmakers, to become the
Law-Observer; For him that was above all Law, to be made under the Law, is a
condescension indeed. Therefore the Apostle speaks of the Love of God to be the
greater, because he sent his Son made under the Law. As the Son of God, the
infinite absolute Lord of all, and Lawmakers to all, he might have pleaded
exemption from the Law; though the humane Nature, as a Creature, considered
separately from the Divine, was obliged to the observation of the Law; yet
being in conjunction with the Deity, and making one Person with the Son of God,
it was privileged as to keeping the Law; but he humbled himself to do it, that
he might satisfy the Divine Justice for our Omissions. Indeed, it is no
disparagement to men, no not to Angels, to be subject to the Law of God. It is
as essential to them as their dependence is, by virtue of their Creatureship;
but it was a great Humiliation in Christ to be bound to that Law of which he
was Lord, especially if we consider these two things:

1. That he must be Man, before he could be made subject to the Law. For as
God, he was altogether above it. As the Apostle says, He was made of a Woman,
made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. His Incarnation was the first, and greatest, and
lowest step of his Humiliation. It was not so great a marvail, nor so great a
suffering for Christ, being man, to die, as for the Son of God to become man;
he emptied himself, and made himself of no reputation, when he was made in the
likeness of man, Phil. 2.6. For God to become man, was an emptying himself of
his Credit, and stripping himself of his Robes of Glory, and is the first
aenigma in the Apostles mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.

2. He was bound to perfect personal Obedience upon pain of the Laws curse. I
mean not on pain of bearing the Laws curse as he did, notwithstanding his
perfect Obedience for others, but for himself. He was under the same Covenant
with God, in regard of himself, that the first Adam was, and if he had failed
in Obedience, as Adam did, his Humane Nature had been separated from the
Divine, and had perished withal in him for ever. That Covenant under which the
Redeemer was for himself, had no grains of allowance for the least infirmity,
nor would admit of Repentance for the smallest defect or offense; so that if he
had swerved the least from the Law, he had been incapable of suffering and
satisfying for others, Heb. 7.2. ult. and also had disjoined the Humane Nature
from the Divine, (which could not continue in Conjunction with a sinful
manhood,) and his Humane Nature with all he undertook for, must have born the
curse of the Law for ever. Reader, is that little, which cost Christ so much to
satisfy for? Was it easy to fulfill all Righteousness, to obey all the rigid
Exceptions of the Law to the utmost, to answer all its demands which was still
crying for work, yet afforded no help, neither allowed the least mercy in case
of failing. I hope thou will not hereafter live in any Omission, upon
presumption that it is but a little sin, when it intrencheth so greatly upon
the Divine Prerogative, has the greatest punishment inflicted on it in the
other World, and brought the Son of God to be made of a Woman, and so to be
made under the Law here, that he might satisfy for it: For if after all this
thou should continue in it, I must say to thee, as Saul to Jonathan, with some
alteration, Know thou not that thou have chosen, this Son of the Devil to
thy own confusion, 1 Samuel 20.30.

CHAP. XLV. Another excuse for sins of Omission (which is a cause of them) that
they would be unseasonable, and so are deferred to that time which never comes,
with the answer to it.
2. A Second excuse that men have for their Omissions, is the unseasonableness
of the performance of their Duties. They grant, that they ought to perform
them, that God requires it of them, and they must be done; but the present time
is very inconvenient, other affairs now call for their presence, and an another
time they may be done with more advantage. So the Jews served God about
building his House, Hag. 1.2. They acknowledged it was very fit that Gods House
should be re-edified, and very sad that his House should lie wast, whilst their
own were ceiled, but the time was not yet come, it was unseasonable at present;
they being amongst wicked Neighbors, who would possibly scoff at them, and
oppose them, if they should go about it; it was best to defer it till another
season. Thus Felix, when Paul's discourse of Judgment to come, had convinced
him so far, that he trembled, most unhappily denies him leave to proceed; but
defers him to a more convenient season, which never came that we hear of. Many
persons put off in a Morning Closet-Prayer, and Family Duties, pretending they
shall be better at leisure before Noon, and thereby come to neglect them wholly
for that part of the day. As Saul forbad the Priest to ask Counsel of God, for
want of leisure, 1 Samuel 14.19. Others, when Alms are desired of them, by fit
Objects of Charity, will not deny them positively, but do it really, by
deferring it till another season, which the poor Creatures never see. Thus the
Devil destroys many Souls, by prevailing with them to delay their Faith and
Repentance upon pretense; hereafter will be time enough, and then such and such
affairs will be over, and then they will be more at leisure to mind them. If he
can thus gain time of men, he doubts not but to make them lose thereby an happy
eternity; he is pleased well enough to hear men say, they must and will repent,
they must and will believe, knowing there are few in Hell who enjoyed the
Gospel, but sometime or other said as much; but as long as it is in the future
Tense, I will, and I will, and he can persuade them that they are unseasonable
Duties at present; he fears nothing, as knowing himself sure enough of his prey.

To take away this cause of Omissions, I shall answer this excuse.

1. I answer, by confessing (that it may be) that some positive Duties may at
some times be unseasonable. The best sort of Food is not always in season.
Solomon tells us, There is a time to sow, and a time to reap, Eccles. 3.1, 2.
All the year is not Seed-time, only some part of it. And it must be granted,
that every thing is most beautiful in its season, verse. 11. then in its season
it is most lustrous and lovely, most amiable and comely The grace and glory of
an Action consists much in the right timing of it; therefore it is the praise
of a good man, That he brings forth his fruit in due season, Psalm. 1. And it
highly advances the Wisdom of God, that all his Actions are done in the neck,
in the joint, in the fittest opportunity possible. When the fullness of time was
come, God sent his Son, Gal. 4.3, 4. He has out of his goodness allotted time
for every Duty, Eccles. 3.1. There is a time to every purpose, and Duty for
every part of time, so that a man can never say at this time, I have nothing to
do. Nay, God has allowed a season, an opportunity for every thing, wherein, by
a concurrence of helps and means, it may be done with most ease and advantage,
Isa. 50.4.

2. I answer, that some positive Duties are never unseasonable. To honor our
God, to work out our Salvation, to keep a good Conscience, to love and believe
in our Lord Jesus Christ, are always in season. These, and such like, ought to
be concommitant with every part of our time. Trust in the Lord at all time,
Psalm. 62.8. I will bless thy Name all the day. Blessed are they that keep
Judgment, and do Righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106.3. Therefore it is as
some observe, that when Solomon mentions a time for several things, he mentions
no time for doing evil, because that must never be done; and no time for doing
good, because that must ever be done. That which ought to have no being, should
have no time to be in. That which ought always to be, needs not the mention of
any particular time to be in.

3. I answer, that no Duties are unseasonable, when more good than hurt is done
by the present performance of them. To reprove our Neighbor offending is a
Duty; yet if I knew that my reproving him at this time would make him curse and
swear, and sin more against God, I would defer it till another time; but if I
thought that I should not have another season to do it in, and that present
Reproof would only put him into a little pet or passion at present, but
afterward probably he would consider it to his advantage, I would embrace the
present opportunity. He that will omit that Duty till all things concur to his
mind for the performance of it, must never perform it. There is hardly a step
to be taken in our Journey toward Heaven, but there is a block in the way to
make us stumble at it, or go aside for it: That if I will observe the Wind, I
must not sow at all.

4. I answer, Take heed that this pretense of the unseasonableness of Duties be
not a device of the flesh, and a wile of the Devil, to cloak and cover thy
unwillingness to performance of them. It Is easy to find some shift for every
sin; and truly there is none thou can live in, but Satan and thy own heart
together will help thee to sufficient grounds for them. Scarce any are gone to
Hell without some reason on their side for going thither.

5. I answer, that we must consult God and his Word for Wisdom to know, and
faithfulness to perform our Duties in their best seasons. The heart of the wise
discerns both time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5. A good man that looks to God
and his Word with a single eye, desiring to know what he should do, and when he
may do it best to the pleasing of God, shall be taught and led by the Spirit of
God in the way which he should go in. The Word of God is perfect, and directs
thee about the fittest seasons for thy Duties. It teaches thee when to mourn,
Joel 2.13, 14. Isa. 22.22, 23. when to rejoice, Exodus 15.1, 2. Nehem. 8.10.
when to pray, and when to sing, James 5.13. when to reprove, and when to be
silent, Amos 5.13. when to give, and when to forbear giving, Prove. 3.27. Yet
still there will be much need of Christian prudence, and it may be helpful to
thee to observe some general Rules.

1. That a greater good be preferred before a lesser, and a more weighty Duty
always have the precedence of what is less weighty. Though a lesser good, and a
less weighty Duty must be minded in their time and place, yet the greater must
have the precedence, Matthew. 6.33. Public advantage must not be crowded out,
and put by for private, nor spiritual good give way to temporal. Shimei showed
his folly, in minding his wealth more than his life. And Mary, her wisdom was,
improving the present time for her Soul, when Martha was troubled about other
things.

2. That generally the present time be laid hold on, and the first opportunity
for the doing of good. Time is bald behind, and therefore its good to take it
by the fore-lock. It Is the Mariners wisdom to take the first good Wind that
offers it self for his Voyage; and it may be the Merchants policy to take the
first Chapman. The Apostle says, While ye have time, do good to all, Gal.
8.10. implying, that they will not always have it, it is winged and flies away.

Sometimes I confess it may be prudence (as circumstances may be) when there is
a probability of enjoying another season to defer it at present; but usually it
is best to take the present, because future time is uncertain, and then it may
be said, A price was in the hand of a Fool, and he wanted an heart.

3. That if it be evident, that more hurt than good will be done by our present
performance of our Duties, we forbear and defer them. For those Duties that do
not bind us ad semper, God leaves much to the wisdom of the faithful Christian
as to the season of performing them.

4. That a certain good at present must be chosen before an uncertain future
good, though greater than the former. If I have a price now in my hands to do
my self or Neighbor some good, and neglect to improve it; but defer it, hoping
hereafter for an opportunity of doing my self and Neighbor more good, this is
sinful. I doubt not, but Felix sinned in putting Paul off till another season,
though he had intended to hear him afterward for his own greater profit,
(which he was far enough from) because he must know that his own l^^e,
continuance in his Government, and Paul's life were all at the pleasure of
another, not at his own.

Reader, if thou art upright with God, what is said will be sufficient; but if
out of the deceitfulness of thy heart, thy plea be only a pretense for the
total omission of thy Duty; know assuredly, that if thou can find no season
to do God Service, he will find no season for thy Salvation.

CHAP. XLVI. A third excuse for sins of Omission. It is but one sin, with the
answer to it.
3. A Third excuse which men have for sins of Omission, is, It is but one Duty
I omit, and I hope there is no such great danger in that. Though I do not read
the Word, yet I pray; though I examine not my own heart, yet I read Scripture,
and mind prayer; It is true, I give not to the poor, but I am painful in my
Calling, and provident (...) my Family, as God commands me. What hurt can
there be, if some one secret Duty (the omission of which cannot be scandalous)
should never be performed? Surely, God who knows our weak, infirm, nay,
wicked and d^praved natures cannot exspect universal Obedience to his positive
or negative Commands. He understands that Perfection is impossible to the
humane nature since the Fall; and therefore sent his Son into the World, to
take away the sins of it.

To cure the distemper of the brain; for it is a kind of frenzy which makes
men argue after this rate; consider,

1. That there is a vast difference between thy being guilty of many sins, and
allowing thy self in one sin. Grace may consist with the being of many sins in
the same subject, but not with the liking of one sin. As the love of money is
the root of all evil, so is the love of Sin the root of all the evil that
befalls the Sinner. He who knew he could not hinder the inherency of many sins,
yet desires and endeavors to prevent the regency of any one Sin, Psalm.
119.132. Order my steps by thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion
over me. Oserve, not any iniquity.

2. Consider, that the Omission of one Duty may send thee to Hell, as well as
the Omission of many Duties. One Knife, one Sword, one Bullet, one blow may
kill a man as well as a thousand. If thou allowest thy self in one Omission,
thou art a Servant to this one Sin, ( For his Servant thou art whom thou
obeyest, Romans 6.16.) and so the Devils Slave, (for he has thee as fast by this
one Chain, as by many,) and consequently an Enemy and Rebel against God, and
accordingly shall suffer eternally. Thy Soul, Friend, is the price of every
sin, and when thou allowest thy self in any one, thou do implicitly, though
not expressly, bargain with the Devil thy Master, to sell him thy Soul for the
wages of unrighteousness, 1 King. 21.20. One man in Law may keep possession,
and keep the right owner out of his Estate. One sin may keep possession for
Satan, and hinder Jesus Christ from his Right; I mean from sitting on the
Throne, and swaying the Scepter of thy Soul. Wallowing in one puddle defiles
the Body, and tumbling in one piece of filthiness defiles the Soul. One piece
of ward-Land, though but a quarter of an Acre, makes a man liable to the King,
and brings in his whole Estate, though he be worth thousands per annum.
Therefore, Friend, do not say, it is but one sin, and I may be bold with it;
but rather, it is Sin, and so mortal, and I may not allow it. As Christ gave
himself to redeem thee from all iniquity, Titus 2.14. So do thou give thy self
to him in all manner of Duty. How severely have some been punished for one Sin.
Moses, for not sanctifying the Name of God at one time. Eli, for omitting to
reprehend his Children, according to their wickedness, which was one Sin.
Aarons Sons, for not fetching their fire from the Altar (as some judge) were
struck dead, Levit. 10.1, 2. If the Righteous be recompensed on the Earth, much
more the Transgressor and the Sinner. Take heed, if Readiness sparing one Agag,
lost him his temporal, thy sparing one Sin, lose thee not the eternal Kingdom.

3. This one Sin will not go alone; thou may hope when thou have opened the
door for this one Sin to enter, that thou can presently shut, and keep out
its associates, but it is impossible. Sins are sociable, and ever go in
company. First, one evil Spirit takes possession of the man, and then seven
more worse than himself. As there is a concatenation of Graces, where one goes
all the rest follow, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. so there is a concatenation of Sins,
2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. They are so linkt one in another, that as in a Chain, the
drawing of one link brings with that a second, and that a third, and that a
fourth, and all are drawn to the very end of the Chain. When Dalilah had
enticed and prevailed with Sampson, then come the Lords of the Philistines and
bind him, and put out his eyes, and set him to grind at the Mill, and to make
them sport. When one sin by its flatteries has deceived and possessed thy
Soul, then come others more potent and lordly to strengthen Satan's hold, and
make way for others. Any one sin allowed is a great-bellied Monster, who has a
numerous brood in the Womb of it. It does insensibly harden the heart, and
strongly disposes it for other Sins; as one wedge makes way for another. Who
could have thought that David's idleness should be accompanied with so great
and cursed a crew.

He who neglects Morning-Prayer, is hereby disposed to neglect God in his
Calling, and to buy and sell, and do all without his counsel. Consider, Friend,
if thou fall from the top of a Ladder but one round, it will be many to one if
thou stop before thou come to the bottom.

4. This one sin allowed makes thee guilty of all sins. By the breach of one
Command thou disownest the Authority by which all the Commands are enjoined,
James 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point, is guilty of all. It Is true, he does not break the whole formally; he
may be no Thief, no Murderer, etc. But,

1. He breaks the whole Law interpretatively. He slights and despises the
Author of the whole Law. He cannot obey God in any Command, who endeavors not
to obey him in every Command; the Apostle subjoyns this reason, for he that
said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill; so that if thou commit
not Adultery, yet if thou killest, thou art a Transgressor of the Law.

2. He breaks the whole Law collectively, though not distributively. All the
Commands are ten words, but one Law. The whole Law is one Copulative or Chain,
break one link, you disorder and mar all. The whole Body suffers by a wound
given to any one part. The Commands are considered all together, (not
severally) as they make one entire and perfect rule of righteousness, from
which whosoever swerveth in regard of any part of it, must needs swerve from
the whole.

3. He breaks the whole Law eventually, though not intentionally, in the
consequent of his Disobedience to one Command. He is liable to the same Curse
with those that break every Command. He is as truly out of favor with God, as
if he had kept never a Command. Any one condition not observed, forfeits the
whole Lease, be it never so large; and any one Command not obeyed, forfeits the
benefits of the Gospel, and subjects the Soul to eternal damnation.

4. He breaks the whole Law habitually, though not actually. The same wicked
nature which carries him out to break one Command wilfully, would carry him
out to break them all, if it were not restrained. This man's heart breaks every
Command, though his hands be tied, and he is hindered from breaking many of the
Commands.

5. He breaks the whole Law by the breach of any one, because he sins against
love, and breaks that bond and knot which keeps and fastens the whole Law
together, Romans 13.10. Qui uno peccavit omnium reus est, peccans contra
charitatem, in qua omnia pendent, Aug. Epist. 29. He that breaks one Command is
guilty of all, because he sins against Charity, on which all hang, says
Austin. Therefore upon the breach of one, viz. That of the Sabbath, God
charge the Jews with the guilt of all, Exodus 16.18.

5. I answer, if it be but one sin thou live in, but one Duty thou live in
the omission of, the more foolish art thou to lose all for lack of doing one
thing more. Though as the young man said, thou have kept all the Commands from
thy youth, yet if, as Christ said to him, thou lackest one thing, truly, as
with him, the lack of this one thing will be the loss of all. And what a Fool
is he who runs for a Crown, an incorruptible Crown, to run within one step of
the Goal, and then to make a stop, and thereby to lose the prize? Is not he an
unwise man, who lays a large Foundation, raises up stately Floors, is at
great cost in building an House; yet for want of a little more charge about
some material pillar of the Edifice, suffers it all to fall down?

Reader, Consider it, the omission of one Duty is the amission of all thy
Duties. If God lose but one, thou losest all. And art thou willing to lose all
thy labor, all thy days at the Labour-in-vain, and that for want of taking a
little more pains, and doing one thing more for thy Soul and Salvation.

One flaw in a Diamond mars all its beauty and brightness. One blot in a
writing may spoil the whole, and render it insignificant. One poisonful Herb
renders all the good and wholesome Herbs in the pot unprofitable. Therefore do
not say, It is but one, therefore I may omit it; but rather, it is but one Duty
more to all my other Duties, and therefore I will not stick at it.

CHAP. XLVII. A fifth cause of sins of Omission. The example of others, with
the cure of it.
5. ANother cause of sins of Omission, is the example of others. Men are much
led by the eye, more than by the ear, and look rather to what their Neighbors
do, than to what God speaks. Though all men are not of one mind in all
things, yet most in the places where we live are of a mind about evil, and
against good. The whole City of Sodom will join together in a sin that was
against the very light of nature. Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about
them, sinned in like manner. The Diseases of others Souls are far more
infectious than the Plague, or any other Disease of their Bodies. The ground
why several neglect the Duties God requires, is, because others neglect them.
They see their Neighbors (some of whom are counted (possibly) wise men, and
are (it may be) rich men and great men, and others who are numerous,) to live
without God, to omit Prayer and Scripture in their Families, to neglect the
instruction of their Children and Servants, and they think they may omit them
as safely as others. Nay, they will tell us, such and such men are sober men,
and understand themselves well enough, and they think it needless to make so
much ado about Family Duties, and the sanctification of the Sabbath, etc. and
our Neighbors generally are of their mind; and why should we be wiser than our
Neighbors? O what a ready Scholar is man to learn a wicked Lesson that is set
him by others! If Corah conspire against God, he shall quickly have some
hundreds to join with him in his rebellion. They move swiftly toward the dead
Sea of destruction, who are carried thitherward by the tide of Nature, and
blown powerfully with the wind of Example.

The patterns of them who are Persons of Quality and Estate, have a strange
prevalency upon the inferior sort, and are often the Looking-glasses by which
they dress themselves. Ordinary men look on their Superiors, especially if they
be not scandalous, as men of wisdom (whether they be such or no) and fit to
guide and govern others, and so judge they cannot err much, if they follow
their steps. The Pharisees plead this for the Omission of the great
Gospel-Duty, Joh. 7:48. Have any of the Rulers of the Pharisees believed on
him? Will ye be wiser than they? Do you think that if Faith in this Son of man
(as he calls himself) were a Duty, they would neglect it; or if he were the
true Messiah, such understanding men as they would not know it?

One great man, as a great Letter in an Indenture (though it signify no more
than another small one) has many small ones following him. The Herodians (some
think) were so called from their conforming to Herod in their Religion. And
it is judged the Melchites, who lived in the East, were so called from Melech,
i. e. of the Kings Religion. The works of great men are more powerful with the
ordinary sort, than the the Will and Word of the great God. Again, the example
of the multitude is very forcible. Men are carried down with the stream both
easily and strongly. It is as common to do as the most do in irreligious, as in
natural actions. We think our selves in greatest safety, when we are with the
most numerous Party. To be singular, is looked upon as ridiculous; and those who
are so, are counted proud, conceited, precisians. Men choose rather to be
sociable in sin, than singular in sanctity, and to do as the most do, than as
the best do. The fewness of Christ's Followers was a stumbling block to his
Enemies, and an offense to his Friends.

To cure this, Reader, consider:

1. That no patterns of any men are valid against the Precepts of God. The
Precepts of God are like himself, of certain purity and eternal verity; but the
patterns of men are like themselves, vain and variable. Our business is not to
look to what men do, but to what God speaks. It is highly derogatory to the
supreme Being to make the examples of men, and not his Commands the rule of our
lives. The examples of Murderers, Thieves, Drunkards, Swearers, are of as much
force against the good and wholesome Law of a Prince, as the irreligious
examples of any men are against the holy and righteous Laws of God. A Judge
would deride the Malefactors Plea, that should say, It is true, I have broke
the Kings Laws, but have done no more than such an Esquire, or Knight, or Lord;
I have but imitated them therein: Or that should say, I was guilty of such
Treasons, but I joined with many other Traitors; I had good store of company
with me. And do thou think, Reader, the Judge of Quick and Dead, when he
shall arraign thee for thine unchangeable Estate, and demand of thee why thou
omittedst the Duties he enjoined thee, will accept thy Plea, when thou shall
say, It is true, Lord, I did live without Scripture, or Prayer in my Family;
but such and such great men, who lived near me, did so as well as I; I wrote
after their Copies, and thought it would be well enough to do as they did; or
when thou shall say, Lord, though I neglected thy Worship and Service, I
followed therein almost all the Town and Parish where I lived, and I judged it
best to imitate the most. Can thou imagine that such a silly simple excuse
will bear any weight? Thou will not take such a pitiful Plea from any Child or
Servant in thy Family. If thy Child, when reproved by thee for Drunkenness, or
Thieving, or Disobeying thy Commands, should excuse himself, and say, Sir,
other men's Sons are as bad as I, such a Gentleman's Sons are worse; the
Children of very many meet and join with me in all my drinking, stealing, and
debauched courses. How ill would such an answer sound in thine ears? Or what
would thou think, if thy Servant, instead of doing the work appointed him,
should run from Alehouse to Alehouse, and spend his time in Carding and
Dicing, and then excuse it to thee, that he did as others did; there were many
beside himself, and some of Quality, who were examples to him. Consider how
poor, how pitiful, how irrational a Plea it is to excuse thy Disobedience to
God, by thy imitation of irreligious men; and do not think that the great God
will take that excuse from thee which thou will not from a Child or Servant.
Surely there is a little more difference between the boundless blessed God, and
thee a poor Worm, than there is between thee and any Son or Servant.

2. Consider, If thou will follow others (be they great or many) in sin, thou
shall also follow them in intolerable and eternal Sufferings. The ways of such
tend to death, and their steps take hold of Hell. And if thou will walk in
their ways, and tread in their steps, thou can not avoid their end, Rev.
18.4. Come out from among her my people, and be not partakers of her Sins, that
ye receive not her Plagues. He that catches the Plague of another, catches
all the pain and weakness, and ill effects of such a Disease. Do not think to
feed on wicked men's Dainties, to live their lazy sensual lives, and not to pay
their reckoning. Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, went a whoring
after strange Flesh; here they join in sinning, but are they separated in
sufferings: truly no: Are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire, Jude, verse. 7. If they unite in wickedness, they shall be united
in woe. God will bind them up together as Tares for the fire.

I know, Reader, thou would not be willing to dwell for ever with, and fare
for ever as wicked great men shall. Tophet is prepared of old: for the King it
is prepared; he has made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much,
wood: the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it, Isa.
30. ult. And why then will thou do as they do, and resemble them now in time.
It is unavoidable. Live as they do here, and live as they do for ever. Again,
thou art unquestionably loath to be with, and suffer as the most shall to
eternity. At the great day the World, (i. e. the far greater part of it,) shall
be condemned, 1 Cor. 11.31. When they shall be arraigned for their endless
Estates, they shall be cast and condemned to the company, and curses, and
torments of the Devils for ever and ever; and if thou would not die their
Deaths, or partake of their unchangeable Conditions, why will thou live their
lives, and walk in their wicked ways.

3. Consider of all patterns, these two, The greatest or richest, and the
multitude, are most unfit for thy imitation. Because of all men, these usually
are the worst men, and do least imitate Christ. For great men, how few are
there who are good; Grace and Greatness are happy and lovely, but rare
Conjunctions. Solomon tells us, That Wisdom is good with an Inheritance,
Eccles. 7.11. But where shall we find Wisdom and Wealth, Righteousness and
Riches together. Great and rich men have their Farms and Merchandising, and
Honors and Pleasures, and other things to look after than their Souls and
Salvation. How hardly, says our Savior, shall a rich man enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. It may well be hard for him, who turns the cords of Love,
and bands of Kindness into fuel, to his lusts and weapons of unrighteousness.
Blessed be God there are some great men who walk religiously, but truly they
are very few. Brethren, ye know your calling, not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has chosen the
foolish things of the World, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, Not many wise, or mighty, or
noble are chosen or called of God. But God has chosen the poor of the World
rich in Faith, and Heirs of a Kingdom, James 2.5. The poor are evangelized,
transformed into the heavenly spiritual Nature of the Gospel. The Poor receive
the Gospel, the Rich receive the World, and the things of the World. The Poor
having little Estate in the World, look after an Estate in the Covenant; but
the Rich having this Worlds Goods, are satisfied, and desire no more. Now,
Reader, will thou follow them that are wholly taken up with fleshly fading
Pleasures and Riches, and cast off all care of their eternal condition? Are
they fit to be thy Guides, who bid defiance to God, and fight against him with
his own Mercies, and throw off all regard and care what shall become of them
for ever and ever?

Again, for the giddy-headed multitude, how unfit are they to be thy examples.
Most are usually the worst. Of all Creatures, the basest and vilest are ever
most numerous, as Flies and Vermin. How few Jewels to Pebbles or common
stones. The weaker part are more than the wiser. The whole World lies in
wickedness, as a brute in his filth, 1 John 5.19. and are such fit to be
followed? The whole Earth wandreth after the Beast, Rev. 17. and is deceived by
the Devil, Rev. 12.9. And are such poor tame Slaves to a cruel Devil, who hates
them and thee perfectly, good examples for thee to imitate? Do thou not
consider what truth speaks, Broad is the way, and wide is the gate that
leads to destruction, and many there be who go therein, Matthew. 7.14. Stop a
little, and ponder it. Will thou go after them, who go in the broad way to
destruction?

THE CONTENTS Of the several CHAPTERS CONTAINED In this BOOK.
CHap. 1. The Preface and Introduction to the Text, page 1. Chap. 2. The
division and brief explication of the pronunciation of the Sentence, page 15.
Chap. 3. Concerning the privative part of the Sinners punishment, page 24.
Chap. 4. The properties of Sinners loss, page 30. Chap. 5. The reasons of the
Sinners privative punishment, page 35. Chap. 6. Uses concerning the heinous
nature of sin, and grievous misery of Sinners, page 40. Chap. 7. Containing the
folly of Sinners, and the vast difference between them and the godly at the
Great Day, page 52. Chap. 8. An use of Trial, with the mark of those that shall
be banished Christ's presence, page 60. Chap. 9. An Exhortation to fly from
this wrath to come, with some helps thereunto, page 63. Chap. 10. The positive
part of the Sinners misery, expressed by fire, and why, page 68. Chap. 11. The
difference between our fires and Hell fire, page 74. Chap. 12. The fullness of
wicked men's misery, in that it is positive and privative, with some cautions
against it, page 80. Chap. 13. The eternity of the Sinners misery in the other
world, with the grand reason of it, page 85. Chap. 14. How little cause to envy
Sinners, and how careful we should be to avoid their eternal misery, page 90.
Chap. 15. The reason of Christ's severe Sentence, and a question resolved,
whether the Righteous by their Acts of Charity do not deserve Heaven, as well
as the Wicked by the Omission thereof deserve Hell, page 69. Chap. 16. Why
Christ will try men at the Great Day by Acts of Charity, page 105. Chap. 17.
Three particulars about the Text, page 115. Chap. 18. That sins of Omission are
dangerous and damnable, page 118. Chap. 19. The nature of sins of Omission in
general, page 123. Chap. 20. Three distinctions about sins of Omissions, page
127. Chap. 21. The agreement and difference between sins of Omission and sins
of Commission, page 136. Chap. 22. The danger of sins of Omission, in the
heinous nature of them, and their offensiveness to God, page 143. Chap. 23. The
danger of sins of Omission, in their destructiveness to man, and our proneness
to overlook them, page 158. Chap. 24. The reason why sins of Omission are
damnable, page 173. Chap. 25. Farther reasons why Christ at the Great Day will
condemn men for sins of Omission, page 181. Chap. 26. Use of Information. How
dreadful will be the condition of those that live in sins of Omission, page
194. Chap. 27. Negative godliness is not enough. Christ's impartiality in
Judgment, page 205. Chap. 28. Practical godliness necessary, page 218. Chap.
29. The condition of men only civil is ununsafe and sad, page 224. Chap. 30.
Sinners conviction at the Day of Judgment. The purity of Christ's Religion above
all others, page 234. Chap. 31. The holiest have cause of humiliation, page,
248. Chap. 32. Use of Trial, whether we be guilty of these Omissions or no,
page 256. Chap. 33. A caution against sins of Omission, in regard of the matter
of Duties, page 272. Chap. 34. Arguments against Omissions, the positiveness of
our Rule, and of Gods Mercies, page 288. Chap. 35. Arguments against Omissions,
Christ purchased positive as well as negative holiness, and our privileges
oblige to both, page 296. Chap. 36. Arguments against Omissions, we profess our
selves Gods Servants, and all our Re^^gion will come to nothing without
positive holiness, page 305. Chap. 37. Arguments against Omissions, God
deserves our positive Obedience before all others, and true Sanctification
cannot be without it, page 315. Chap. 38. If God should omit his care of us a
moment we are undone, and if Christ had omitted the least in our work of
Redemption, we had been lost irrecoverably, page 327. Chap. 39. The new nature
in Believers inclines the heart to positive as well as negative holiness, and
the profit will answer the pains, page 336. Chap. 40. God delights chiefly in
our doing good, and our opportunities for doing good will quickly be gone, page
353. Chap. 41. The grand cause of sins of Omission; an unregenerate heart, with
the cure of it; a renewed nature, page 364. Chap. 42. Another cause of sins of
Omission. Ignorance, with the cure of it; laboring after knowledge, page 384.
Chap. 43. Another cause of sins of Omission. Idleness, with the cure of it,
page 396. Chap. 44. Another cause of Omission, is vain excuses men have, that
Omissions are little sins, with the cure of it, page 409. Chap. 45. Another
excuse for sins of Omission (which is the cause of them) that they would be
unseasonable, and so are deferred to that time which never comes, with the
answer to it, page 447. Chap. 46. A third excuse of sins of Omission. It is but
one sin, with the answer to it, page 456. Chap. 47. A fifth cause of sins of
Omission. The example of others, with the cure of it, page 465.
FINIS.

