To the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled, The
Proposals of William Sydenham, Esquire, for the Raising a Considerable Revenue
to His Majesty, by a Tax on Money, proportionable to that on Land; which he
Humbly lays before your Honors great Wisdom and Consideration.
I. THAT at the Rate of One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to His
Majesty by all Purchasers of Lands or Houses of what Kind or Tenure soever,
within one Month after such Purchase made, to the full value of the Purchase
Money; the Title of the Land not to be good or pleadable either at Common Law or
Equity, without the Purchaser's producing from the King's Commissioner or
Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of
Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty aforesaid, or a Stamp affixed to the
Deed of Sale; and also in default, to forfeit one Hundred Pound to the King:
And that in case any of the Purchase Money shall be Concealed, and not truly
mentioned in the Deed, that such Money not mentioned in the Deed to be
forfeited, one half to the King, the other half to the Informer.

II. That one Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to his Majesty, by
all Purchasers of Annuities, Offices, or Leases whatsoever, and Copyhold
Estates in Possession or Reversion, within one Month after such Purchase made,
to the full value of such Purchase-Mony, the Titles whereof not to be good or
pleadable, either at Common Law, or in Equity, without the Purchaser's
producing from the King's Commissioner or Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and
Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty
aforesaid: And in default, to forfeit Fifty Pound to the King. And that in case
any part of the Purchase-Mony shall be concealed, and not truly mentioned in
the Lease or Copy of Court-Roll, either in Possession or Reversion, That such
Money not mentioned in the Lease or Copy of Court-Roll, to be forfeited, one
half to the King, the other half to the Informer.

III. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to the King by the
Lenders, out of all Money lent on Mortgages, within fourteen days after such
Mortgage made, to the full value of such Mortgage-Mony, The Titles of such
Mortgages not to be good or pleadable either at Common Law, or in Equity,
without the Person who lent the Money produces from the King's Commissioner or
Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of
Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty aforesaid. And also in default, to
forfeit Fifty Pounds to the King. And so after the rate of One Pound Five
Shillings per Cent. per Ann. to be paid to the King at two several Payments in
the Year, to wit, Michaelmas, and Lady Day, during the continuation of the
Mortgage.

IV. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to His Majesty by
the Lenders, out of all Money lent on Bonds, Specialities, or Notes, within ten
Days after such Bond, Specialty or Note made and given, to the full value of
such Money lent; Such Bond or Note not to be good or recoverable at Common Law
or Equity, without the Person who lent the Money produces from the King's
Commissioner or Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from
his Book of Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty aforesaid: And so after
the rate of One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. per Ann. to be paid to the King
at two several Payments in the Year, to wit, at Michaelmas, and Lady Day,
during the continuation of such Bond or Note. And in default, to forfeit one
moiety to the King, the other to the Informer.

V. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. be paid to His Majesty by all
Merchants, and Persons whatsoever, who shall Export any Goods of what kind
soever out of this Kingdom, if they receive the product home by Bills of
Exchange, within twenty days after they receive such Bills of Exchange to the
full value of such Bills, and to produce from the King's Commissioner or
Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of
Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty, and in default, the Bills of
Exchange to be forfeited, one half to the King, the other half to the Informer.

VI. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to His Majesty by
all Persons who shall have Money in any Bank in this Kingdom, within three
Months after this shall be Enacted by Parliament; and to produce from the
King's Commissioner or Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true
Copy from his Book of Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty, without which,
their Bank-Bills or Notes shall not be good or pleadable at Common Law, or in
Equity; and also in default to forfeit Twenty Pound per Cent. to the King of
all such Bank-Mony, and Five Pound per Cent. to the Informer; and so after the
rate of One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. per Ann. to be paid to the King at
two several Payments in the Year (to wit) Michaelmas, and our Lady Day, during
the continuation of such Bank-Mony, and so also for Private and Concealed Banks
to be subject to the same Payments and Penalties as aforesaid, exceeding Two
Hundred Pound.

VII. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to His Majesty by
all Persons and Tradesmen whatsoever, who shall buy any sort of Goods or
Commodities at Fairs or Markets, or at any other places in this Kingdom, at the
time of their buying such Goods, and to produce to the full value of the Money
which they bestow in such Goods from the King's Commissioner or Receiver a
Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of Entries, that
he had paid the King's Duty aforesaid, and in default, to forfeit one half of
the Goods to the King, the other half to the Informer; provided nevertheless
that in case the Goods are not bought at Fairs or Markets, that then, and in
such case, they shall have ten Days time to pay in the King's Duty, and procure
their Receipts from the King's Commissioner or Receiver, under the Penalty
aforesaid.

VIII. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. shall be paid to the King by all
Farmers and Husbandmen, and all other Persons whatever, who shall buy any sort
of Live Cattle at Fairs or Markets, or at any places within this Kingdom at the
time of their buying such Cattle, to the full value of the Money which they
bestow in such Live Cattle, and to produce from the King's Commissioner or
Receiver a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a true Copy from his Book of
Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty; and in Default, one half of the
Cattle to be forfeited to the King, the other half to the Informer; Provided
nevertheless that in case the Live Cattle are not bought at Fairs or Markets,
that then they shall have ten Days time to pay in the King's Duty, and to
procure their Receipts from the King's Commissioner or Receiver, under the
Penalties aforesaid.

IX. That One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. per An. shall by the Lenders be
paid to the King, out of all Money now lent on Mortgages, Bonds, Specialties,
or Notes, to the full value of such Money lent on Mortgages, Bonds,
Specialties, or Notes, upon the Assigning or Transferring, or Altering the
Property hereafter, at two several equal Payments in the Year, to wit, at our
Lady Day, and Michaelmas, during the Continuation of such Mortgages, Bonds,
Specialties, or Notes; The Titles of such Mortgages, and also such Bonds,
Specialties, and Notes, not to be Good, Pleadable, or Recoverable, either at
Common Law, or in Equity, without the Person who lent the Money, produces from
the King's Commissioner, or Receiver, a Receipt under his Hand and Seal, or a
true Copy from his Book of Entries, that he had paid the King's Duty aforesaid,
and also in Default, to forfeit one moiety to the King, the other to the
Informer.

X. If any Person contrary to the true meaning of this Act, shall make any
Contract to avoid and elude this Act, or any part or Clause thereof, he shall
forfeit One Hundred Pound, one half to the King, the other half to the
Informer, over and above the Penalties oforesaid.

The aforesaid Proposals being duly weighed and considered, I am persuaded they
will find very few Objections (if any) which cannot easily be Answered: Due
Balances are the Interests of all Governments, and not of the least
concernment in Taxes; The Body Politic bearing very much Proportion with the
Natural Body, the one part of it being uneasy, the whole is affected. The Money
of this Kingdom, bears a great Proportion with the Land, almost equalizing it;
And yet it has paid but a very little share of the Taxes: Land has born the
heat and burden of the day: And although it has been endeavored by several
Acts of Parliament, to make the Money of the Kingdom pay its due Proportion, yet
how ineffectual have they all proved, not being enforced with Penalties, which
are commonly better and more effectual means to force Obedience, than Oaths and
Tests.

This One Pound Five Shillings per Cent. on Money, is but three Pence per Pound,
which is but One Shilling more than the intrinsic Value of the Land Tax of
Four Shillings the Pound. For One Hundred Pound in Money, according to the
Established Interest, brings in Six Pound per Ann. And One Hundred Pounds worth
of Land, hardly brings in Four Pound per Ann. all Charges being deducted. And
therefore this Tax proposed on Money, can give no just Cause of Complaint to
any, who are Friends to the best of Interests, and willing to Support the best
of Causes. Besides, if we consider the uneasy Circumstances which many are
under, who are Possessors of Land, which do not so often attend those who
command Money; it will appear the more reasonable, that Money should no longer
escape paying its share and proportion, and especially of so small a Dividend,
seeing it is demonstrable that a Tax on Money, will be a means to advance the
Price of Land; for the Taxes on it, has occasioned several Persons (and more
will follow their Examples) to sell their Lands, and conceal their Money, not
liable to the Inspection of Assessors; so that all Thinking Men must grant the
Price of Land must fall, except there is a Tax laid on Money or some other way
prevented by the Wisdom of Parliament.

The greatest part of the Money in the Kingdom does Circulate in those
Particulars before mentioned. And I believe it will be no easy Matter by any
shifts, ^o avoid paying these Duties to the King, without great hazard and
danger. This will raise yearly a very considerable Sum, without racking
Invention; Merchants will have no cause to complain, because the product of
their Goods returned home by Bills of Exchange, pays nothing at the
Custom-House: Money in Banks has no reason of Complaint, for its Interest and
Advantage turns to the best Account of any Money in the Kingdom: Tradesmen have
no reason to think it hard on them, for their Stocks have paid little toward
the Charge of the War: Farmers and Husbandmen have as little cause to complain
of these Proposals, as any, for They grew Rich, whilst their Landlords grew
Poor, their Stocks always escaping the Tax. If all Persons who are herein
concerned, would be Impartial, they must confess, that nothing is hereby
proposed, but what is for the Interest both of King and Kingdom, and no
Impeding, but rather Promoting Trade. And if every Man with Cheerfulness would
part with a Little, rather than lose All, we might with Assurance, expect and
hope for good Success in so Just a War, under the Conduct of so Brave a
Monarch: to Whom, God Almighty grant a long and prosperous Reign.

All which is Humbly Proposed and Submitted to the Consideration of the
Parliament, and c.


