Great Britains GLORY: BEING THE HISTORY OF King ARTHUR; WITH THE ADVENTURES OF
THE Knights of the Round Table.

depiction of knights of the round table

London: Printed by and for W. O. and sold by the Booksellers.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
DUring the Revolutions of this Kingdom such have been the Valerous Exploits of
the Princes, and other Renowned Warriors, Natives, not only in this our Land
and neighboring Countries, but throughout the known World, that all Nations
have stood amazed, and trembled at their Prowess: And amongst other, well may
the Famous Arthur, that renowned British King take place; though (to lessen the
Credit of his great Exploits) some envious Aliens have endeavored to prove
there was never such a Man; but since it is evident by Chronologers of the most
Antiquity, and Integrity, that he was the Son of Vter Pendragon, of the Ancient
British Royal Blood, I shall not (...) more Arguments to manifest it to the
World (...) to the Matter of History, as I sign it laid down for the
Instruction of future Ages; And remain, Reader,

Yours, to serve you, J. S.

The History of King Arthur.
CHAP. I.
Of the Parentage of King Arthur; with a Desciption of his usual Accouterments;
his Vision, and the Interpretation thereof; and how he constituted the Knights
of the Round Table.
THe Saxons after the departure of the Romans, having (under the title of
Friendship) seized upon many strong Places in this Kingdom, the native
Britains, after having tried their Fortunes in many dreadful Battles, were
obliged to retire into Wales and Cornwall; yet retaining many Places of
considerable strength: and from thence, by frequent Excursions, they greatly
annoyed the Enemy: not forgetting their ancient Valor, and the former Glory of
this Isle, amongst which was King Vter Pendragon, lineally descended from the
British Kings, who in the Year, Anno 500, began to Reign over the Britains that
possessed the Mountainous Country with great success, giving the Saxons many
Defeats, and gaining upon them; till at last, falling in love with a fair Lady
named Igreyin, Wife to Alfridus Duke of Cornwall, he so doted on her Beauty,
that not finding her to be won by persuasion to yield her Chastity to his
Disposal, he plotted with Merlyn a famous Necromancer of that Age, to bring his
Designs about by Policy. This Necromancer undertaking the matter, the better to
ease his Prince's laboring Thoughts, with Spells, and by Magic Enchantment,
so wrought, that either deluding the Lady's sight, or transforming the King
into the Shape of her Lord, she received him as such, and suffered him, in the
absence of Alfridus, to enjoy her a whole night, on whom he got our famous
Arthur: For her Lord being in War against the West Saxons, was slain e're his
return; of which the King hearing, though greatly grieved at the loss of so
renowned a Subject, yet as much rejoiced that Fate gave him opportunity to
procure the love of the fair Duchess in an honorable way, which he
prosecuting after the Days of Mourning were over, he so dealt with her by fair
Words and rich Presents, that being now at liberty, she was contented to be his
Wife, and was married to him by the Bishop of Carlisle, with great Pomp and
Splendor; all the Lords and Nobles subject to his Scepter together with their
Ladies adorning their Nuptials. and assisting at the Ceremony: And so great was
the Joy, that Feasting, Tournaments and all manner of Desports to recreate the
Senses were held for twenty Days. Yet the Queen was troubled to find the Fruits
of her Womb increase so fast, as fearing to be suspected of Adultry, for well
she knew she had been deceived, when she computed the time of Alfrydus's Death
with the same she supposed him in her Embraces: but the King, to put her out of
doubt, and to prevent melancholy thoughts, in loving wise revealed the whole
Mystery; yet it was agreed between them, that it should be kept secret, and
that the Child should as soon as born, be conveyed to a trusty Guardian to
prevent Coloquie. The Queen about six Months after the Ceremony of the Wedding
was over, being brought to bed of a Son, the Child named Arthur, as it was
resolved, was conveyed by trusty Hands to a Lady of good Repute, named Mari^da,
Wife to Sir Ector, one of the King's Knights; who brought him up in such
Learning as was meet for his Pears: When as his Father, worn out with the
continual Folies of War, and much distempered through many wounds he had
received, died, leaving him sole Heir of his Dominions; who thereupon was
proclaimed by most of the Nobility, and crowned King; though some taking the
advantage of his green Years, rebelled, and raised diverse Commotions; but he
growing up, and getting the Reins of Government into his Hands, did many great
Exploits, as will in the Series of this History appear.

King Arthur by this time being grown up, became exceeding tall and strong,
insomuch that he seemed more than Man, and in many Iusts and Tournaments so well
behaved himself, that none could stand before him: A Horse he had which he
called Beaucephalus, after the name of the Great Alexander's Horse; and he in
all Exploits proved the best in the World: His Sword was of a large size, viz.
five foot in length, and in breadth eight inches; cutting with two fearful
edges, on which hung death and destruction: His Lance was eight Cubits, and the
head thereof formed of massy Steel, weighing six Pound: His Armor was of the
highest Prooff, shining with Gems and burnished Gold: And the better to inure
him to War and great Exploits, he frequently rode thus accutered; and often in
places of greatest danger, glorying in nothing more than his Strength and manly
Prowess, delighting in, nor fancying none but such as were truly Valiant, and
feared not Death in any of his dreadful Shapes; but to such he was lavish to
Exccess. Retaining no other for his Counselor, but Merlyn the famous
Necromancer, from whom, as from an Oracle, he received the certainty of future
Events; and at his request recreated him with strange and wonderful Sights, the
Representation of Magic; and amongst the rest, upon a great Plain before the
King's Palace, at Cardigan, he raised a stately Tower, and round it a pleasant
Garden adorned with Fruits and fragrant Flowers, Fish ponds. Fountains, Bowers,
and Vmbrages, into which he led the King and all his Nobility, feasting them
after a sumptuous manner, as they imagined; but he had no sooner reconveyed
them thence, but looking back, they saw all vanish in Thunder, Lightning, and a
prodigious Earthquake, to their great amazement; yet knowing before it was but
Defusion, they rested somewhat more satisfied, yet could not but think of what
had passed. The day being spent in viewing this Piece of Recreation, end the
King ruminating many things in his mind, at last laying him down upon his
Couch, he fell into a slumber, and then dreamed that he was carried into a
spacious Have, in which stood a Table of great circumference, out of the middle
of which grew an Oak and Laurel, with Crowns, Scepters, Swords, and Ensigns
hanging on them, and that they were guarded by many valiant Knights, high in
Prowess, and terrible to the whole World, which made him desirous to become
their Associate; nor did he sooner demand it, but they joyfully received him,
and placing him in a Chair of Ivory and Gold, made him their Chief, and gave
him a Banner with a Lion rampant portrayed thereon; and this Motto written,
viz. Ever Victorious; upon which, the sound of Trumpets, noise of Drums,
clattering of Arms, shouts and cries saluted his Ears: And he supposed he
beheld Armies in rout and slaughter, scattered through the whole World, and
that the Couquerers laid the Trophies at his Feet, and with an Universal Shout
saluted him, Great Monarch of the Western World. At what time awakning, he
found it but a Dream, yet revolving in his Mind the strangeness of the Fancy,
the next morning he related it to his Nobles, who assured him of happy
Presages, and advised him to make inquiry into the Interpreration thereof;
whereupon, sending for his Necromantick Counselor, he related it to him, who
promised within a day to give him the signification of his Dream, which he did
as follows: viz. That by the Table was signified his Kingdom; by the Knights
the Pillars and Strength thereof; by Oak and Laurel, Strength Victory and
Durance; the Crowns, Scepters, Swords and Ensigns, the Spoils of the Nations
he should be possess's of; and the Schene of War, the Representations of the
many dreadful Battles he should fight, wherein he should ever remain
victorious; and the making him Chief, giving him the Standard, and placing him
in a Chair Ivory and Gold, denoted him deep in his Subjects Love, and that no
Treason should prosper against him This Interpretation highly pleased the King,
and raised his towering Imaginations to such a pitch, that he resolved to spread
the terror of his Arms throughout the World: Wherefore he made great
Preparation of all manner of Warlike Provision, but above all of hardy and
courageous Knights, inviting them from all parts to his Court; and for their
better Encouragement, caused a spacious Hall three hundred Foot in length, and
twenty in breadth, to be built, with Glass Turrets on the top, ceiled with
Fret-work and Gold, wainscoted with Cedar, and paved with Marble; in the midst
of which he placed a Round Table, at which four hundred Knights might sit, and
caused it daily to be furnished with great store of choice Provision, for the
entertainment of such Men of War as would resort thither; and shortly after
constituted the Order of the Round Table, allowing a Yearly Pension of a
hundred Mark to such as were truly valiant, and would intole themselves to
attend his Service when Occasion required, making himself the Head Sovereign of
the Order; so that by this means the valiant Men of the neighboring Nations
tendered their Service to him, and were admitted into the noble Order, but not
before they had been proved in some Exploit.

CHAP. II.
How King Arthur warred with the Kings of Mercia, and the East Angles, who
invaded his Dominions, slew a Monstrous Giant, and put their Armies to the
Rout, etc.
THe King being established in his Throne, and having thus far proceeded,
caused a place to be made for Iusting, where (...) every Week his Knights
exercised in Martial Order, and Iusted with each other; and to him that did
hest the King would frequently send one rich Present or other, himself being
still a Spectator of those Exercises, and at all great Feasts present amongst
them at Dinner, having a Chair like a Throne placed on that part of the Table
that was toward the upper-end of the Hall; but no Music suffered, except the
Martial Sounds of Drums, Trumphers and Clarions, in which most of all our
Heroic Prince delighted. And now being furnished with mighty Men, that might
compate to David's Worthies (if not exceed them) in dreadful Foots of Arms, he
passionately desired to have an honorable Occasion to try his and their
Valors, which was not long wanting; For the Mercian King of the Saxons, and
the King of the East Angles, presuming upon their Strength, broke into Cornwall,
part of King Arthur's Dominions, and committed diverse Outrages, burning,
plundring, ravishing and slaughtering in suth a dreadful manner, that the
People (with such substance as they could convey) fled everywhere before them:
The News of which rouzed our Lyon-like Prince, who taking with him his Guard of
Knights, and eight hundred common Soldiers, the Flower of his Dominions, by
swift Marches passed on give War the meeting; whose approach to the Enemy
(being treble the Number) little regarded, not doubting to give him the
Overthrow, trusting greatly to the force of one Cingeterox, a monstrous Giant,
nine Cubits high six in circumference, and armed with a huge Battle are and
Coat of Mael; but the undaunted Prince, whom Fear could not dismay having
animated his Soldiers, and set them in Battle-array attended by his Knights,
broke through the Ramparts, killing such as guarded the Camp, and setting upon
the Infidels, for so at that time they were, cutting through the thickest of
them, made such a slaughter that all the way he passed was strewed with dead
Bodies; yet on he pressed through lanes of Death, his Heroic Champions
following, as animated by the Martial Deeds of their Renowned Leader. Nor did
they less annoy the Enemy, who by this time taking the Alarm in all parts,
come running to oppose them, and began to make some slaughter of his Men,
especially where the Giant fought; which the King perceiving, by the Cry that
arose, caused his Standard, with the great Lion to advance that way, bearing
down all before him till he came to the place where he found Cingeterox and
Ethwaldus, the King, bathing their Ares in the Blood of his Men, of which they
had slain three hundred, when as King Arthur with a loud voice cried, Turn this
way, Infidels; spare the Weak, and bend your force again the Stronger. Upon
which, the Giant stairing on him, with a dreadful voice replied, Who art thou
that comes to seek thy Death? I am a Slodier, said the King, and one that am
come to fetch thy Head by way of Reprizal for the Mischiefs thou have done in
my Country. But you must get it first, said the Giant. That shall not be long,
said the King; and thereupon charged on the Monster so furiously with his
Sword, that e're he could welld his Battle; ox with a full stroke on his
Helm, which made the sire spring from thence, he made him staggar three huge
Paces, and bend with his Knee to the Ground; then the Giant (enraged) made at
him, and struck at the King, so that the blow dazzled him, and made his Eyes
swim; but spon recovering, he that had never been so used before, resolved
revenge thereupon (after a fust stroke) wheeling his dreadful Sword about, he
struck the Monster en the Helmet with such force, that cutting it through, the
Sword entered fix inches, whereupon, with a terrible groan, he fell to the
Earth, and at what time the King stood on him and divided his Head from his
Trunk, the which he delivered to his Esquire that bore his Bow and Quiver. Nor
were the Knights of the Order idle, for Sir Lancelot had by this time
grievously wounded the Mercian King, and taken him Prisoner; and Sir Tristrian
slain thirty six Captains besides thirty six common Soldiers; so that the King
of the East Angles seeing all go to wrack, and his Men were disordered, caused
the Retreat to be sounded; whereupon his Captains endeavored to bring off
their Men, but they being in great Consternation, and the Britains pressing on
them, (fearful of death) fled in all parts, and left all the Booty they had
gotten to the Conquerors, who fiercely pursuing the flying Foe, made terrible
flaugheer, insomuch that such as could not fly into Castles and Strongholds
fell by the Sword, to the number of twenty thousand. This Over^how being noised
abroad, brought a great Fear upon all the Saxon Princes, so that the Mertians
wholly submitted, and sent a great Ransom for their King; who upon his swearing
to become Tributary and Vassal to King Arthur, was set at liberty. Nor were
there any of their petty Kings that then possessed this Island which they had
divided into Heptiarchey, but sent their Ambassadors with great Presents to
entreat a Peace; the which upon their acknowledging him their Supreme Prince,
and paying eath two hundred Geldings, a Faulcon, and a Greyhound yearly was
accorded to. And thus flourished this Renowned King in the beginning of his
Reign, but more dreadful and redoubted were his future Deeds, as by the Sequel
will appear.

CHAP. III.
How King Arthur passed into Denmark, conquered the Kingdom of Norway;
overthrew Burnamissa the Danish King; besieged Copen-Hagen; and how, at the
Entreaty of Geneura, the Sister of the Danish King, he hearkered to an Accord,
and had an Interview with Burnamissa, and how a Peace was concluded between
them, upon the whole matter being left to the Princes's Award: and how King
Arthur falling in Love with the fair Princess, married her.
THe King having in a manner brought England to his subjection, resolved not to
suffer the current of his Victory to be damed up with Ease, took counsel with
Merlyn and the most valiant of his Knights, what Enterprise was next to be
undertaken, who advised him, That it was most for his Honor to revenge the
Injuries he had received by the Danes, who roaming about those Seas, had not
only taken diverse of his Ships, but (landing) had surprised some smast Towns
upon the Sea coast, and burnt them, corrying the Inhabitants into miserable
Captivity, and by ctuel Tortures obliged them to offer Sacrafice to their
Idols, that Kingdom being then unconverted. This motion pleased the King, whose
restless spirit and desire of Glory made him impatient of ease; whereupon he
caused a great Navy of Ships to be rigged in Milford Haven, and in all other
Ports, and gave Order for the building Men of War and Galleys, so that in six
Months space he had a Fleet of small and great Vessels that consisted of three
hundred Sail, on which early in the Spring he imbarqued with twenty eight
thousand choice Soldiers, and all manner of Warlike Provision; having by this
time inroled twenty new Knights, to supply the places of such as fell by the
Sword or dyed of diverse Diseases; and so with a fresh gale weighing Anthor, and
with a fair Wind arriving in the Baltic Ocean, entered the Straits, now
guarded by the two famous Castles of Coronsburg and Elzeburg, the latter
standing on the Coast of Norway, and, there brought such a fear on either
Shore, that the Inhabitans in all parts fled with what they could most
conveniantly carry, leaving the rest for a prey to the Britains, who under the
Conduct of their victorious King, intiched themselves with a great booty; when
incamping before Nidrosia in Norway, summoned the City to yield, but there
being a strong Garrison therein they returned Answer, That they kept the City
for Burnamissa, King of Denmark, and would in no wise yi ld it without his
Order: whereupon the King commanded the Assault to be made by twelve thousand
Men, under the leading of forty faut Knights of the order of the Round Table,
who heving their Scaling Engines in a readiness, on Easter-eve marched to the
Wall, and with a shower of Arrows and Wildfire drdve the defendants thence;
when as Sir Ector, bearing the Royal Seandard, mounted, and making great
slaughter of suek as opposed, cutting of Arms, Legs, and Helmed Heads, placed
it on the chief Bulwark, which the rest seeing, on all sides sfreve to imitate
him, so within less than six hours the City was won, which the Conquered
perceiving, retired to the Marker-place, and throwing down their Arms begged
Mercy; which the King generously granted; yet gave the Spoil of the City to the
Soldiers, not reserving any part to himself, which so heightened them, that
(leaving a Garrison there) passed on to Bergen, which upon the first Summons
surrendered; and by its Example all the remaining Cities and walled Towns did
the like, so that the Kingdom of Norway was entirely at King Arthur's Devotion:
whereupon finding no more to conquer, he having received a supply of five
thousand Men to make up the number he brought, by reason he was forced to leave
the like Number in Garrison, imbarqued, and passed the Straits, landed upon the
Dainish Shore, filling all with Terror and Amazement; when as that King having
gathered a huge Army, advanced to give him Battle, which did not a little
rejoice King Arthur, who greatly desired to try his strength in Mar: when
jayning, on the great Plain before Copen-Hagen, a dreadful Fight began; but
Victory (who never declined our Heroic Prince) soon declared for the Britains,
so that the Danish King Anding the Battle swerve, and that he could not stay
his Men longer from open flight, to cover their Shame, sounded the Retreat;
whereupon they retiring in great Confusion, King Arthur and his Knights
following so furiously, that all the Plain was strewed with the bodies of the
slain, and so hotly they pressed on, that e're three parts of the Army entered
the City, the Gates were shut up, and a third pars shut out, for fear the
Britains should enter pell-most with them, who were by the furious Soldiers
slain in the fight of their Friends, though the compassionate King bid spare
the Sword.

The Danes thus overthrown, the King intamped before the City, resolving to
carry it by force, and the next Day prepared for the Assault, resolving to
march in the head of his Knights to win immortal Fame by his planting his
Srandard upon the Wall with his own Hands, or to lose his Life; nor could the
Peeswasion of his Nobles make him decline it: but as he approached the Wall,
the Gates opened, whereupon he supposed the Foe intended to sally, but inflead
of armed Men, there issued out a Troop of beautiful Ladies, and in the front of
them the beaureous Genura, Sister to Barnamissa the Manish King, whereat King
Arthur muth wondered, and commanding his Men to stand in Battalia with twelve
Knights went to meet them, when as the Ladies approaching him, the fair and
beauteous Princess fell at his Feet, and bedewing the Ground with Gears,
besought him to have Compassion on her distressed Country; the King being moved
at this unusual sight, in loding wise raised her in his Arms, and bad her be of
good Comfort; bur the sorrowful Lady, whom Tears made more lovely, refused all
Comfort unless he would grant het Request, to which the King (overcome by
Tompassion) consenced, after a short Pause, if what the demanded might consist
with his Honor: whereupon opening a Casker that one of her Ladies held, the
first presented him with Jewels of great value set in Gold, and then entreated
that an Interview might be had between him and her Brother; to which the King
readily consented, as already faeling Love's pointed Shafts pierce his high
prooffed Armor, and presenting the fair Princess with a Crown of Gold set with
Pearls and Diamons, which he had taken in the Mercian War; as likewise her
Lady with Jewels of great price; he dismissed them, and caused a royal Tent to
be pitehed about a Furlong fram the Vaunt guard of his Army.

Hostilities ceasing, the Danish King with twenty of his chief Nobility came to
King Arthur's Tent, and there in humble wise would have proserated themselves,
but the King would not permit it; but making them sit down actorsing to their
Degree, entered into a Discourse with them, relating at large the justness of
his taking up Arms and demanding Restitution for the Wrongs his Subjects head
received, and for the Mischiefs his Country had sustained; to which Burnawissa
replied, That whatever had happened in that Nature, had been without his
Knowledge; but however knowing him to be a Prince of great Clemency, he would
be well contont to submit to whatever he should think fit: The King overcome by
the meekness of the Dane, finding a relenting in his Breast, as generously
offered to refer the whole marter to the beauteous Princess, and bound himself
to stand (...) what Award He should make; which was joyfully accepted by
Burnamissa, who expected before, that no less than his Kingdom of Norway would
make Satisfaction to the offended British Monarch: whereupon the Princess was
sent for, who came, attended by diverse Ladies of Honor, in most sumptuous
Attire, glittering in Gold and Fems, which were out-vied by her imcomparable
Beauty; when making her Approach, King Arthur arose from his Chair of State and
saluted her; as likewise his Knights did her Ladies: Then Burnamissa made her
acquainted with the Pleasure of King Arthur; but she in Modesty refused to be
Arbitress in so weighty a matter, till the King pressed it, and desired her to
do him so great an Honor; whereupon after some Consideration she awarded, That
her Brother should defray the whole Charge of the War, and restore all such
Ships as were found to appertain to any of King Arthur's Subjects, and that the
Offenders being taken should be delivered to the King to dispose of as he
thought fit, and then the King to depart the Land, and withdraw his Garrisons.
These Articles were highly approved on either part, and the Princess her Wisdom
admired: whereupon Commandment was given to proclaim them with beat of Drum and
sound of Trumpet, and that from thenceforth all Hostility should cease.

Peace being thus happily accorded, the Danes rung their Bells and made
Bon-fires in every City, all the Nobility feasting their poor Neighbors and
Tenants throughout the Kingdom; when as the Danish King causing a royal
Pavillion to be reared without the City, prepared a sumptuous Feast, to which
he in humble wise invited the King and his Nobles, and so great was the
Entertainment, that the like had not been known before in that Kingdom.

But what pleased King Arthur more than all, was the sight of the fair
Princess, with whom by this time he was most passionately in Love: Nor did the
Fever of his Desire less afflict her, though she durst not raise her Hopes so
high; till at last the King (not longer able to resist the Magic of heri Eyes)
took the opportunity of breaking his Mind to her, who humbly told him with a
demure Countenance, That she could not conceive herself worthy the Thoughts of
so great a Monarch; but if it pleased him to condescend so low, as to raise her
to such Dignity, she had no Argument against his Pleasure, if her Brother would
consent. This pleasing Answer overjoyed the King, insomuch that sending for the
Danish King, he desired to beg one Favor of him; Nay, replied Burnamissa, your
Majesty may command even what you please, since to your Clemency I owe so much.
Then said King Arthur, It Is this fair Pledge of lasting Peace that I with low
Submission do request. If my Sister be contented, said the King, I am overjoyed
at what I hear, and have long desired to be allied unto so great a Prince, yet
must not compel a free Mind. You need not, (said the Princess, blushing like a
Rosey Bloom that opens in June or July to the Morning-Sun) for I have already
parted with that Heart that needs would go, upon Condition you consented. I do
consent most willingly, replied the King; and thereupon taking King Arthur in
his right Hand, and the Princess in his left, he joined their Hands, and at the
Request of the former, Segbert the British Archbishop Married them, according
to the Cannons of the British Church, pronouncing many dreadful Curses on
whoever should attempt to untye the sacred Band. This known in the Camp and
City, redoubled the Joy, so that all Night long whole Loads of Pines blazed,
insomuch the Fires created a new Day as soon as Sol was set; and so sumptnous
was the Feast, which lasted many Days, that Rome in all her Glory could not
exceed it; the Martial Feats (to win Glory, and the Love of the Ladies) were so
many that I have not place here to relate them.

CHAP. IV.
How returning home, King Arthur sound his Country invaded by Magor King of
Ireland, and how he vanquished him; and having recovered the Isle of Angle-Sea
from the French, sailed into France, to revenge the Injury done to his
Subjects, overthrowing their Army. Also how Queen Geneura was delivered of a
Son; and of the Presents and Vows made by the Saxon Kings: With a full
Description of the Knights of the Round Table.
THe King having been absent from his own Dominions for the space of six
Months, began to cast his Eye homeward; when having remitted Burnamissa the
Charges he was at, and only gave order his Subjects Loss should be repaired, he
with his fair Queen, whom the King leaded with rich Presents, took leave of the
Danish Court, and imbarquing with the whole Army, and diverse of the Danish
Nobility, who from chair King head order to attend the Queen; having a fair
gale, on the ninth of October landed where they first imbarqued, and were
received with universal joy; whereupon the King coming to a Castle of his, near
(...). feasted the Dainish Nobility in a mast spianded manner. But whilst he
remained there, he had notice, That Magor King of Ierland, who by his
Amiassaders had courted the fair Gemna, and been refused, was (to revenge it on
his Arrival) landed with great Power in South Wales; whereupan the King
comforting his Queen, who was greatly grieved that through her cause such
suddenly Troubles should arise, passed on with his victorious Army, and gave
him Battle near Merioneth, and utterly discomfited him, so that flying with his
broken Army, and being everywhere assaises by the Country Peasants, who had
laid the way for him, he scarcely escaped to his Ships with five thousand out
of his thirty thousand; so that King Arthur (speedy as Caesar in his victories)
returned to his fair Queen with the Trophies of his conquered Enemies long
before he was expected to have fought the Battle; when sending four thousand
Men under the leading of Sir Lancelot and diverse of her good Knighes, they
landed on the Isle of Angle-(...), and drove thence the French that had for
some time past, during the troubles of this Kingdom, settled themselves there.

The King's Victories daily increasing, the Terror of his Name being spread
wide, it made the most redoubted Monarch tremble; yet durst France (then
powerful at Sea) invade our Coait, and with fire and sword spoiled many
Sea-towns, carrying away great booty, as also the People, the Men they made cow
in their Galleys. and the Women to satiate their prodigious Lust; when as the
cries of his suffering sujects reaching his ear where he was delighting himself
with his Queen, he resolved once more to forsake the Camp of Venus, and her
soft Delighis, to court Fame and Glory in the Camp of Mars; whereupon having
sent to Lothario^ for Restitution, and receiving rather scorns than a
satisfactory answer from that imperious King, he made great proparations for
the War, and had at that time twelve Sale of Ships sent to his aid by his
Brother of Denmark; when being in a readiness with an Army of thirty four
thousand, he coasted the Country, and puning into the bay of Marselies, with
his shot of Arrows that flew like Hail, drove the defendants from the shore,
on which himself with his own Standard first leaped, and stood like an enraged
Lion, though a thousand that is flew round his Head, and many (...) from his
glittering shield; but long it was not e're the valiant Knights of the Order
(imsrating their Sovereign) thrust their Ships to Land, and putting their
Soldiers in Battle-aray, charged furiously upon the foremost Battailian of the
Enemy, lead by the Duke (...) Vallois, so that being overset, they retreated in
great disorder, and finding no place to be received, broke the Ranks of their
Friends; when as the Duke De Nevers advanced with the right wing of Horse to
their succor, but was so gauled with the shot of Arrows that the Horses
mischiefet more the Riders than the Britains.

In this Confusion the King drawing out six thousand of his choice Men, charged
upon the disordered Enemy with such courage that he pierced their main Battle,
making lanes of death wherever he came, cutting off Arms, Heads and Legs,
insomuth that the Danish General Gironeus imitating him, the French Soldiers
(routed in all parts) left their Commanders and fled, insomuch that the
slaughter of the Nobility was great, a Fare even incident to that Kingdom; nor
would they trust to the weak wall of Marselies, but flying to Lions and Paris,
left that part of the Country naked, to be possessed of the Britains.

The terror of this overthrow alarming the French Court, and finding that
brought home to them which they had used to others abroad, the People with
Tears besought their King to appease the Conqueror in time, and thereby prevent
worse desolation, who considering his tottering Kingdom was at stake, sent four
of his prime Lords to beg a Week's Cessation or Truce, to which King Arthur
(whose (...) was more at Glory and Renown than Advanvantage) accorded, during
which time, the King having raised a Mistion of Crowns sent them in diverse
Wagons, with other rich Presents, to purchase his Peace, and the depatrure of
his new come Guest, yet prevailed they not e're he had made his Acknowledgment
for the indignity put upon the King's Ambassadors, and deliver the Town and
(...) Marselies, to be possessed as a Pledge of future Peace by the Britains
for the spare of twenty Years to come and upon pain of forfeiting it for ever,
no Hostilities to be used by Lend, nor Depravations by Sea. These Articles
accorded, the Kin^ hastened to his own Country with the grearest part of his
Army, leaving only (...) Solders in Marselies; and having amply rewarded the
(...) dismissed them.

Upon King (...) he found, to his unspeakable joy, his fair Queen (...) a
lovely Boy, who, by the Advice of Merlyn, he nam^d Constantius, those Victories
and great Exploits that Prophet for^, which after his Father's death, he
succeeding him in his Throne, exactly came to pass: and now the joy bring great
throughout the British Dominisns, all the Saxon Kings came to King Arthur's
Court, then removed to the then floursihing City of Hereford, and made their
Homage, complementing him highly on his Marriage, and the birth of his Son,
presenting the Queen and Royal Infant with great Presents, as Jewels, Gold, and
fragrant Spice of Arabia, promising for them and their Heirs to be obedient to
the British Stepter though before and after the Death of King Arthur they brake
their Vaws, though to their great disadvantage: For the young Prince (almost as
successful in War as his Father) grasped the Kingdoms of the Mercians and
East Angles with so hard a hand, that during his Life, they could not wrest
them from him; but to our purpose. King Arthur being the chief Favorite of
Fortune, and the eldest Son of Fame, began to enlarge the splendour of his
Court, and increase the number of the Knights of the Round Table, in whom
consisted his chief Strength, for scarce was there any one of them, but durst
encounter ten ordinary Men hand to hand; and as he increased them, so he
enlarged their Pensions, which drew the most Valiant of all Nations to serve
him, though none were admitted before they were tried: The habit they
ordinarily wore, when without their Armor, was a Vest lined with Sables, and
on the back of it a red Cross, and on their Thighs Cushes of highest proof;
their Stockings were in the manner of Bugkins, and their Shoes of Camelsskin,
the Hair appearing outward: on their Heads they wore Caps made of Seal-skins
lined with Silk and Cotted: and about their neck Silk of diverse colors; each
of them in War carrying a double Faulchion, a Battle-axe, a Bow and Quiver, a
Lance, being severally allowed a Esquire or Armor-bearer, who attended them
in all Battles.

CHAP. V.
How King Arthur upon the Relation of a Hermit, sailed into the Holy Land, took
Ioppa, overthrew Salmanezar, and took Jerusalem, with what else happened
remarkable on that occasion.
ABout this time King Arthur finding nothing worthy of his Sword at home, and
altogether impatient of ease, studied how he might employ it abroad, and whilst
he was musing thereon, (...) Hermit in poor array came to the Court, and filled
it at once with pity and desire of revenge upon the dismal Relation he made,
which was, That the Turks and Sarazens had fallen upon Judea and Palatine with
an Army of one million of Men, and made such slaughter of the Christians in
those parts, that such that escaped were forced to fly into Rocks and Caves of
the Earth, and there were either starved to Death, or became a Prey to wild
Beasts: And that they had taken the Holy City of Jerusalem, after thirty days
Siege, and put almost all the Christians they found therein to the Sword,
polluting the Temple and Holy Sepulcher with their Heathenish Worship: As also,
that they impailed the Patriarch alive for refusing to worship Mahomer.

This Story coming to the King's ear, he could not refrain from shedding tears,
when sending for the Hermit, in the presence of his Nobles, he most strictly
examined him to all particulars, and finding he delivered nothing but what (as
he said) himself had been an Eye witness too; the King turning to his Lords,
said, Hear you this, my Lords, shall we suffer the Enemies of our Lord and
Savior thus to Triumph over the professors of his Name? To which they with one
Voice replied, That it was intolerable, and they were ready to venture their
Lives and Fortunes in that Holy War, and in his Service. Whereat the King
highly commending their Resolutions, vowed by the Passion of his blessed Lord,
whom those Infidels defied and blasphemed, he would not take pleasure in any
thing till he had faced those barbarous Nations, and tried his Fortune to free
the Holy City from its Pollution; and thereupon he sent to all the neighboring
Princess for Aid, resolving to set sail in the Spring, it being now the middle
of August: He likewise laid double Taxes upon his own Subjects, and demanded
double Tribute of the Saxon Princes, who did not so willingly pay it at that
time as was expected, by reason most of them were unconverted, and therefore
secretly rejoiced at the Prosperity of their Brother Infidels: But however the
King raised a great Mass of Money; and caused his Navy to be augmented; so that
from France, Denmark, and other parts of Spain, having received fifty Ships of
War, most of them manned with Volunteers of those Nations, he with two hundred
Sail, on board of which he had five thousand Men, in the beginning of April
weighed Anchor, and having a fair wind, coasting France and Spain, he joined
likewise diverse other Ships, who were ready to attend him, for the noise of
this War had overspread all all Christendons; where passing through the Straits
into the Mediterenian Sea, he brought such a fear upon the Sea towns, that the
(...) them fled with their substance to the Mountains, into which the
Christians entering, found yet some booty; but (desirous to pass on to
Jerusalem) the King sailed to the Isle of Cyprus, then governed by one Emanuel
a Christian, where having refreshed his Arms, he again imbarqued, and sailing
through that tract of Seas, arrived at Joppa. a famous Sea: port, and the
Inlet of Palastine, which he found strongly fortifled, as likewise Salmanezer
King of the Turks incampes with a Host of one million of Turks, Jews, and
Sarazens about six miles from thence; yet landing his Men, he resolved to
besiege the City, and by taking it, secure the Port; whereupon causing his
Enginers to make diverse batterings after the Roman fashion, which under the
favor of the night (notwithstanding the Besirged hurled down Wild: fire and
stones in grear abundance) they ser to the Walls on the North side, and by
force of Cords battered with such fury, that they rent the Vamures in diverse
places, making the City tremble, which so alarmed the Infidels, that they
sallyed ten thousand strong upon the quarter, guarded by the Earl of Merioneth,
but coming to handy strokes, were forced to retire five thousand lefs than they
came; and the next morning, by King Arthur's express Command, a furious Assault
was given on all parts, when as the Britains with their shot of Arrows bearing
the Besieged from their defenses, mounted and planted the King's Standard upon
the wall, entering and kissing the Infidels in great number, so that all the
streets ran Blood, till such time as the King (upon their throwing down their
Arms, and on their knecs brgging Mercy) bid spare the Sword; when having
expesled them the Town, he placed a Garrison of diverse Nations therein, and
marched to join Battle with Salmanezer.

The Infidels being greatly troubled at the loss of Joppa, desired their
General to lead their to battle e're the Christians advanced any further; to
which, after many delays he consented, and on the fifteenth of July early in
the morning advanced, in hopes to suirprize the Christians, but finding them in
battle-array, he began to repent his rashness; but sinding no means now to
retire, unless with loss and disgrace, he divided his Army into three parts,
the first (containing forty thousand Men.) he lead himself; the second
(containing thirty six thousand,) he committed to his Brother Albamazer, a
Giant of great stature, fierce and cruel; and the third (containing twenty four
thousand,) to Gouzeles, Governor of Jerusalem: Nor did King Arthur delay to
Marshal his Batrle in the best manner, eading the first Batalian, consisting of
two thousand choice Soldiers, and an hundred Knights of the Order for the guard
of his person; the second battle (consisting of ten thousand,) he committed to
Battanins Duke of Cornwall; the third battle (consisting of ten thousand,) he
committed to Sir Laneelot do Lake; the fourth (consisting of the like number,)
was lead by Frovonius a noble Dane: When as both Armies (marching in this
posture,) came face to face, leaving a little space between, a monstrous Pagan
stepping forth, demanded (e're the Charge was sounded, a Man to sight him hand
to hand, and that the combat should ve for no less than the City of Jerusalem
or the departure of the Christians, if King Arthur durst agree to it: whereupon
the King having sent to the Turk to know if he would sland to what his proud
Champion proposed, and finding him inclinable thereto, he thoutht no Sword more
sit than his own to chastise the Daring; when (contrary to the mind of his
Nobles) disguising himself in the Armaue of one of his Knights, he stepped
forth, and without much ceremony, charged him with such fury, that at one full
blow he broke his Helm, and made him staggar six paces back, yet recovering
his starian, he the more enraged, resolved to obliter the disgrace that he had
sustained, in the sight of his Prince and his whole Arym, came on with double
fury, foaming and storming for slame and anger to be so fulled, he smore the
King with such force, that he loased his Helme^ and made his eyes swim desye:
but he nothing daunted thereat. as the Giant was about to redouble his stroke,
Struck him so full on the right (...) that his Sattle: are fell to the Ground,
when pursuing his stroke. he struck him as he bended to recover it on the neck.
so that the Sword entering caused a deep wound, out of which issued great
quantity of Blood, so that the King finding through loss thereof he must naeds
faint, kept him off, as not thinking it safe to hazard too eagerly his Person
when the Conquest was already made: nor did his expectation fall; for the Giant
finding his strength decay, like a Lamp, which at going out gives the greatest
blaze, taking his Are in both hands, smote upon the King in great fury, and
with a full stroke upon his shoulder crushed his Armor, and much bruised him;
at what time the King with undaunted courage gave him another wound on the left
Arm between the joints of his Harness and pursuing it with a thrust, pierced
his Coat of Meal and high-proffed Tushes, so that the Sword entering a foot
into his bowess, he with a dismal groan fell to the Earth: whereupon the
Pagans, contrary to the promise of their King, sounded the Charge, refusing to
stand to what had been sworn; the which so enraged the Christian Soldiers, that
redoubling their fury upon the signal given, they charged so furiously upon the
Infidels, that the Battle wherein Abumazar fought was by King Arthur and his
Squadron overborn, and pierced even to the middle, when Sir Gawen, a Knight of
the Order having killed the Standard Bearer, took the Standard even in the
Infidel King's sight, which made him advance with all his strength to recover
it: but finding great resta^ance, after he had fought, and by words strove to
animate his Men, laboring in vain to stay their flight, he turned-furiously
upon his second Battle that was advancing; being hotly persued by the
Christians, and finding no place to retreat, he put them in great disorder;
when as Sir Lancelot fetehing a compass about, charged them in the Flank on the
right, and so gauled them with shots of Arrows, that after many were slain and
wounded, and nothing but the cries of the Vanquished, and the shouts of the
Vanqvishers, to be heard, the rest of King Arthur's Battles advancing, and
charging them in the left, they (after making what resistance they were able,
and the loss of four thousand of their best Soldiers, their King being sore
wounded and carried out of the Battle) fell into disorder, and in great
confusion fled, every one as he could shifting for himself, so that the
Execution following with great fury, scarce two thousad escaped the the Sword.

The Victory thus happily gained, the Christians found such store of Treasure
in the Tams, that (...) was wounderful, the which the King sharing amongst his
Sowiers, according as every and had deserved, and well refeeshed his Army,
sending the Mounded of his pare to Ioppa, and bursed the Slain; he with Banners
spread marched toward Iernsalem, bringing a great fear on all the Cities in
his way, must of which surrendered upon the first Summons; so that coming before
the Holy City, whither the greatest part of the scatrered Army was retired, he
having summoned the Infidels to yield and save their lives, but receiving no
answer, he batrered it with his Rams, War wolfes, and other fearful Engines,
till a part of the wall on the South side fell, upon which a furious Assault
was given, insomuch, that the Insidels having drawn their greatest strength to
defend (...) breach, a great slaughter was made; yet the Thristians resolving
to carry the City, which then was but small, and very ravenous, pressed on with
suth violence, that the fearful Enemy being overborn, were everywhere slain;
and the Christians enteing, plated King Arthur's Standard upon the Bulwarks,
which so dismayed the Infidels, that such as could, fled by the Posterns, and
over the Brock Cedron, others hid themselves in Caves till the fury of the
Soldiers were over, and such is could not do either, fell for the most part by
the Sword.

This famous City, being the first time thus taken by the Christians, a great
number of miserable Men and Women were released out of Dungeons, who had for a
long time been fed with Bread of Affliction, half starved, and miserably used
by the Infidels, for publikly owning the Name of the Lord, who, not far from
thence, purchased them with his precious Blood to their unspeakable Joy.

CHAP. V.
How, upon notice that the Saxons invaded his Country, he retruned; and how
upon his return, the Saxon Kings laid down their Arms: Also how King Arthur
built many Religious Houses, and gave great Largesses to the Poor; and how he
swore his Nobles and Knights to his Son Constantius, and so died.
THe King having thus performed his vow, repaired the Walls; buit a strong
Castle, and placed seven thousand Soldiers therein, besides the Christians of
Syria and India, that daily flocked thither in great number; he received
notice, that the Saxon petty Kings in his absence had cast off his Allegience,
and being united, invaded his Country insomuch that his Queen, Son, and those
that he has left in charge with the Kingdom, being overchrawn in a spirited
Battle were fled to the softnesses of Snowdown Mounains. Which News greatly
perplexed the King; so that having made his Offering at the Holy Sepuchre, and
constituted Religious Men to keep it, he with three parts of his Army he
brought, returned to his Ships, the other part being either slain in the
Battle, peti^^^ed by sickness, or left in the Garrison; yet e're he could (...),
twenty seven thousand, Turks, Sarazens, and Aegiptians, lying in ambush in a
Wood for that purpose, fell upon the Rear of his Army, and cut off three or
four hundred Britans and Danes e're the King with the Gross of his Battle could
draw up to ^^eir relief; yet fatal was it to the Infidels; for being
unexpectedly enclosed by the Christians, who fetched a compass behind diverse
littly Hills, they were almost all of them cut off.

This second Overthrow given the King quictly imbarqued his Soldiers, and
sailing by diverse Islands, destroyed the Earisons possessed by the Infidels:
When one day going on shore on the Promentory of Carthage, with a few of his
Knights, he was set upon by four hundred Moors, who sallyed out of (...) is;
but such was his and his Knights invincible Courage, that they drawing their
Swords, slaughteren the Barbarians in such manner, that they fled with great
cries, raking them to be more than mortal; whereupon the King causing eight
thousand Men instantly to come on shore desieged the City, and with Wild sice
burnt it about the Batharians Ears, putting many of them to the Sword: And then
marching up farther into the Country, there come against them six huge Lions,
bred in the Muritatian Forest, with whom the King and twenty of his Knights
encountering, killed tweive, and put the other four to flight.

King Arthur, impatient of stay, least whilst he conquered abroad his Country
should suffer with great spoil put again to Sea, and sayiing homeward, met with
a Fleet of Dyrates. who taking his Ships for Merchams, set upon the foremost
Souardran with loud Souts, casting great quantity of stones and Wildfire
amongst them, but coming to graple, they soon found their mistake, and then in
vain endeavoring to fly, were miserable slaughtered, insomuch, that out of
thiety but five escaped: In these Ships many miserable Christian Captives, both
Men and Women, were found, of which the King taking compassion, sent them into
their respective Countries, allowing them all things necessary for their
maintenance during the space of a year, and so passed on toward his own
Country.

The King's approach being known to the Saxon Princes (who not long before had
news that he was dead in the Holy Land, and thereby were animated to take up
Arms) so discouraged them, that withdrawing their Forces, every one retired
into his own Province, to sludy how to appease the Victorious Monarch, whom
they had justly incensed by their persideons Treachery, and as soon as they had
norice the King was landed and preparing his Forces to War against them, they
sent their respective Deputies with rich Presents, to excuse their rash and
unadvised actions, promising never for the future to transgress in the like
nature; yet the King being highly incensed, would at no cheaper a rate pass
over their persldeous dealings, than a personal acknowledgment, and the sum of
two thousand Marks each: As to be the better assured of them for the future,
that each of them should send his Son Hostage, and that those that had no Sons,
to send their nearest Kinsmen. and over and above, to make reparation for such
damages as could be by any of the King's Subjects proved to be sustained by
their unlawful Arms. This being performed, a Peace ensued, and the King
dismissed his Auxiliaries with great Rewards.

King Arthur now having (...) to repose in Peace, and think and think on his
many wonderful Deliverances, resolved to apply his mind to deeds of Piety, and
thereupon caused many Monastries and Religious houses be built giving yearly
maintenance to diverse poor People, but espersally to such as had lived in
splendour, and were fallen to decay: And daily he visteed the Sick, giving them
Christian Comfort: and using his utmost endeavor to therish Learning and Arts,
(...) which ended his proper charge he built likewise many Schools (...)
Colleges giving himself wholly up to the study of the seven Liverall (...);
and so well profited he therein, that he became the greatest (...) therein of
his Age: But most of all, he fixed his (...) upon his latter end, and with
Solomon was frequently heard to say, All Worldly things were but Vanity and
Vexation of Spirst; and that on Earth no real nor substantial joys were to be
found. When in the sixeth Year of his Age, and the forty ninth Year of his
Reign, salling sick, and by the opinions of his Physicians not likely to
recover, he sent for all his Nobles, and the Knights of the Order, and he
caused them to (...) fealty to his Son (...) in the (...) wise and thereupon,
finding (...) pious Expressions, and Prayers, (...) his Nobles to be careful of
securing his Son in his Throne, and having great respect to his Queen. he gave
up the Ghost, to the great grief of his Subjects, but more of his fair Queen,
who took it so grievously, that soon after fading into a Fever, she died, and
was buried with him in a Monastery, built by him at Monmouth, whose tomb
(richly adorned) continued visible till the Dissolution of the Fabric in the
time of Henry the Eight.

Thus, Friendly Reader, I Have (...) ^ere,
King Arthur's Noble Acts, which does appear
More fully in the larger ten Sheet Book
If thou therein, will cast a friendly Look.
FINIS.

