THE JESUIT DISCOVERED; Or, A Brief DISCOURSE OF The Policies of the Church of
Rome, in Preserving it Self, and Dividing of Protestant States and Kingdoms.

In which, is plainly Demonstrated, the Effects of their Political operations
upon Us at this Day, in respect to Religion, and matters of State.

Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, Who has bewitched you, that you should not
Obey the Truth!

London, Printed, 1659.

TO The Reader.
THis Discourse of the Jesuit Discovered, I intended that it should have bin
much larger and better Methodized; but that I, finding the Malevolent
Influences of the Jesuit, and the Common Enemy powered out so fast upon Us,
therefore Published it thus Rude and Undigested. This will not prevent the
Evil, but it demonstrateth that some course ought to be taken, that this Nation
may come to a Consistence in Government, else nothing but ruin will follow. So
many Persuasions as we find in the Nation, so many Interests of State we may
find also: unless all be wound up upon one bottom it will be a hard matter to
save it from Destruction. The Saints Interest must not be only consulted, but
also their Interest that are not accounted Saints; Our Savior advises his
Apostles to let the Tares and the Wheat, grow together until the Harvest:
Perfection is not attained unto in this Life, therefore our persuasion in
Religion ought not, in point of its own safety, seek Predomination over
another; It is to be bewailed amongst us, that men's merit by many is measured
by their opinions. It Is true that the Jesuit has had more opportunity for to
practice upon us this last 22 years, than he had in 100 years before; and would
do much more if he could persuade you to take down, and throw in the dust the
Ministers of Gods most holy Word. What think you of those that say, They are
dumb Dogs, Hirelings, and Antichristian? Did not the Jesuit teach them to
spell that Lesson; Be sober, Englishmen be sober; you are Ridd by the Jesuit,
throw him off; seek after wholesome Principles, that may be as Charts to sail
by, in this Turbulent, Dangerous Sea, where you find nothing but Rocks and
Shelves: He has raised mists that you cannot descry, nor make any true
observation of your Land marks, that should guide you into safe Harbor; He
feeds you with Notions that are sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly,
yea Poison; He infatuateth your understandings, that you cannot distinguish
between Life and Death; He lays his Snares at distances, and bids you walk
as in a most pleasant path; but (behold) you are taken in his Toil: Do not look
so a squint upon Him, who is not of your persuasion, but take him unto thee,
and embrace him, and say unto him, Brother, The Jesuit has endeavored to set
us at Odds. We are the same in fundamentals, Why should those small
Circumstances be such marks of distinction and difference? Come, let us unite,
and join hand in hand in the Work of our God and these Nations, that the People
of the Lord in other Nations that shall hear of it may rejoice, and his Enemies
may fear and tremble, for that England is become an entire Piece, in the
Building of the most Holy One.

Unite, that you may not be broken. How much is the love of Gods People one
toward another abated, since they were separated by those various distinctions
amongst us: If there were no more in it, but that of the preserving love among
those that fear the Lord, it should be a sufficient Inducement to unite, and a
prevayling persuasion to submitt to it, as an Essential Duty; but there is more
also in it, viz. If you do not unite, your ruin will follow, and you will be
broken one against another: What if one persuasion were fully possessed with
Sovereign Power, could they hold it? No: For that there is no one Persuasion
but must Exclude and Sever from their Interest six times their own number? Will
Council or Arms defend you in such a Case? No, there is nothing Will or Can
Defend or Preserve, but union of all Interests, for which he prays, who is an
unfeigned lover of the Church and People of God, and his Native Country,

J. S.
I have here briefly unlockt the Cabinet of the Policies of the Church of Rome,
and do desire that others more able then my self will make it their Work, to
search further in the mysteries of their Policies, that the evil intended by
them to us may be thereby prevented. I also intend to do more of this matter,
God Willing.



THE Jesuit Discovered.
THe policy of the Church of Rome, consists principally in dividing it Self
into Diverse and Sundry Orders, which are provided to retain all Humors in
Mankind. By this, She preserves Her self, and makes Her Interest strong and
powerful: and preserves Her self from ruin, without which, She could not have
continued to this Day, or bin able to act any thing to the hurt or detriment of
the reformed Churches.

First, As to the diversity of Orders amongst them; their only policy to those
who despise the Wealth of the World, and that can content themselves with
Poverty, are the Mendicants; their Prelates abound in Riches, their Hermits and
Capuchins for Severity of Life, their Cardinals for Pomp and Glory, their
Jesuits for Learning, and all manner of Sciences; their Popes and Prelates
exercising Sovereignty and Princely Command: They take especial care to engage
and ravish all manner of Humors. On the one side of a Street, you shall have a
Nunnery, or Cloister of Virgins; on the other side a Sty of Courtizans. One Day
you shall have them all in Masks, with all manner of Obsceneness and Folly that
can be imagined, or the corrupt nature of man desire; the Day following they
will be all in Processions, whipping themselves until the blood comes. On one
Door you shall have Excommunications, throwing Souls and Bodies to Hell: on
another Door, a Jubilee; or full Discharge of all Villainies, Murders,
Fornication, Drunkenness, Swearing, Forswearing, Poisoning; in a word, all
manner of Sin, Lendness, and Impiety: They were led to this policy by the hand
of Confessions; by that means they come to discern the nature of Mankind in
general. They do not hold it safe to restrain any of these Humors, lest it
should cause Eruptions, and make their Subjects seek some other way for to vent
them in; so that these Orders are as Sinks to receive the Humors. They have not
the Sword of the Spirit to destroy Vice, nor the Word of Truth to convince of
evil Doing; therefore they must trust to carnal Policy: For the more growth
sin has among them, that more the Church Increases in Riches, for that all
punishment upon the matter, and pardons, are Pecuniary. The ways they have to
ravish all sorts of affections, as I said before, are well-nigh infinite, there
being not any thing either Sacred or Profane, no Virtue or Vice almost,
nothing of how contrary condition soever, which the Church of Rome makes not
in some sort or other to serve Her turn, that each fancy may be satisfied, and
each appetite find what to seed on. Whatsoever their Wealth can sway with its
Lovers; or voluntary Poverty with, the despisers of the World; What Honor with
the Ambitious; What Obedience with the Humble; What great Employments with
stirring or Martial Spirits; as the Orders of Knights, that of Rhodes, St.
John of Jerusalem, those now of Malta, that of the Kinghts of St. Morris, and
St. Lazare amongst the Savoyards, established by Pope Alexander the fourth,
1644. the Knights of the Order of the Dog and Cock in France: The first were
to wear a Collar full of Staggs-Heads, with the Image of a Dog to hang
thereon, to signify fidelity; these followed Philip the first, King of France
in his Wars: Those of the Cock, signified watchfulness, and had a Cock for
their Blazon, for that the Ancients accounted it to be a Bird of Mars; The
Order of the Knights of the Ginit in France; The Order of the Knights of the
Leli, in the Realm of Navarr; The Order of Knights of St. Mary in Jerusalem, of
Sr. John of Accon, and of St. Thomas, of St. Savior in Arragon, Knights of
Mount-joy in Syria, King of Portingal, or men at Arms, St. James of Spain: The
Order of Knights of the Glorious Virgin in Italy; The Order of the Knights of
the Golden fleece in the Houses of Burgundy and Austria, with above 200 more
Orders of Knights too large here to be mentioned. These Orders are for their
Metalld and Active Spirits. Also, they have their perpetual provisions, for
their Heavy and Restive Bodies in their Cells; What content or pleasure nature
can take in Passe-times and Jollities; What contrary-wise, the Austere mind in
Discipline and Rigor; What Love, either Chastity can Raise in the pure; or
Voluptuousness, in the impure or dissolute: What allurements, are in Knowledge
to draw the Contemplative, or in Actions of State to employ the Politician:
What Miracles with the Credulous: What Visions with the Fantastical: What
Ceremonies can do with the Superstitious: What Prayers with the Devout: What
dispensing with breach of all Rules, with Men of lawless condition: In sum,
whatsoever the heart of Man can desire, he is fitted with, in the Storehouse of
the Church of Rome's Politics; for himself to pursue, or at least to Adore or
Reverence in another. This is the main Wheel on which the Church moves, and
keeps fast, Members of all sorts; so that, by this means of providing for the
several Humors of the Members, it enjoys the more quiet in it self, and
becomes able to oppose and disturb the Reformed Churches; They have two other
strings to their Bow; Besides, this aforementioned, which is, indeed the chief.
The first is their Miracles.

The second, is, their keeping the Laiety in Ignorance.

For their miracles: the number are infinite, that they reckon upon, but they
are all of the same Stamp and Impression with these, viz. The representation of
the Virgin Mary with the Babe, their Eyes to move at certain times: it is
performed by Engine-work, secretly contrived to cheat the People into a belief
of their Fopperies; the lifting up the hand of the Image of the Virgin, in
imitation of Blessing the People: and the like. Her Image giving Milk on the
Day of the Nativity, convayed by small tinn-Pipes at a great distance, begot
the admiration in the People, and an Implicit faith of all these wonders. A
subtle Jesuit shall make his abode five or six years more or less, being
blind (at least seem so to be) by Dying the Inner skin of the Eye, by a water
distilled from a certain Herb, not fit to be mentioned here; or seem Lame, or
Leprozed; or otherwise by Guzmonds Art of raising an artificial Leprosy, now
used among some Beggars, to move Compassion in the Charitable. When he is well
known, he shall come and implore the aid of such a Saint: Immediately he shall
be as whole as a fish, and his sight shall be restored; then that Saint is
repaired unto far and nea^; offerings come plentifully; Thus they contrive to
enrich the Church, and if it chance that any Bath or Spring break forth of the
Earth that passes through any mineral, and is of Physical use (as all such are)
it is Dedicated to one Saint or other; and sometimes waters, of no virtue at
all Naturally, are cried up to be for such and such uses, as the Well or Water
of Saint Winifrid, or the like precious Saint; People repair to it, to use it:
the which, together with the opinion that they have of it, does effect some
kind of cures. It is a true saying, that the Patient's good opinion of the
Physician or means is more then half the cure. The Politicians of the Church of
Rome know the truth of that saying, therefore they use all means possible to
increase the faith of their Patients or Clyents; which makes their cure more
certain and easy. That cure of the King's evil here in England, granted by the
Pope, as a gift peculiar, to the Kings and Queens of England, had indeed no
other virtue then what was extracted from the opinion of the Patient, created
by the Majesty of the King, the Solemnities and Circumstances that attended the
manner of the cure; therefore I allow that report to be true, that the blood of
the Late King, saved upon an Handkercher, or other piece of linen being dipped
therein, has cured that distemper of the King's Evil. It is known to
Physicians, that several Distempers are cured by the strength of Imagination,
as well as several Natures are subjected to several Distempers by Imagination.
As in time of Pestilence; many that would dye of other Diseases than what was
prepared by the Humors, or Disorders in nature. The Fear and Imagination of the
Party distempered, is as a mould to cast the form of the thing feared in:
though others do dye of it, being prepared, as tinder is apt matter for fire;
so they more aptly are subject to the Influences operating at that time. God
makes use of second means, although that of the Plague be an immediate
dispensation from Him, and is as it were a thing distinct from, and other than,
the ordinary workings of Nature.

The Church of Rome are very well acquainted, and do much study Natural Magic,
and are very good Proficients therein, as in many hundred cases, they may be
traced in their Legends; as most of all which, may be performed by the natural
Magical Art, though they ascribe unto them the honor of Miracles: As for
Example, that of St. Francis, his great wonder of kindling a fire with Ice. We
must here let you to know, that it is easy for Artists to make such a
composition, that so soon as one drop of water touches it, it shall become a
violent flame; the which is effected by Antiperistasis; that is to say, the
strengthening and opposing any quality against its contrary, as of cold against
heat; it may be represented in a more familiar Example, as that of the firing
of a Corn or Hay-Stacks, when Stackt too moist or wet; it does not fire,
because of heat and dryth, but it fireth because too moist or cold: which is
able to oppose, though not overcome the other; qualities being stirred, devour
the matter that retained them both. Also the Church of Rome is acquainted with
Sorcery, or Diabolical Magic; the which, was practiced by Pope Alexander the
6th. Who, the Papists themselves cannot deny, but that he gave himself to the
Devil; who was not only the wickedest of Men, but also the wickedest of
Pope's: He bestowed the riches of the Church upon his Bastards; he made away
the Brother of Bajazet for a sum of money, though he fled to him for
protection; he used his own Daughter Lucretia, the Wife to three Princes.
Innumerable examples might be given of this nature, too large here to be
insisted upon: So much, as to their Miracles, and the means by which they
effect them.

Secondly, As to their other Part or Branch of their policy, viz. Their
practice to divide the reformed Churches: they do it by Instruments and
Emissaries of their own, who are sent to divide and infect them with Errors and
Contradictions. They, out of the Seminaries, of the Order of Jesu, do send
usually great numbers to all Parts to do this work. This Order was wholly
Religious before Luther's time, they vowed the preaching of the Gospel to
Pagans, and the Instructing Christians in good Letters, gratis. When Luther
began to oppose the Power of the Church of Rome, they cast off their Religious
Vows, and betook themselves to defend the Supremacy of the Church of Rome to
be above general Councils and Princes, by principles and practices of policy,
or rather Devilish circumventing cunning; for they Value not the way or means,
by which they attain to the accomplishing of what they undertake. When seeming
Piety shall make way for what they design, they have it at their fingers Ends;
when the most impious and wicked Act, that ever was on Earth done, must
accomplish what they design they there also are most ready: But they make
choice rather of seeming Sanctity, than of wicked Violations; because the
Church has a better Salve to cure the wounds made by the former, than it has
for the wounds made by the latter.

The manner of this political Order's Practice, you shall find in Campanella's
Discourse, (one of that Order) touching the Spanish Monarchy, Chap. 25. He
advises the King of Spain, in the latter End of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
in these words, Now as concerning the weakening of the English, there can no
better way possibly be found out, than by causing division and dissension
amongst them, and by continual keeping up the same; which will quickly furnish
the Spanish Crown, or the Church, with more opportunities and advantages than
the power of great Armies can procure or produce: As for the Religion of that
People, it is that of Calvin, though very much moderated, and not so Rigid, and
Austere as it is at Geneva; which yet cannot be so easily extinguished or
rooted out there, unless there were some Certain Schools set up in Flanders;
with which People, the English have great dealing and Commerce: by means of
which there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of Schism and Division, in the
natural Sciences; as namely betwixt the Stoics, Peripateticks, and Telesians
by which the Error of the Calvinists might be made manifest: For the Truth is,
That Sect is diametrically contrary to the Rules of Policy; for they teach,
that Whether a man do well or ill, he does all by divine Impulsion; which Plato
demonstrates against Homer, to be opposite to all sounder Policy, which says,
That every man has free Liberty of Will, either to do well or ill; So that it
is in our power to do and observe whatever is commanded, and from hence we are
to expect our Reward or Punishment; according as I have taught in my Dialogue
touching Policy, where I have discoursed of this point, though but briefly;
which they, since they have become Heretics, are grown somewhat subtle in;
and yet being of a Nature that is still desirous of Novelties and Change, they
are easily wrought over to any thing.

Here may be discerned what advantage they have over us in respect of Religion.
I recited his whole Aphorism, as to that particular, that the Reader may
perceive the Order and Working of these Politicians; who lay their Designs
deep: they study Men, their Minds, Objects, Causes, and their Effects, and the
Effects of Effects, ad Infinitum: They this day have lulled this Nation into so
many several Lethargies and Sleeps; wherein, Those of this persuasion dream,
they only are in the truth, and all others in Errors; So those of another, do
the like of the former, and the like of others.

And thus the Jesuit has divided us, by his observing the several Humors of
the English Nation; As to the People that are superstitiously given, there is
the Episcopal; those that are more Austere, as the Presbyterian; those that are
more pure, as the Independent, or separate Churches; the Anabaptists, as holy
and select, and as Persons set a part from the World, by their Submission to
that Ordinance of Baptism, at years of Discretion: The Difference is not much
material, yet the Jesuit makes use of these Distinctions, to carry on his
design, by promoting of every one of them, and by keeping them at an eeven
poyse; and sometimes again subdivide, that thereby, whilst he divides them
that are most near to the Truth, he may work the better upon those that are of
a baser Mind and Humor, and that will receive more gross Principles, more
remote from the Truth: And those he practices upon such who have not a spirit
of discerning, but have some Affection to Devotion, as on the Seeker an the
Quaker; more loser Principles on the Familists and Ranters; merrier and
pretty-conceited Devotions amongst the Rosicrucians, and Psalterists, or
Halilujaists, or Singers; so of many others: I do not say, that the Jesuit was
the Creator or Institutor of the former, that is of the Episcopal,
Presbyterian, or Independent; but he sometimes must make use of Truth, and the
ways of Truth, to gain advantages in his design; as the Devils in the
possessed, said, What have we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth; thou Son of
the most High God? The Devil acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, in
design: for the People seeing him to be acknowledged by the Devils, they drew
this Conclusion, that he did cast out Devils by the Power of Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils: the Devils would never have confessed that he was the Son of
God, but to produce that contrary Effect: So the Jesuit does not promote, or
cast himself under, those forms that are true, or near the Truth, to any other
end than to produce those contrary Effects, before premised, viz. to divide and
subdivide, to render the Churches less formidable or powerful in opposing the
Church of Rome; if not subvert them, and bring them back to the Obedience of
the Church of Rome. That this is certain, and not taken up upon conjecture, is
evident, by the practice of Thomas Ramsy, of the order of Jesus, who joined
with a gathered Church at Hexam, in the North of England, under this pretense,
hat he was a Jew, and gave himself this name, Joseph Ben Israel; his particular
Instructions was to insinuate the Doctrine of Free Will, the which he did
accomplish, and carried on with a High hand, until he was discovered,
detected, and cast into prison: One then in the same Prison, the Gate House-
Westminster, that got more than ordinary advantages of Familiarity, obtained of
him the Discovery of many rare secrets in the Policy of the Jesuits practice,
some of which are these; The ways that they practice in their Seminaries, to
bring up youth, and temper them fit for the intended Employments, they put them
upon; They, First observe the Genius of the Party, and observing the peculiar
Gifts he is naturally endowed with, they fit him only for that service; he
learneth some Trade (to hide and blind his Order,) which he practices; by this
means he becomes Eminent amongst of that persuasion he casts himself into:
and, to put him in such a condition, that he may be freed from the stings of
Conscience, they first teach him to swear, curse, damn, and forswear; and
immediately to implore the Throne of Grace, with all pious Devotion imaginable:
By this means they become flexible, and fit for any design that lies before
them to promote; and if Conscience still should pursue them, their pardons help
at a deed lift.

And this they warrant from that Maxim, That no way is to be refused, whereby
the Felicity and Peace of the Church of Rome is to be promoted and secured: Let
it be by any means whatsoever, lawful or unlawful. These things considered, How
much does it behove all that truly fear God, or have any true sincere Religion
in their breast, to detest and decline the thought of condemning this form, or
that; in regard Religion does not lie in forms, but in the powerful practice of
all holiness, and godly Conversation; and therefore consent to some Natural
Harmony, or form necessary to the Truth for liberty of conscience, that the
union thereof may be such, as it may be able to make head against the Church of
Rome's designs, and the Projects of the Devil; else we shall continually be
divided and subdivided, till at last we shall neither have form or substance
left, and be hurried into all manner of Confusion. The Truth of which is to be
seen at this day amongst us: How do the giddy and unstable run out of one form
to another! The Devil and Jesuit can scarcely invent that which has either
seeming Form or Order in it, fast enough, or so fast, as giddy People, that
were never well principl'd in Religion, are ready to be led away captive by
poisonous Notions that are daily distilled amongst them, to the ruin of their
own Souls, and to the dishonor of God: Who, so soon as they are tainted by
those delusions, immediately think themselves illuminated by Divine Light, as
we see by sad Experience at this day amongst us, by People that yield
obedience, and submit to all manner of Delusions, and conform to them as
Impulses from on high; which is nothing else but the Effects of depraved minds
agitated, illuminated, and acted by the Evil One.

The Truth of which was experimented upon one Hunt, who, in the year 1653, in
January, being committed to the Gate House Prison, Westminster, for his strange
Prophecies of the Stuart's coming again to the Crown; that he was sent of God,
to persuade old Cromwell to resign his new-assumed Authority of Protector-ship.
Some of the Prisoners there had a design to try whether they could not impose
some Revelation upon this poor deluded Person, who pretended so much to
Revelation and Prophecy; (observe, that he was one of those who, as the Apostle
says, are given over to believe Lye^). At that time there were three Jesuits,
one of which was Ramsey aforementioned, who aided in the undertaking. The first
par^t acted was to write a Letter in Hebrew, which was written by Ramsey, the
Prophet Hunt being gone to bed before. The Keeper locks him up, the Keeper left
the Letter upon a Table in the Room, being folded up in an unusual form, with
this Superscription; To the Servant of the most high, PAUL HUNT: Next morning
diverse o^ the Prisoners rise just at the time of unlocking, and walk in the
Ga^lery^ into which Prophet Hunt's Chamber Door opened, (...) of the Excellent
Music and singing they heard about (...) the Clock that Morning, every one
praised it above measure, and affirmed the Voices to excel humane Voices, and
the Music to excel Humane Art, and also alleged that it was about the
Prophet's Lodging: they all spoke loud enough, that he should hear what they
discoursed of. So after a little time, two or three entered the Prophet's
Chamber, and recited what every one discoursed of: the Prophet, immediately
said, That he did hear Music, but he was cast in a deep sleep, and what the
mind of God was in it, he knew not, but he should wait his good pleasure
therein. So one of the Company casting his eye upon the Table, espied the
Letter, asked the Prophet what Letter that was, folded up in so unusual a form.
Every one stood at a distance from the Table, to free him from suspecting any
of the Company, to bring it, or lay it there; The Prophet thereupon repaireth
to the Table, and takes it up, and reads the Superscription as
aforementioned; he expressing extraordinary joy and gladness, opens it, and
in it was written in the Hebrew. An Order of Church Government, as also an
Order of Civil-Government: withal, a Charge to him upon pain of the
displeasure of the most High, that he should go or write to the then newmade
Protector, and require him to surrender his Government to Prince Charles, with
many other things. Out of hand he demanded of the Keeper to open the Prison,
that he might go and deliver the Message of the Lord to the then Usurper O. C.
Who refused to let him go. He consulted with some of the Prisoners what to do.
One of them replied that the Command did expressly require him to go or send,
which employed, he might write; the which he did and stuffed three or four Sheets
so full of Invectives, that had he sent it to (but the Prisoners were so
careful, that they prevented the delivery of the Letter) old Oliver, he would
have hanged him without all peradventure. They fained an answer, and persued
the design much further to the admiration of many worthy Gentlemen, (State
Prisoners there at that time), who saw in part what might be effected in things
of that nature, upon the minds of such persons that are given up to delusions.

The Art of the Jesuits in this particular, is manifest. Another way which
serves them to great purpose, is, the loosening of People from principles; and
when effected, distill Notions to pursue after the discovery of new Lights, and
instead of meeting with that which is Light, they close with what suteth to
their corrupt Minds or Ends: The Inferior sort of every persuasion, when the
Jesuit has distilled his poison amongst them, receive the Notions and
Principles as Truth, and many of them worship under those Forms and Notions, as
in Spirit and Truth. The chief of most of them do Join with them out of corrupt
Ends, to be Heads of the factions, to exercise a kind of Domination, which is
delightful to mankind: so that the Jesuit does no more then first distilt
Poisonous Notions, and nurse it, and defend it till it be indifferent
considerable: when accomplished, it will subsist of it self, and put it self
into Form and Order. Then when he has done that by error, if that should grow
too fast, he allayeth it by subdividing of it by some true Notion, or some
other erroneous notion, which are equally a like to the Jesuit, for that the
end of his design is, Dividing. When he has divided and cast a Nation into
many and various Forms, he has accomplished and arrived to his End; then, if
he can Procure, Forment, or Stir up Dissatisfaction and Jealousies betwixt the
Interests, there he keeps them in continual ebbing and flowing; and naturally
every persuasion will incline some to one Interest of State, some to another:
As for example, the Episcopal does naturally incline to a Monarchy, the
Presbytery does also incline to a Monarchy, but that is accidental; for the
Presbytery is well suited, as to its form, for a Commonwealth; but here, when
it started from the Interest of the Commonwealth, it was necessitated, because
it was suspected by the then Supreme Power, therefore it adheared to the
Interest of Charles Stuart, and espoused his Quarrel. The Independent,
naturally incline to a Commonwealth. The fifth Monarchy to an Oligarchy; that
is to say, a Select company of Men to Govern, so and so qualified.

Campanella did give the King of Spain the best advice to practice this kind of
policy; yea, he commends it before the opposing of England by Arms. The
reason why he chose the Doctrine of free will to be first set on foot in
England, was, because that opinion concludes Man to be a free Agent, which
looseneth and freeth the disciples thereof from more firm and sounder
Principles, and prepares them to seek after new Lights; and when once arrived
to this degree, immediately they turn Enthusiasts, who pretend, or think that
all they do, is done by the Spirit, and that they are attended by the spirit of
Revelation: Our Quaker is much pestered with the Malignant Influence of this
opinion.

The Jesuit by this means does not only divide People, as to Religion, and
thereby render them less formidable against the Church of Rome, but also
brings an evil Report upon the Protestant Religion; disuniteth the affections
of the professors thereof, and causes Jealousies, Heart-burnings, and
Animosities, one against the other; and takes them off from the Power of
Religion, to defend paultry forms and distinctions: and, that which is worst of
all, thereby increases so many distinct and different Interests of State, as
there are considerable persuasions in a Commonwealth that Cherishes Religion,
as is in part showed before. When a persuasion is grown up to be considerable,
it gives occasion for factions in State; Thereby, some ambitious men will
become the Heads of this or that faction, and by the Power of the faction they
head, become Mighty, and sometimes arive to the top of Supreamacy thereby.

But of all Persuasions, Opinions, or notions, that of the Enthusiast is the
most dangerous and inconvenient to a Commonwealth; for when that the Jesuit
has infused that Opinion, (That, what ever is given into their hearts after
praying or seeking to God, must needs be the mind of God, and pursued with all
vigor and earnestness to the death,) they then do nothing but roll out of one
Change into another; and out of one thing into another; and a State or Power
having gotten once out from the Center or Basis of true Interest, by such
wicked principles, they shall never return nor take Sanctuary at Settlement and
Safety; before utter ruin and destruction: as is plainly demonstrable in these
few Lines following that is to say; A State or Power having once repaired to
extraordinary means, to accomplish this or that Design; if they have success
in it, immediately they conclude God has done it for them; and so repair to
one extraordinary Undertaking after another, so often as they have opportunity,
and conclude into be righteous, so often as they have success: which may as
well and justly be concluded by him that robs or kills on the High way if
he were in a Capacity strong enough to protect himself from Justice, he would
seem righteous; and, in stead of being Hanged by the Judge, he would execute
the Judge. The Error that such People, States, or Powers, are in, is, that they
were Principles and Rules, and Act neither by Principles nor Rules: but
prop^und to themselves the Object or End; that is no say; what they would have
or desire; then they seek God; afterward consult; and if by consultation it be
found attainable, then it is the mind of God; if not, the contrary. God is to
be sought in all undertakings; nay, it is an underlable Duty: but, in seeking
Him; respect is to be had to the Justice of what we seek for: Now, in this. Man
is very subject to be led out of the way of Truth, for, he is very apt to
conclude that what he would have, is just: the desire or affection is passion,
and passion does Cloud the Judgment; and that which is true in one holds
proportionably true in more then one, being united by one Interest.

Now, if the Judgment be so Clouded by private affection, and a State or Power
be led by such Principles; What wickedness shall not they be led into? What
villainies shall not they attempt? What so sacred, that they shall not violate?
Or, what Interest or Right will not they invade? What shall limit them, if they
find opportunity to attempt the accomplishing or the attaining to their desire?
Miserable is that Nation that has such a Prince or Power, Civil, or Military;
that are poisoned with such Opinions: such Powers, are ridd by the Jesuit: who,
will ride them, not only out of breath, but at last to death: The World is
mistaken, when they apprehend that the Jesuit works immediately in Councels
to produce Turns and Changes of State; No, but he works by remote Causes,
such as are here before premised; than is to say, by infusing Notions
destructive to public safety, at first into the common People, then it is
drunk in by great Ones, then it Cleaves and Divides a Nation into so many
Interests as there are, Persuasions; then he applies matter suitable to the
Humor, and most apt to be received by the several persuasions which shall work
naturally such Effects; and as it is the policy of the Church of Rome to
preserve it self, by providing suitable entertainment for each Humor within it
self; so, it is to destroy other Churches, by several poisons for each Humor.

Therefore it behooves all Christian States to endeavor to fortify themselves
with a consistence. Those that cannot attain to a consistency ( England is much
to be feared that it cannot arive to that happiness,) are in a miserable
condition: When a State has arrived to consistency, its Form and Order, is a
bar to the Jesuits operations. Those States that are divided have no means to
stay themselves from falling down the precipice of inevitable ruin, but to
settle the form of Government amongst them, with respect to all Interests as
Men. The exclusion of any Interest is dangerous. For their different Interests
as Christians, the Supreme Magistracy ought to be an equal A bitrator, and
ought to protect them equally; But here, care is to be had, that the Supreme
Power (if in a Commonwealth) be not lodged in one Interest. If it be, although
that Interest do permit freedom of exercise to different persuasions, by that
liberty of conscience cannot be long preserved; for if the Supreme Power be
lodged in one Interest, it naturally will fortify if self by such reasons of
State, that it will sever it self from the Interest of the Public. Therefore,
Liberty of conscience to the several persuasions must be preserved by dividing
or distributing the Power equally; else those that are excluded will become
Enemies to that which is entrusted with, or assumeth, the Power: and those
which have it, shall never hold it with security or Peace, for the Jesuit will
still he practicing by his remote applications, to divide and widen the
different Interests or persuasions, that the product will be nothing less; or
else, then Josling one another out of Power, and the weakest will always
adhear or apply themselves, to that where it can expect Sanctuary and
Protection. That this general Rule, and all other good Means must be used to
prevent the workings of the Jesuit, is of absolute necessity. The different
Persuasions and Interests, are to unite, to prevent them of matter, to work
upon an unsettled and divided Commonwealth, ought to be settled at once upon
such principles and Basis, that there may be sufficient provision for all
things, to the satisfaction of all Interests, that none of them should have
place left to desire any other constitution: If the Founders of a Comwealth
cannot hitt that mark, their undertaking herein will be obortive, and the
Commonwealth shall do nothing but reel from one uncertainty to another. The
Jesuit does not only operate by distilling Notions in Religion, but also in
affairs of State; as for Example, in the Case of our Controversies with the
Late King: The King, He Offends the People; the Parliament thereupon make
War with Him, because they see that the discontents of the People will bear
them out, and enable them so to do; the which discontents were, no doubt,
heightened very much by the Jesuit. When the War was Ended, the King being
beheaded, the Jesuit also did practice and endeavor to incline the People to a
Commonwealth: but in its Infancy also he endeavored to stifle it, and prevent
its ariving to a consistency, lest it should be too firm and heavy for him to
move: for a Commonwealth that has Rotation or annual Election, the Jesuit is
at a loss to practice upon, for that at every Change of Persons in Government,
he is to seek how to fasten his Correspondency, and other advantages to
carry-on his designs with. Also it is his design to endeavor the altering of
a Commonwealth again into a Monarchy, and a Monarchy that is erected out of a
Commonwealth into an Oligarchy; not that any one of the forms of Government
will be more Subservient to his design than other, but that he may always
practice Changes: by which means a Protestant State is exercised with struggling
Interests within it self, so that it shall be less formidable and dangerous to
the Catholic States.

That these things are not conjectures or taken up by supposition only, or
that these and such other Rules and Practices they follow, is plainly
demonstrable by Adam Contzen the Jesuit, in his Politics, Chap. 16.17, 18.

CHAP. XVI.
Is to show that Princes must determine of nothing in Religion, as having power
to defend that which the Pope determines of, but no power to appoint or change
any thing themselves, or judge of Controversies. The Church must Judge and the
Prince must Execute.

Take notice that one of their Maxims is, that the Magistrate has nothing to
do with matters of Religion. As that Maxim ferveth their purpose to strengthen
the Power of the Church, and weaken that of the Magistrate in Catholike-States:
So it serves their purpose in Protestant States to weaken the Magistrate, and
lay all in confusion in the Church.

CHAP. XVII.
Is to show, That to preserve Religion, (that is Popery), no other Religion
should be permitted: and that Riches tend much to strengthen the Clergy, and
preserve Religion: And the poverty of the Protestant Ministers (which must be
by all means endeavored).

As he here prescribes means to enrich the Popish Ministry, he advises the
impoverishing the Protestant, that they may become disabled and discouraged to
study and labor in the work of the Ministry, as also that by poverty they may
become contemptible: Indeed the Protestant-Minister is the Eyesore to the
Catholic, and those that Cry out against Ministers maintenance do nothing
else then the work of the Jesuit.

CHAP. XVIII.
To bring in popery, and abolish, the Protestants Religion, is, to make use of
the Protestants Contentions. How easy is it (says he) in England to bring the
Puritans into Order, if they be forced to approve of Bishops? or to reduce the
Puritans in the Low Countries, if the Prince adhere to the Armiulans? For the
Variety of Opinions makes that doubtful, that before seemed certain; so that
when the Magistrate joyneth with one side, he easily overturns the other, and
leaves the whole obnoxious: As Paul did by the dissension between the Pharisees
and Sadduces, joining to one side, he escaped. This (says he) I would
principally persuade an Orthodox Magistrate to (that is, a Papist.) For he may
with as much advantage make use of the Protestants disagreements as of the
Papists Concord to extirpate Protestants. As in Wars, it is not only the
skill and strength of the General, but often also the Carelessness of the
Enemy, or his Mistake that give very great advantages for success. When rigid
Calvinsm was assaulted by the Lutherans in the heat of the Paroxysm, it was
exasperated, and the sudden restraint did much hurt: But now the Arminians have
of their own accord let go the hardest part of their rigor, and judge the
Calvinists to be impious, and persecute them in the very University, and in
other Towns they force them to banishment; and would venture to do more and
Crueller things, if they were not afraid of the strength of the adverse Party.

That he here says of Contentions, is sufficiently practiced: First, To Create
them; And Secondly, To Foment them. That which Contzen principally takes
notice of, is, that Order in the Puritans or Professors of Religion in England,
is ease to be effected: But he advises that the Magistrate, or Agent for the
Church of Rome, do make use of the Protestants differences.

The Major part of the Professors of Religion, are sensible of the practices
and agitations of the Jesuits. The effects thereof that are produced daily,
are visible. The chief power of a Nation ought to erect a private Council,
whose only work should be to gain Intelligence, to observe their Seminaries and
Colleges, to put in practice such Rules of policy as may undermine their
designs, and countermine their practices. How, and which way such a profitable
work may be carried on effectually, I shall here omit, in regard that it is
not fit to be Published: The publishing thereof would do dis-service to the
Protestant-Interest, in regard that what is fore-known may be easily prevented.
Therefore, it shall be kept in silence until God shall raise a Magistracy,
whose heart shall be free to so noble a work as this will be; by which
Christians as Christians, and Men as Men, will receive no small Benefit: A
State in general, and every Member in particular shall have cause to bless
God, for such who shall promote this good work. No doubt but that it will be
acceptable in the sight of God: and they shall have the Prayers and the Praise
of Men, the good of Posterity will be better secured as the case stands. Now,
neither the Church or People of God nor the Nation, can be assured of any
Stable or Constant condition, in regard we are so Rolled and Tumbled out of one
uncertainty into another.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Jesuit's Method to win particular Persons. Reader, Observe them; for when
thou find these Rules practiced; It is by a Jesuit himself, or by one that
has bin his Pupil.

1. Be sure to keep the Respondents part, and not the Opponents. It Is not so
easy to prove, as to wrangle against Proofs.

2. Follow them with certain Questions, which the Vulgar are not verst in. As

1. Where was your Church before Luther? Or, Where has it bin Visible in all
Ages? Q. 2. How prove you, that you have a true-Scripture that is the Word of
God among you? Q. 3. What express Word of God do the Catholics (the Papists)
contradict? Q. 4. How prove you that you have a truly called Ministry, that is
to be heard and believed by the People? Q. 5. By what warrant did you separate
from the Catholic Church, and condemn all your own Forefathers, and all the
Christian World? Q. 6. If you will separate from the Catholic Church, what
reason have you to follow this Sect, rather than any one of all the rest? Q. 7.
What one man can you name from the beginning, that was in all things of Luthers
or Calvin's Opinions? Q. 8. Do you not see that God does not bless the Labors
of your Ministers, but People are as bad as they were before? What the better
are you for hearing them?
Reader, Just upon the Close, I met with this Passage in Campanella, Chap.
XVIII.

Neither would I have this one thing to be omitted; namely, that He erect
certain Colleges through all the Provinces of his Dominions, in which should
be placed all the most Ingenious Boys of the said Provinces; (and who are
such, may easily be known, by their first Masters, that taught them their
Grammers, and other the First Rudiments) and these, being thus culled out of
all Grammer-Schools, I would have to be brought up, and maintained at the Kings
Charge; and there should be a New Order set up of them, like that of St.
Dominick; which Order I would have called, The Austrian Order. And when any of
these were come to be 18 years old, they should then be commanded to Preach:
and these I would have to be called, The Kings Preachers; and they should then
be sent abroad, some into Germany, and others into England: where, if they have
managed their business rightly, and well; at their return they should have
Bishop-ricks conferred upon them by the King, of those that are in the Kings
own gift: for, by so doing, he shall render himself secure both from the pope,
and also against all perfidious Preachers and Heretics; and by this means such
persons only shall be maintained at His Charge, as do him service for it, and
advance His affairs.

He advises a new Order, the which the King of Spain did. They were to be sent
into Protestants States to practice Division, in behalf of the Interest of the
Crown of Spain; as the Jesuit does in behalf of the Churches Interest.

FINIS.

