An Expedient for Peace, Or some Christian and Reasonable PROPOSALS, Once more
Renewed and Offered again to Friends of READING, Conducing to an Amicable
Composure of Differences among them: WITH A healing Epistle to them from
Friends of BRISTOL, on both sides, tenderly advising them to meet all together
again in their Ancient Public Meeting House.

AS ALSO A seasonable Expostulation and a persuasive to a Reconciliation, with
some remarkable Testimonies added to promote the same and several Objections
against it Answered, which may Tend to a General Service.

Mat. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers,

Luke 6.38. Forgive and ye shall be forgiven.

Philip. 4.5. Let your moderation be known to all Men.

These. 5.13. Be at peace amongst your selves.

Romans 14.13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more.

Ecclesiasticus 27.21. As for a Wound it may be bound up, and after Reviling
there may be Reconciliation.

Charity, said one of the Ancients, is the whole perfection of a good Man.

Reading Sixth Month 1692.

London, Printed in the Year 1693.

An Introduction by way of Preface to the Ensuing Papers.
FOR the use of all the truly Moderate and Impartial Friends or professors of
the Truth, these following Papers are chiefly designed, and it is hoped that by
such, they will be both seriously perused and gladly received, being in the
same Universal Love and good will toward all (in which they were first
Written,) are they now published for a more general good, even for the stirring
up the Minds of all to be found in that which is more, (or indeed the most)
excellent way, and that is Fervent Charity, which the Apostle Peter exhorted
the Primitive believers above (before or over) all things to have amongst
themselves, Pet. 4.8.
for (says he) Charity shall cover the multitude of Sins.

I. It was also by the Apostle Paul preferred as being that in it self which is
both (most valuable and most permanent) before and above all knowledge,
Prophecies, Tongues, and other spiritual Gifts, for these shall vanish away,
but that never fails. And (says he) though I speak with the Tongue of Men
and Angels, 1 Cor. 13.18, etc.
and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass or a tinkling Cimbal; And
though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and give my Body to be burned,
and have not that one necessary thing Charity, it profits me nothing, for it
suffers long, is kind, it envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, nor easily provoked; and concluding that Chapter, Now (says he) abides
Faith, Hope and Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity; so that indeed
as one well observed, that makes a Man absolute and perfect in all other
Virtues; for where it is, there is also Patience, Meekness, Kindness,
Gentleness, Constancy, Humility, Faith, Hope, Perseverance, etc. For it
Bears, Believes, Hops, and Endures all things.

II. Now all those who are endued with this Divine never failing Virtue, and
Live in it, can easily forgive one another, and are far from being
irreconcilable, or like those the Apostle spoke of, that were unmerciful, Romans
1.31.
implacable, and without Natural Affection; such are very heard-hearted and
revengeful, and who do let the Sun go down on their wrath. And truly if this
Charity were but as Predominant amongst all sorts of Religious Societies as
possibly a forward and furious Zeal is too prevalent, O how comfortably and
sweetly might they all live one with another, and enjoy the benefit of each
other, both upon a spiritual and temporal account!

III. But alas, there is such a Peevish, Churlish, Narrow, Morose, Sullen,
Strait and sower Spirit, has got such a place into too many, that unless People
be just of this or the other Opinion or Profession, they will not only be ready
to look upon them as no Christians, (or at least not so good as themselves) but
also not worthy to be Conversed with, in a Neighbourly and Civil Manner, no
otherwise than either mere Natural Relation or some private self-end
necessarily leads thereunto.

IV. And O what sad tearing and ruinating Work? What lamentable Mischief and
Havoc? What Confusions and distracted doings has this uncharitable and
unchristian-like Temper produced in this and other Nations? as in some places
more than in others, many tenderhearted People have seen to their great sorrow
All which might have been prevented, had all kept to that Meek, Peaceable,
Patient, Condescending and Forgiving Frame of Spirit, in which there would have
been a Tender Charitable-bearing with, and watching over one another, for Good
and not for Evil, and not with an evil Eye, seeking advantage against each
other, or improving it to the very utmost too: And there would also have been a
provoking one another, not to Wrath, Neb. 10.24.
Anger, Revenge, etc. But to Love and good Works, and a laying aside all
Malice, all Guile, and all Hypocrisies and Evil-speakings, and nothing done
through Strife or Vainglory, but in lowliness of mind each would have esteemed
better of, 1 Pet. 2.1. 1 Timothy 5.21.
and preferred others before themselves, and doing nothing by Partiality, as is
expressed in another place. And before it be, as it should and ought to be, all
must come to this, even to bear and to forbear, forgive and forget all injuries
offenses and provocations, in which as the Ancient Philosophers summed up the
substance of all their Morality, so there is no true Christianity without it,
let any profess or pretend to what they please.

V. And truly very observable it is, That of all the Commands in the New
Testament, there is not one so frequently repeated, so earnestly recommended,
and so pathetically exhorted to, by our Lord Jesus and his Apostles, as that
one is, (viz.) Love one another, which is at least fourteen or fifteen times,
in the very same words expressed, and indeed next to that entire loving of God
with all our hearts, etc. it is the chief and most principal part of Religion;
for our Great Master himself Determined it, that it was by loving (and not by
Hating, Striving, Envying, Quarrelling, Abusing, Insulting over, Reflecting
upon, or Smiting one another) by which (even by Love) we were, and all are to
be known to all Men to be really his Disciples; and so it is indeed as obvious
to all on the other hand that who ever they be that are in Pride, in Enmity,
Hatred, Prejudice, Envy, Revenge, etc. one against another, they are not his
follower: Concerning which much more might be enlarged, but I Omit it at
present, designing brevity.

VI. Only this further Reader, pray beware of being Tinctured with that Evil,
Implacable and Uncharitable Spirit, whatever may be the provocations given
thee, etc. which neither can forgive, nor desires to be forgiven: Also have a
care of being influenced by that old, sour, Pharisaical Leaven of Prejudice or
Malice, which too many simple, good natured, honest, harmless, well-meaning
Persons, have been insensibly and unawares, by Conversing with others of a
strait, uncharitable temper, drawn into the same, and though altogether
Ignorant as to matters of difference, (and can give no reason why) they yet
carry it so Shy, Strait, Morose, etc.

VII. O how this Leaven has d^ffused it self among both Young and Old! And even
the very Children we see, (not to mention some others) are Tinctured with it,
as well as those whom they imitate in their Oppositions, they do not know for
what; nay even the nearest Relations one to another have scarcely escaped, but
have been and also are influenced thereby: So that it has made (it being
joined with a forward blind Zeal) the greatest Confusions and Distractions
imaginable, both in Christian Societies and Families: For here is Testimony
against Testimony, Conscience against Conscience, Zeal against Zeal, etc. of
which we have had, and would to God we had no ground to say, that still we
have, and daily almost see too many instances thereof in this place.

VIII. And now as to the Paper, which contains some things for an Accommodation
of Differences among Friends of Reading several Years ago, it was drawn up some
time after a Friendly Conference was heard by three Friends of each side, (viz.
R. P. Sen. J. W. A. B. J. K. W. S. and RS. Which was held at R. P's House the
21st. of the 10th. Month 1686.) By which some Proposals in order to Friends
meeting altogether again in the Ancient Meeting House were concluded on. But
some Particulars refused their Concurrence, and one thing or another (there
being an Averseness and Unwillingness in them to it) was unhappily suggested,
and as unseasonably (as groundlesly objected) against it, by which the good
Intentions, sincere Labors and Endeavors of Friends on both sides, were
prevented and obstructed. And to avoid as much as can be in this, any Personal
Reflections on any; The chief occasions of the aforesaid Obstructions are here
omitted, as likewise what caused, and wherein it was, that the following Papers
did meet with much like the same unkind Entertainment and cold Unwelcome
Reception from diverse that happened either to see or hear of them, is also here
on purpose passed by, being loath to Irritate or exasperate any Particulars.
However several Ancient Friends to whom they were imparted approved of the
same, and some said (and that of no mean Note) that they could set both their
Hearts and Hands to what was therein Proposed, as being that which was both
Reasonable, Christian and Necessary on all Hands to be performed; being so
general too, and yet very comprehensive, that neither the one nor the other can
be justly offended or aggravated by it.

IX. And had all complied Cordially therewith, it possibly might have prevented
much of what has happened since, as to those things which have widened the
Breach amongst us, and before ever there be a Reconciliation or Accommodation
of Matters, whatsoever else may be done, that which is in the following
Proposals and healing Letter must not be neglected, but as the first and main
thing observed and performed. And being now they are to be made more public
than before, every one that is willing may read them at their own leisure. And
so it is left to the faithful witness of God in every ones Conscience, to
search and consider thereby how far they are inclined to close with, and
promote what is singly and chiefly aimed at by the same, which is at least a
better and more Christian like and prudent Accommodation, if not such a
Friendly Reconciliation of one to another as ought to be, and which if the
advice and Methods herein offered be followed neither the one nor the other
will be Impossible, nor Impracticable to be accomplished. Notwithstanding (by
long continuance and many other unhappy circumstances, and accidental or
Additional Occasions of Provocations, the more is the pity) that differences
amongst us are now come to such a sad height.

X. But if so be that neither the one or the other of those be obtained at
present as is desired, and the difficulties still remaining so great to impede
and hinder the same from being effected (for indeed as its said and has proved
always too true, that a Brother offended is harder to be won than a strong
City; Prove. 18.19.
and their contentions are like the Bars of a Castle) Yet it is hoped that it
may be serviceable to some and help to raise up a more charitable and moderate
mind in them, and to a more Friendly behavior, Christian like and amicable
deportment one toward another, if not in our religious capacities, at least in
our civil concerns, and as loving, courteous and kind Neighbors (and not like
Barbarians) live together. Friends may also see by this that there is really a
disposition and desire in some toward a peace and Reconciliation again; and it
may be observed in time on whose side the fault lies, and who are not inclined
nor willing to condescend to such fair, equal and Christian Proposals.

XI. It is likewise well known, how many Intricate, Knotty, Troublesome, and
Tedious differences, especially upon a Religious account (for these are the
worst of any,) have been at last finally determined by the aforesaid; for when
all has been said and done that could be, either by the parties differing and
offending each other, or by those to whom it has been referred, as well to
reconcile them together as to put an end to the same (both which is the great
intent and design of all references) they behoved to bring it even to this
Issue at last, to wit, to acknowledge, to forgive and forget all on each Hand,
etc.

XII. And this same thing was designed not long ago to have been proposed, by a
moderate discreet Friend in order to have composed a great difference long
depending between some Friends here. But he was much discouraged in it by the
Averseness that appeared in one side more than in the other, obstinately
refusing any compliance therewith.

XIII. We hope there can be none justly offended with the publishing of this,
supposing thereby that the difference among Friends will be made the more
public; for that is too much already known, what by many Printed Books and
Papers of Controversy, and what by two open distinct settled Meetings in
several places, and by too many other apparent Tokens of a Division and
Separation among us: And there are no sober judicious and impartial Persons,
but will esteem it well done in a^y to propose an expedient for Peace, and to
endeavor after a Reconciliation or some better Accommodation of Matters, and
that such do not deserve to be blamed, but rather to be praised, who do
undertake the same, however despised and slighted they may be, and although at
the same time may expect to meet with the Frowns and displeasures of some, and
also be exposed to the harsh Censures and Reslections of others, yet the Matter
it self, and the Methods therein proposed however are consistent both with
truth, with the Testimonies from the Holy Scriptures and with sound Reason.

XIV. And if any others do propose better, more feizable, and more rational
expedients, and be more effectual than what is here offered, we shall be really
glad of it, and do desire that this may be as an encouragement, or an occasion
to incite and stir up others more capable so to do, and so to be concerned
herein. And indeed it was hoped that before this time these unhappy differences
might have been composed; but instead thereof it is sad to observe how they
have rather increased than decreased, and that Matters are here rather far
worse than better, so that there appears now a greater need and necessity for a
speedy Compliance, with reasonable Proposals in order to some Reconcliation, or
Accommodation, etc. Now Friendly Reader, not to detain thee longer, and to
conclude this at present, we desire and beseech thee to Read what follows,
without any prejudice, and in the fear of God seriously ponder and consider the
same, so then it may not be undervalued or disesteemed by thee.

XV. For notwithstanding this undertaking of being Peacemakers or Reconcilers
we may be rasbly judged by some, partial disaffected persons, and as foolishly
disliked of by others, may be too deeply engaged either by affection or
interest, and so too much prejudiced, whose Zeal may far exceed both their
Understanding and their Charity. Yet it may please Almighty God so to bless it
in the Hands of Some Moderate and unbyassed Friends, that in time it may prove
successful, and however may be of such service so as to beget some living
earnest desires, and ardent longings in the Hearts of many sincere-hearted ones
on both sides, and from thence there may be hearty endeavors used according to
their Capacities, and in their stations toward the effecting that long desired
Reunion and happy Reconciliation, which would be an unspeakable comfort, and
Cause of no small rejoicing to us all.

XVI. And which that the Lord God Everlasting in his infinite Mercy, Goodness
and tender Compassion toward us, may be graciously pleased both to grant us,
and hasten the time of its accomplishment, and that we may all labor in the
mean time to be a People worthy of so great and so unvaluable a Blessing, and
singular favor: And let us all (if so be at present we cannot accord in other
things) however unite and join together in our sincere breathings, and
supplications, and with one Heart and Soul mightily cry to the Lord for the
same.

XVII. And which that it may be really effected, and (by that Divine powerful
hand with which nothing is impossible) at last brought to pass amongst us, is
that which is both our Hearty and earnest desire, and is likewise the chief aim
and end of the publishing the following Papers.

Reading the 12th. 6 Month, 1692. Signed on behalf of himself and others
Concerned, Abraham Bonifield.

The Copy of a Letter and a Paper, Tending to an Amicable Composure of
Differences among Friends at Reading, etc. Which is as follows.
The 18th. 9th. Month 87. Dear Friend,
IT cannot but be a great grief to many of you, as well as with us, that so sad
Heats, Animosities and Divisions have happened among those that were begotten
to God by one and the same Word of Eternal Power; That such should fall out by
the way is indeed Lamentable. Although the occasions taken may be very small, yet
the Enemy of all our Souls gets his Advantage, when he draws us into Feuds, and
Controversies, to the neglecting the most weighty matter; these things greatly
tending to the prejudice and hurting of many Tender, Innocent, and well meaning
People. And as these things have taken too much place in your Town, and partly
issued hither, so it will be well, if you first could hit upon a
Reconciliation, that the same Brotherly Love might again arise, which at first
was among Friends one toward another; where then will the Animosities be?
Surely if all had kept in it, these things had never happened. Wherefore I have
been willing to send thee the Enclosed Copy of a Paper, Written by one who
heartily Travels for the Prosperity of the Truth, and the Union and
Tranquillity of those that Profess it, and shall esteem it well done of thee,
if thou approve thereof, and propagate it to others of your Town; Where I hope
there are many, either weary of these sad Disturbances, or at least troubled at
them.

If all sides prove as willing, I hope it will prove as Easy, and as Comfort
able to you at Reading to come out of them again, as it has done to our Friends
at Bristol, who had long enough tried the sad effects of Division: And if this
Essay should have any of the same effect; I make no doubt but it would be to
the Glory of God, the Honor of the Truth, and the Comfort of you all, the good
Example of others, and much Rejoicing to the Author, etc.

Here follows the Paper.
SOmething once more soberly offered for an Amicable Composure and
Accommodation of difference, happened among the Professors of Truth in and
about Reading, and which may be through the Blessing of God in order to their
Friendly Meeting all together again in the Ancient public Meeting House, if
all parties concerned be Cordially inclined to agree hereunto and comply
therewith, which is left for them all to consider of seriously, in and with the
Precious Light of Christ Jesus.
WHereas it must be acknowledged on both Hands that there has been, and is a
sad Division and Separation unhappily fallen out amongst the Professors of
Truth in the Town of Reading, and that which has partly occasioned the same
has greatly proceeded from an unwary managing of Matters, too hot a Zeal, and
Indiscreet Inadvertency; and though possibly there might be in the mean time a
good intention in diverse on both sides; yet alas! how have the sparks of
contention arisen to a great flame, which albeit it may seem difficult, however
we hope it is not impossible to be quenched.

I. In order to which it is therefore in the first place tenderly proposed,
That it be Heartily and Unanimously concluded on by all concerned herein, That
it had been more to the Honor of God and renown of his Holy unchangeable
Truth, more for our prosperity therein and gathering of others thereunto; had
we all kept more in the Word of Gods patience, and in the Lamb like Life, more
in Coolness and Calmness of our Minds and in the silence of all Flesh, than
frequently we have done, whereby the Enemy of us all has often prevailed upon
us, to draw us out to those things which were unseemly and unbecoming our Holy
profession, both to the wounding of our own Souls, and also hurting many
others, and casting stumbling Blocks before the weak, and whereby the pure Name
of the Lord our God has been much Dishonored, and his Holy Spirit grieved, the
Hearts of the Righteous sadned, and many ill effects produced.

II. Wherefore in the second place, its necessary that a true godly Sorrow
seize upon every Soul for these things that ever it should have so happened
among us, and a Holy firm Resolution through Divine Assistance never to be
found therein again; having sufficiently learned by this time through a serious
review and impartial Observation of preceding passages, to be more wise and
careful, more circumspect, watchful and moderate for time to come, so as to
endeavor to amend what has been amiss in every one of our own particulars,
hoping hereby, that our most merciful tender, hearted Father will be graciously
pleased freely to remit what is past, which has offended him, and favorably
Countenance us, when assembled together again, with the Glory and sweet Sense
of his Blessed presence, than which nothing is more excellent or desirable.

III. And that as we know right well he has been, and is ready upon a true
returning to him with the whole Heart, to pardon and blot out many
transgressions committed against his Divine Majesty, so we truly desire to be
of the same Mind as our Blessed Head was of, Colos. 3.13, 14.
to overcome all evil with good, heartily forgiving each other their Trespasses
against us, as we pray to be forgiven our selves; putting on every one of us
(as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness
of Mind, Meekness, longsuffering, forbearing and forgiving one another; as the
Apostle said even to the Christian Colossians, if any Man have a quarrel (or
complaint) against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do you. And above
all things, put on Charity (the most excellent of all gifts) which is the Bond
of perfectness: And let the Love of God rule in your Hearts, to which also you
are called in one body, etc.

IV. And whatever imprudent miscarriages, Weakness, Frailties, Infirmities, and
unfriendly behaviors have been observed one toward another, either in our
uncharitable apprehensions, unadvised sayings, or action^, and whatever
unsavory Reflections, Provocations and Aggravations have been given by any when
formerly together, or since asunder, we sincerely and heartily desire (in order
to a Cordial uniting, and amicable Meeting altogether again in the ancient
public Meeting House) That all these things aforesaid and whatever else has
caused this unhappy Separation, may be forever buried in the Grave of
Everlasting Oblivion (according to the tender Council and Christian Practice of
our Friends of Bristol) and never to be remembered any more, or any to be
upbraided therewith publicly, or privately for time to come.

V. Whereby it may be hoped, that in time all these former or present
Distances, Prejudices, Animosities, Shiness, and Straitness, with all kind of
Antipathy, Harshness or Enmity, and the very ground, or root from whence they
have sprung, may come to an end, and be totally Extirpated; and in the room
thereof, that Brotherly Love, that Christian Friendship, and Condescension,
that sweet Society, lasting Amity and Sympathy, in the ancient Life, and Love
of Truth may revive again; and that Heavenly Concord and Harmony, that
desirable agreement and unity of Spirit, and oneness of Heart Soul and Mind in
the Blessed Seed may over all take place, appear and prevail amongst us; that
the Bond of Peace may forever be kept inviolable, and nothing ever able to
break it again, and so Truth, and Righteousness, Mercy and Peace, may flow as a
mighty River in and amongst us, to our great mutual Joy, and rejoicing of the
Hearts of all the faithful, and to the wiping away that reproach which has
been cast upon our Holy undefiled Religion.

VI. That it may be seen that there is a God in Israel, and that there is a
restorer of paths, and a healer of breaches amongst us, even he who is the
great Reconciler of differences, by whose reconciling, Peacemaking Word of
Life, when Enemies to God and strangers one to another, we were brought near to
him and into a Spiritual Relation; whose Infinite Divine Power, which thus so
graciously visited us, doubtless is as able (we must all acknowledge) as ever,
to Reconcile and unite us again, and make us as near, and dear one to another
as ever; yea, and more than ever before; and that it yet may be known to all,
w^ still retain that infallible Christian Token and most certain Demonstrative
Character of being the Disciples of Jesus, through that tender unfeigned love
which he has begotten in our Hearts, and declares it self in bearing one with
another, praying for, and forgiving each other.

VII. And that as there is now such an Universal Calm and toleration in the
Nations, as to outward Disturbations; so we all may partake of the benefit
thereof together; and that this Town may no longer be the only differing place
from all others, but that for time to come we may meet all together in the
Ancient tender Love of God, meekly, and quietly, we all endeavoring that all
occasions of public differences as much as in us lies may be avoided on all
Hands for time to come; and that as we would not that the truly Conscientious
on the one Hand should be opposed, or obstructed, from doing those things that
they believe are their Christian duty; so one the other Hand the tenderly
scrupulous should not be Imposed on or Compelled to act beyond their own
understandings or Convictions, or conform to any thing they are not clear nor
free in their own Minds, so to do in Matters purely Conscientious. And thus an
equal liberty is allowed to both, and which all Christians ought to grant one
to another. For as one well said, none but God alone has power to impose a Law
upon the Conscience of any Man to which it ought to be subject as obliging by
it self. This Conclusion is proved by the words of the Apostle, There is but
one Lawgiver who can both save and destroy; There is nothing (said another) in
the Primitive Church deserves greater Imitation than in that admirable Temper,
Moderation, Action and Condescension, which was used in it, toward all the
Members of it. And to separate Goodness and Mercy from God, Compassion, and
Charity from Religion, is to make the two best things in the World (God and
Religion) good for nothing, etc.

VIII. What is aforesaid proposed, is judged very proper and necessary
expedients, in order to a Friendly agreement and Composure of differences
amongst the Friends of Reading, even by a mutual acknowledgment one to another,
and forgiving each other, and some body must begin this good work. God Almighty
grant that this honest, sincere undertaking in proposing these things in the
Universal Love of God, in true and tender good will to all, may be Prosperous
and Successful, and have its desired effects; That over all, and in and by us
all, he may be livingly Worshipped, Served and Reverenced, according to his own
appointed Way, and in the Divine Order of his own Ordaining. Blessed and
Magnified be his Holy Name for ever and ever.

25th. of the 8th. Month, 1687.
Hereunto is also Annexed the Copy of a very tender, healing Epistle, from some
of the most Eminent Friends of Bristol of both sides, and Directed to several
Friends of Reading also, of both Meetings, which contains good Christian
Counsel, and seasonable Advice, and does well agree with the aforesaid: And is
as follows.
Bristol the 5th. of the 1st Month 1686 7. Thomas Curtice William Lambol
Leonard Key Abraham Bonnifield Robert Sandilands Robert Pain John Kent, John
Buy, Benjamine Coal, etc.

Dear Friends,
We dearly and heartily salute you, in that Ancient Love of God, which did at
first reach unto us, and gathered us to be a People, and which has often
refreshed our Souls and Spirits to our great Consolation and Joy in the Lord,
and one in another.

It having pleased the Lord, to take away the cruel hand of the Informers and
other sufferings, that have of late attended us in this City, and our
Meeting Houses being again delivered up to us, it came into our Hearts, and we
believe from the Motion of the Spirit of the Lord in us jointly,
(notwithstanding some misunderstandings and differences had happened amongst
us) to meet and continue together in the Worship of God as in former times, in
and through which we have found great refreshment and satisfaction; for by our
mutual endeavors to bury the extremes that offen'd each other, we feel the
ancient love to arise the more, which brings us nearer unto each other, wherein
we rejoice and have great Consolation; and from thence arises the same true and
ancient love unto you, with prayers unto the Lord and desires unto you, that
the same endeavors, may be amongst you, that in the Grave of Oblivion, all
that has been hurtful may be buried and utterly forgotten, that so as one
Family you may again meet together in your ancient love and place as formerly;
then will certainly the true love more and more arise, and the hope and faith
that will remove Mountains, and the peaceable Savior be more rejoiced in, that
leads through and over all that which does offend, into Brotherly kindness and
forgiveness one unto another, wherein you may be one another joy and rejoicing
in the Lord. May the Lord so tender all our Hearts and lead you and us, in the
same path, are the Prayers and desires of your

Dear Friends and Brethren, Thomas Gouldney Richard Snead Charles Hartford
Thomas Callowhill John Love Charles Joanes Cornelius Sarjant William Ford
Thomas Jordan William Smith.

We send this by our Dear Friend John Osgood, whom we have desired to
communicate this to you.



A Friendly Persuasive to Peace; or something by way of an Earnest and
Seasonable Expostulation, with Friends of Reading on both sides to be
reconciled to one another, and to lay aside all Heats, Prejudices, Animosities,
etc. with diverse Remarkable Testimonies, collected to promote the same; and
some Objections answered, which may tend to a general service.
SECT. I.
Contains several weighty Motives, showing the great need and necessity of
Reconciliation, etc.

I. AS concerning the Proposals for an Accommodation, or Composure of
Differences, etc. something already has been said in the Introduction: Now, as
touching the aforesaid tender and healing Epistle from Bristol, some Friends on
both sides may remember, That is was carefully delivered to them by our dear
Friend John Osgood, who, after having imparted it to several, he also used his
utmost endeavors, by persuading them to a Compliance with what was therein
recommended, and afterward diverse other Friends had the sight and perusal of
it.

II. But alas it appears too plainly, that it was not so tenderly regarded, at
least not Answered, so as ought to have been. And indeed seeing that to this
very day the desired effects thereof are not yet produced, must it not be
concluded, that there was both a great neglect and remissness somewhere, and
the wholesome Council and Christian good advice therein given to Friends, was
neither followed nor favorably entertained so as to be practiced? Now Friends
its left to every one, both seriously to consider, and also soberly to reflect
upon themselves whoever they be, that find they are particularly concerned
herein, and were really the chief cause or occasion thereof.

III. However it is hoped that it is not as yet too late to amend what has been
amiss in this or any other respect, and to take an impartial and ponderous
review of the abovementioned, so as to endeavor to recover (whilst there is
yet a time and opportunity afforded,) what has been lost either through
carelessness or unwillingness, which surely would not appear half so difficult
nor uneasy, as may seem to some, if but once the manly part, or that selfish
conceited revengeful-like part (where any thing of it is yet alive in any,)
were laid aside and subdued, and the holy precious Cross truly taken up to all
Peevish and Stubborn Wills, harsh and sower Inclinations, cunning crafty
Reasonings and Consultations with Flesh and Blood, and to that untoward
Disposition of too much justifying every one themselves, and as much Judging,
and too severely Condemning others (an Epidemical Distemper, which Mankind is
too generally and naturally Incident to;) And if that even, sweet, moderate
Temper, Peaceable, Lowly and Charitable Frame of Spirit, might once so prevail,
and appear in all, so as to remove all all kind of Personal Prejudices, Private
Enmity, Revenge or Hatred.

IV. Then certainly would not all be as hearty, and desirous after a
Reconciliation, Peace and Friendship one with another, again as ever formerly,
they might be Eager, Earnest, and Hot after Contention, Variance, Dissension
and Separation from one another? neither then would they be content or at
quiet, till the same should be brought to pass, or at least they had used their
utmost endeavors for a re-uniting and bringing all together again; and it is
but what the Lord both requires and expects, of every one so to do, according
to their Power and Capacities.

V. That so the World and our Enemies on all hands, may no longer reproach us,
and say we are become such enemies one to another, that it seems impossible
that we will ever agree, or be Friends together again; and that we are of all
People, the worst to be Reconciled, or that there is not a wise Man amongst us
to Compose our Differences, or else if there be, that we are very ill-natured,
and wholly averse to comply to any Christian and reasonable Terms, and hear of
no kind of Expedient for a Reconciliation, nor yield to any equal Proposals
that would tend to a better Accommodation of Matters; and that it appears, some
do delight more in a separation and being divided asunder, than to dwell and
meet altogether again, as Brethren of one Heavenly Father, and belonging all to
one Family in true Love and Friendship.

VI. O Friends, is not the one, that is, the former, as comely and as amiable a
sight as can be seen amongst the Children of Men, as its expressed very fully
and excellently in the 133 Psalm. 1, 2, 3. verse. Behold (says he) How good,
and how pleasant it is for Brethren to Dwell together in Unity! It is like the
precious Ointment upon the Head that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaicons
Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his Garments as the dew of Hermon, and
as the dew that descended upon the Monntains of Sion, for there the Lord
commanded the Blessing, even life for evermore.

VII. And indeed as here is great blessing that attends Unity and Concord, so
the contrary must needs accompany Discord, Disunity, etc. and which is very
Unpleasant, Uncomfortable, and Uncomely: And as it is highly Offensive and a
great evil before the Lord, so it is a great, and may prove a fatal
stumbling block to many, and a cause of sad reproach to see a People all own
the same Principles of Religion, all under the same Profession and
Denomination, and yet cannot agree nor meet in one and the same place together
as Friends and Brethren.

VIII. Psalm. 1.20. v. 5, 6, 7.
Does not this occasion some to take up that complaint which David did in his
time, Woe is me (says he) that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents
of Kedar, my Soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace; I am for Peace,
but when I speak they are for War. O Friends what true quietness, Peace or
satisfaction can those enjoy, or bespeak to themselves, who have been or are
the chief cause of this unhappy Separation, and do obstruct it still from being
otherways, and do hinder an amicable Composure of differences, being of such a
rigorous severe Temper, that they are for exacting to the very utmost Farthing?

IX. Friends Remember and practice the Apostles good advice and caution; Romans
12.17. and 19.20.
Recompense (says he) to no Man evil for evil, but overcome evil with good; and
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath. Is not this one of
the hardest Lessons that can be learned by too many, especially such in whom
Pride or passion prevails? And if the professors of Christianity were but once
brought to take up their Cross, to deny themselves in this one thing, viz.
Revenge (whether by Tongue or Hand, or other ways, as there are too many ways,
some more secret, others more open whereby Revenge is shown) which is a
necessary and material point of true Religion, as to the practical part
thereof; O how soon then would there be an end put to all the Heats, Broils,
Contests, Animosities, etc. which abound amongst them, and how easily then
might they be Reconciled, to and at Peace one with another? For the aforesaid
excludes all manner of Revengeful Retaliations, Reflections, or Exasperations
toward any, friends or foes; and if we be advised as we are in another place,
Ja. 4.11. not so much as to speak evil one of another, much less to do evil one
to another. And in Zach. 7.9. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, Execute
true Judgment, and show mercy and compassion every Man to his Brother. And
oppress not the Widow, nor the Poor, and let none of you Imagine evil in his
Heart against his Brother. Read the 11, 12, 13. verse. the sore Judgment that
came upon them for their refusing to harken, and did not do as above mentioned.

X. Surely, to be implacable is far from being like unto Children in malice, 1
Cor. 14.20.
as we are Counseled to be so innocent and harmless as they are; for we know
that though they do sometimes quarrel together (and that about mere trifles
too) yet they are as soon pacified and made friends again, it being contrary to
their natures to retain long their wrath, or anger one toward another, as it
is so with some good natured persons, (that it is more like to Men in Malice
that are very rough, hardhearted, difficult to be reconciled ever again) and
Children in understanding; and quite contrary to what the Apostle exhorts, Ephesians
31.32.
to let all Bitterness and Wrath, and Anger and Clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from you; and be ye kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ his sake has forgiven you.

XI. But we fear there are those who are so implacable, that they will rather
forfeit, or run the hazard of losing forgiveness from God to themselves, than
to forgive others; and indeed an unforgiving is a sad Sign of an unforgiven
person: O how hard may it go with many such, if the Lord should answer them
according to what sometimes they may verbally pray, and in a formal manner
repeat these words oftentimes, and yet never receive any benefit by them, viz.
forgive us our Sins as we forgive them that Sin against us; Let such read Mat.
6.14, 15. v. says Christ, for if ye forgive Men their Trespasses your Heavenly
Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses
neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses: And in another place he
says, Should not thou also have had Compassion on thy follew servant, even
as I had pity upon thee, and his Lord was Wrath, etc. so likewise shall my
Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not for every
one their Trespasses; read Mat. 18. from the 23d. to the end.

XII. Well Friends, its a heavy Judgment for any Person or People to be given
up to an Irreconcilable and Implacable Spirit of Revenge and Malice; they
themselves at last will have the worst by it. And the Lord may, and its the
firm Faith of many, that he will certainly in his own time, and according to
his infinite Wisdom, find out some other way (if there be still an obstinacy,
stifness and unwillingness,) to comply with, and pursue such Christian and
Prudent Methods, as ought to be complied with, in order to a happy
Reconciliation, Union and Friendship,) by which he will bring and Unite
together the sincere, honest and simple-hearted on both sides, (who are
Innocent in their minds to the Lord, and have no by-end, private interest or
design, nor prejudice in their hearts toward any) into true Love, Peace and
Concord: And as for those who do continue stiff, stout, and high-minded, will
not in the least yield, nor by no means be brought to be of a flexible,
condescending, tender frame of Spirit one to another, but say as the proud
Pharisee, I am not as this Publican, or like to those of Old, which said, stand
by thy self (or further off) Come not too near me for I am holier than thou,
etc. let them beware lest it befall them as it did those that even their
Sacrifice became as Smoke in the Nostrils of the Lord, Isa. 65.5.
and he abhorred their offerings; and as they do delight themselves in a
separation (and at a distance one from another, and reckon it better to be so
than together) that he be not at last provoked to separate and remove from them
his blessed Presence; for though he waits and bears long, yet he will not
always do so, but his long-suffering, patience and forbearance, will come to an
end to all who abuse the same.

XIII. It is said in Prove. 13.10. That only by Pride comes Contention; This I
conceive must be meant a Spiritual sort of Pride, especially being attended (as
for most part it is) with vain glory, strong self-will and conceitedness, which
with Singularity, Flattery and Hypocrisy, its Concomitants, have been, and are
the very Spring of all Distraction, and the great underminers of Peace, Concord
and Quietness; the very chief makebates, and occasions of Dissension, Strife,
and Contention in all Societies. Hereunto also may be added those busybodies,
back-biters, tale-bearers and whisperers, who run up and down from House to
House (as some have been observed) who have made a long Practice of it, under
the pretense of Friendship, to both hear and tell stories of one another, whom
they or their Friens do dissaffect. They were not amiss compared by one to a
sort of Hawkers of groundless Reports, which they take in gross, and afterward
retail them out in Companies: It ought to be the care of every good and wise
Man to have them suppressed and discountenanced, for they are mortal enemies to
all Peace and Reconciliation, Love and Friendship, and such are the Whisperer
and double-tongu'd, as in Eccles. 28.14. it is said, have destroyed many that
were at Peace, etc. These have been and are the main Fomenters and the chief
Incendiaries of Breaches, Divisions, Heats, Animosities, differences both in
City and Country, etc. Concerning which more at large, see William Shewer's
little Book, containing a plain Testimony against Back-biters, Tale-bearers,
etc. Its well worth every ones reading, etc.

XIV. And wherefore was it that the Lord took no notice of those when they
fasted, and afflicted their Souls? Because they fasted for strife and debate,
and smote with the fist of wickedness, and hid their Face from their own Flesh;
see Isa. 58.3, 4. But on the other Hand we may find how well pleasing and
acceptable were those prayers, which were offered up with one accord, as in
Acts 41.24. And see the benefit of it, verse. 31. And in Chap. 2.46, and 47. Its
said, They continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread
from House to House, did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart,
praising God and having favor with all the People.

XV. And does not our Lord Jesus prefer Reconciliation of one Brother to
another (where there is a difference or ought between them) before Sacrifice,
by laying a positive prohibition thereon, with as strict a Command, as in Mat.
5.24. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remember, that thy Brother
has ought against thee; Leave thy gift and go, first be Reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer it: How little is this rightly minded or duly
practiced by many, who cannot but remember the same? And though it is as true
that we see one Brother has ought against an another, and both must needs
remember it, yet its very strange that they both continue still offering, and
bringinging their gifts and not mind first the chief and main thing, viz. of
being first reconciled one to another, which as then their gifts would be more
acceptable to God, being according to his Divine Order and Command, so would it
be more serviceable and profitable to others, and also much more comfortable to
themselves than can be whilst unreconciled one to another.

XVI. Now that there is too much here in this Place of ought one against
another, is too apparent by the open separation and division amongst us: But
however one is apt to excuse himself, and so another the like; and one thinks
he may as safely offer or bring his gift to the Altar, as well as another; and
thus it goes, and so from year to year, the positive Command of Christ is
dispensed with, and Unity and a Reconcilement wholly neglected; and its to be
feared that some are become so unconcerned in it, and careless of it, that its
even but as an indifferent thing to them (nay and not only so) but the contrary
is become customary to them, that they neither desire after, nor much care for
a Reconciliation.

XVII. But they should consider, that as Unity, etc. is their duty to labor
after, so it is the Glory, Strength, and Beauty of Christian Societies: It was
demanded once of Ageslaus, why the Lacedaemonians had no Walls to their City? He
answered, that the Concord of the Citizens was the strength of the City. It
also reported of them, that when they made their Supplications to their Idol
God, some asked for Rain, and others for fair Weather: The Oracle returns them
this answered; that they should first go and agree amongst themselves. Alexander
Severus finding two Christians contending with one another, commmanded them
that they should not presume to take the name of Christ upon them any longer;
for (says he) you greatly dishonor your Master, whose Disciples you profess
to be. When there were Commotions in Caesar's Army, the very name of Quirites
hushed them. Oh shall not that Reverence we all ought to bear to that Holy Name,
which we profess, Hush, or Compose our Religious Commotions or Differences
amongst us?

XVIII. The Mahometans, as one says, live in such Exemplary Concord, that they
seldon break out into ill language; but if they do, a third Man will reprove
him with a fie Musselman, fall out! And all is appeased. Were it not to be
wished that the Mahometans were Christians, and in this Christians were
Mahometans? To see an Egyptian smiting an Israelite, is no strange sight; but
to see one Israelite quarrelling with another, is most unnatural and uncomely.
The nearer the Relation, the stronger the Affection ought to be.

XIX. Remember the tragical dismal History of poor Jerusalem; its very
Animosities and Divisions proved at last its fatal ruin; for it was not only
(as observed particularly by some) a certain sign of ruin to the Jews: But one
infallible cause of it was, that while they were besieged by the Romans,
instead of consulting together the Methods of their common defense, they were
broke into such Irreconcilable feuds,
that no sooner had they a time of breathing given them by their besiegers, but
they fell one upon another; so that they became their own most implacable
Enemies: And so it has happened to many in this and former Ages, as by manifold
sad experiences has been known; and to observe such Envy, Prejudice, such
Animosities, Heats, etc. one to another amongst those who profess to be
followers of him, whose Doctrine and example was so full of Love, Meekness,
Forgiveness, Compassion, is it not a scandal to the Jews, an Opprobrium to the
Gentiles, and an inlet to Atheism and Infidelity?

XX. And as the Apostle James tells us, Ja. 3.16, 20.
where Envying and strife is, there is (not only) Confusion, (which is bad
enough if there were no more) but every evil work: This is indeed very
Comprehensive: There are not only two or three, but a whole complex or system
of evil works always attends Strife, Envy, etc. wherever the same is given
place to amongst any sort of People; and we find that some were ready even to
glory in their bitter Envyings and strife which they had in their Hearts one
against another, James 3.14, 15.
and not only so but to lie against the Truth: And in their Zeal and Wisdom
concluded the same to be consistent therewith. But this Wisdom (says he)
descended not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual, and Develish; and who is a
wise Man endured with knowledge among you? How shall such a one be known by
this, let him show out of a good Conversation, his works with Meekness of
Wisdom, even from that which is from above, and that is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, (and
observe) and without partiality and without Hypocrisy. Here we may all see who
is truly the wise Man, and both the Earthly and the Heavenly Wisdom, with the
proper effects each produces; and if we judge the Cause by the effects, its
easily seen, which of the two is predominant.

XXI. And in the next Chapter of the same Epistle, he begins with a Querie,
from whence comes Wars and Fightings amongst you (what, even them whom he calls
Brethren) come they not hence? This is his Answer, even of your Lusts, that War
in your Members. Is it not from Ambition, Covetousness, a greedy desire after
pre-eminence, who shall be greatest and highest, and carry the biggest sway,
and is not that one of the chief causes of most of all Quarrels, Brolls,
Contentions and Animosities? Therefore its said in the 5, 11, 12, Verses, Do ye
think that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells in us lusts
to envy? speak not evil one of another Brethren, he that speaks evil of his
Brother, and judges his Brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the
Law; and there is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy. Who art thou
that judge another, or as Paul has it in Romans 14.4. another Man's Servant? to
his own Master, he stands or falls; yea he shall be holden up, however
harshly or uncharitably he may be censured and judged, for God is able to make
him stand; let us not therefore judge one another any more.

XXII. We are as much cautioned and prohibited not to walk in strife and
envying, as in Rioting and Drunkenness, etc. the former being as well counted
the Works of Darkenness as the latter, in Romans 13.13. And the Apostle we also
find, reckons amongst the rest of the Works of the Flesh, Envyings, Hatred,
Variance, Wrath and Strife; and though these be different names, yet may be all
summed up in one great Evil, expressed by the word Enmity or Prejudice; and
these four are so linked together, that one of them cannot be without the rest;
as where Envying is, there is Hatred, etc. there is no other particular Work of
the Flesh so expressed with so many words to aggravate the same as this, of
Envy or Strife; and when we are exhorted to follow Peace with all Men, at the
same time, in the next verse it is added, looking diligently, lest any Root of
bitterness springing up trouble you. Its observable how much, or mostly,
indeed, the Apostle places the Fruit of the Spirit in these Heavenly and
Excellent Virtues, which are most directly opposite to the aforementioned Works
of the Flesh, as Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Meekness, Temperance, these are all he mentions (except Faith) as the Fruit of
the Spirit; and though they also be expressed by diverse Characters, yet as they
proceed from one Spirit, so they all tend to one and the same thing, and which
the word Charity may comprehend them all.

XXIII. We find that very early, even Christ's own Disciples began to strive
together by the way, and it was about, Who should be greatest too, as in Luke
9.46. And it was from their Carnal reasoning that this Ambition proceeded; upon
which Jesus took a Child and set him by him, by which they might learn how
Innocent and Humble and Little they ought to be. And in Mat. 20.23. Its said,
they were moved, viz. (ten of the Disciples) against their Brethren. But Jesus
called them unto him and said, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them, but it shall not be so among you, (and O that it had never been so upon
no account amongst any who have professed to be his Disciples, etc.) But
whosoever will be great amongst you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your Servant; even as the Son of Man came
not to be Minisered unto, but to Minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for
many.

XXIV. And all such who are found guilty of the pride of Life, of Envy, Hatred,
etc. and are of a bitter sower Spirit, and do not repent of it, will as
undoubtedly be excluded, and shut out of the Kingdom of God, as those who live
and dye in other gross extravagancies; Job 5.2.
for Wrath kills the foolish Man, and Envy slays the silly one, and as
Christ told them plainly in his time, who (its like) conceited themselves to be
great Saints, as with respect to those upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell, Luke
13.4.
Think ye (says he) that they were sinners above all the Men that dwell in
Jerusalem? I tell ye nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish:
And this same he told others over again in the foregoing verse; let us all
therefore beware of Envying, or as the Apostle James says, Grudge not one
against another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the Judge stands
before the Door.

XXV. And let us neither be of such a hot uncharitable temper, to call for
Fire, Luke 9.54.
or to command it (if we could as Elias did) to come down, no not though from
Heaven it self to prejudice or hurt any, which far better Men than we are, or
are now in being, were not allowed to do; yea, though they had power to work
Miracles, yet no liberty granted them to dedestroy or consume any by them: No,
not even those who would not receive Christ himself; and for their but very
desiring such a thing in their warm Zeal, we see he rebuked them, and with a
pretty smart kind of reprehension said to them, ye know not what manner of
Spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them. Now though its true this is as good and as strong an Argument as can
be used, against Persecution, yet it is not improper altogether here to be
alleged also against a Furious, Fierce, Passionate, Violent, and indiscreet
Zeal, Unchristian, and Unwarrantable Imposition of Matters of Faith, which too
often has appeared and been manifested upon a Spiritual account, in more secret
and specious-like manner, as in Envying, Striving, Opposing, Rashly Judging,
and Condemning (Yea, and in Revening too) one another.

XXVI. Neither let us be like to those in the same Chapter above cited, who
were ready to grudg and complain against one, whom they saw casting out Devils;
and though it was a very good work and done also in Christ's Name too, yet they
were so Zealously set against him, that it is said they forbad him; and why?
(not that he did not do it in the name of Christ, for they granted that) but
because (said they) he follows not with us. But hear what Jesus said, Forbid
him not; for (Mark) he that is not against us, is for us, or on our part; as
Mark has it in. Chap 9.39. Christ looked on them all that were not against his
interest in the main, as one party, though others would seem to have rendered as
two distinct parties.

XXVII. But rather Friends, let us all be of that generous, noble, and public
Spirit as Moses was of, when he was told that two others, viz. Eldad and Medad
who were in the Camp, Prophesied as well as the 70 Elders that went into the
Tabernacle, and said, my Lord Moses forbid them. But his answer was, Enviest
thou for my sake? (Here was envy upon a specious like pretense) would God
(says he) That all the Lords People were Prophets, Numb. 11.27.
and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. And also we find the Apostle
Paul was of the same noble excellent mind, who was glad that Christ was
preached, Philip. 1.18.
though it is as true that some (as he says) preached him even of Envy, and
strife, and some also of good will, not sincerely supposing to add to his
Bonds. (Its like some may be ready to say) That surely Paul had good reason
rather to be offended; with such envious and contentious fort of Preachers, and
that though they preached the truth, which was Christ, yet he might well have
opposed or withstood them, but he was not of such a hot Temper, though he gave
them not place by subjection neither, as to some other more private concerns,
but was kept however out of both extremes in moderation. What then (says he)?
Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached,
and therein do I rejoice, yea, I will rejoice.

XXVIII. There fore Friends, pray let that compassionate Temper, moderate, and
most excellent Christian Virtue of Charity, not only be pretended to, or much
talked of, as (too many do) but really seen and practically demonstrated by its
Fruits, that we are indeed endued therewith, and that in Forgiving, Embraching,
and receiving one another as Brethren, who do agree in the main and substantial
Points and Principles of Truth, and wherein we differ in our Judgment of some
things which are but Externals and Circumstantials; let us not however continue
still falling out by the Way about the same, for why should we do so, being as
tenderhearted Joseph, who said to his Brethren, and so treated them as such
with great Compassion and Affection, notwithstanding they had greatly abused
him, Genesis 45.24.
See that ye fall not out by the way. And seeing we are Brethren (or ought so
to be, and accounted as such, however slighted, undervalued, and despised by
one another) why should we contend and quarrel? We must all conclude its of the
Enemy, and his work first to scatter and divide us, and to lead into
Separation, Division, and Contention, and then the more both to weaken and rule
over us.

XXIX. And we find how early the Enemy begat differences; even in Abels time he
raised up a Spirit of Enmity and Envy in the Heart of Cain against his Brother;
and in Abraham's time he, endeavored to cause a Separation and Contention
between him and his Brother Lot: But if we do walk in the Steps of that
faithful Patriarch, we would be as careful as he was to prevent our Adversary,
that sows Discord amongst Brethren; and we have the same reason to urge in the
Case as he had, and the same Argument to plead against it as he did; For thus
he Expostulated with his Brother upon some difference, that was likely to
happen between them: Let there be no strife (says he) I pray thee between me
and thee, between thy Herdsmen and my Herdsmen (and why?) for we are Brethren;
and so they wisely and discreetly, and like two loving Brethren composed the
difference themselves between themselves; and good Peacable Abraham, that made
the first offer, was the better by it afterward in many respects, as may be
seen in Genesis 13.

XXX. And in Acts 7.26. its said, that Moses, that meek Man used the very same
Plea as before, he seeing two Hebrews striving together, the next day (its
said) he showed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at
one again, saying, Sirs, ye are Brethren; Why do ye wrong one to another? As
indeed in all sorts of quarrellings, and fallings out the wrong lies not only
on the one parties side, but is mutual; and though both are to be partly blamed
in one respect or other, yet the one may be more in the wrong than the other,
and one more wronged too than another. But its certain they are most of all in
the wrong, and most to be blamed who will not admit of a Reconciliation, or
refuse to comply with such rational and Christian like Expedients that tend to
it; and as, one well observes from the aforesaid Scripture, he that would not
hear of the putting a stop to the quarrel, it was he that reproached Moses with
the assistance he had given the Day before to an Israelite against an
Egyptian; so enraged he was at the friendly Interposition of Moses in the
Matter, that he seems concerned for the Egyptian that was killed; a public
Enemy being less hated than a Brother, when these Domestic Feuds are raised to
any height, even then a Reconciler becomes more odious than an Alien (as is
observed by many.)

XXXI. And indeed it often happens, that he who goes about to part a Frey, in
all likelihood will have Blows on both sides, especially where the Opposites
and Combatants are Fierce and Violent; he that is eager in any one side, shall
be sure to find some fast Friend, but he that endeavors to be a Reconciler and
as a Mediator betwixt both, bewailing and being greatly grieved at the
miserable Loss, Hurt and Ruin that happens to the whole, and does but set a
foot forward to make up the Breach, will find few to take his part; (and that
is one reason why there are not more Moderators and Reconcilors amongst People;
most love their ease too much, and as they use to say, to sleep in a whole skin
but shall be sure to have many about his Ears; and therefore we may observe
that after it is said, blessed are the Peacemakers, it is immediately added
also, blessed are they that are Persecuted, etc.

XXXII. But we hope better things of many of them than to do so, by such as
appear in healing and re-pairing Breaches among us, and that it would be far
more becoming us, who profess that glorious peaceable Gospel of our Lord Jesus,
which as it tends to bring Glory to God on high, so does it no less Conduce to
peace on Earth (tho? not to the Earthly part in any,) and to good will toward
all Men, and would be more Christian and Prudent like in us, in that Meek,
Gentle, Charitable and Submissive Condescending Mind, to say one to another,
Come Friends, let us now lay aside all our Animosities, Heats and Fouds, let us
compare the Importance and Weight of those things in which we agree, with that
in which we differ, and see which ought to balance us most; let us now be
reconciled and made Friends together again; let us lay aside all Prejudice and
Pertinacy, wait together in lowliness of heart, and feel that ancient spring of
Love and divine Life to Unite and Cement us into that blessed Fellowship, Unity
and Concord, and in the same, let us begin afresh again, and what is past be
remembered no more, than if it never had been; let us forget those things that
are behind, and let us press toward that great and glorious Prize we all have
had in our view: Has not alas the Controversy and Differences been too too
long kept on foot, and keept up between us, both to our shame and sorrow? Its
now more than high time for us all to leave off contendings and strivings
together, and quietly submit in the Love of God one to another, and lay aside
on both hands, all things tending to Controversies, Differences and all manner
of Prejudices, opprobious Reflections, undecent Recriminations, and odious
Comparisons.

XXXIII. O let us not dispute the matter in the anger and heat of our Spirits
any more; but if we will strive let it be then, who shall exceed most in
Temperance, Patience, Love and Forbearance, who most Charitable and Moderate,
and who shall most follow after those things which make for Peace and Concord,
and things wherewith one may edify one another; let us not any more undervalue
both our selves, and also (which is more) the very common Interest of Truth,
and of our Holy Religion. Let us therefore be of a tractable or treatable
Temper, and Comply and Condescend without any more ado, without Reasoning this,
or Consulting other things (whereby Self in all would save it is own Reputation)
with reasonable Expedients and Christian Proposals, let us freely and fully,
and from our Hearts forgive one another, etc. as the Apostle said to the
Philippians, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.
If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort, if any
Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies; fulfill ye my Joy, that ye
be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one mind. Let
nothing be done trough strife or vainglory any more, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better than themselves, look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you,
which is for a Public and Universal good) which was also in Christ Jesus.

SECT. II.
Contains a Collection of diverse remarkable Testimonies, suitable to the
Subject treated on.

MAny other Convincing Motives and pacifick Arguments upon diverse accounts,
might be used and urged, to persuade you to the aforesaid Noble Resolution; but
it would be too tedious to insert them here: However to promote and encourage
the same, consider further these following Testimonies in the first place, and
afterward some pressing Considerations to excite all toward Peace, etc.

I. Eusebius de vita Constable. 67. Constantine says to the Bishops you are not
ignorant, the Philosophers all of them, do agree in the profession of the same
Discipline, but do oftentimes differ in some part of the Opinions that they
Dogmatize; but though they do dissent about the Discipline that each Obs. As The
mistus in his Oration to Valens, says, there were at least 300 amongst the
Gentile Philosophers, etc.
several Sect observes, they nevertheless Reconcile themselves again, for the
sake of that Common Profession, to which they have concurred.

II. J. Hooper in his Ecclesiastical Polity, says, The Time will come when
three words with Charity and Meekness, shall receive a far more blessed Reward
than 3000 Volumes written with disdainful sharpness; or he might have added
twice 3000 Sermons framed from Men's inventions, and delivered with the greatest
Eloquence or Acuteness of Wit. A late Ingenuous Author, says, I trust in the
Almighty God, that Contentions with us, are now at the highest float and that
the day will come (for what cause is there of despair) when the Passions of
former Enmity being allayed, Men shall with ten tiems redoubled tokens of
unfeigned reconciled Love, show themselves each to other the same, which Joseph
and the Brethren of Joseph were at the time of their enterview in Egypt.

III. There was a long feud between Themistocles and Aristides: But being both
employed in the service of their Country, Aristides bespake Themistocles thus,
If we be wise its high time we should now leave off this vain Envy and Spite we
have a long time born each other; And that we should enter into another sort of
Envy more honorable and profitable, I mean, which of us two shall do his best
endeavor to save Greece: To which Themistocles made this answer. I am sorry
Aristides that herein your Honesty appears greater than mine; but seeing it
is that you have deserved the Honor in beginning and procuring such a
Commendable Strife between us, I will henceforth endeavor to exceed you in
continuing this your desire. Oh! that Saints (says the Author upon this) would
learn Heathens to lay aside their particular differences to mind public
advantage. Shall Heathens be better at self-denial than Christians?

Causinus tells us of one Raymundus Lullius, who was so ravished with Love,
that being asked any thing, he would answer, nothing but Love. Where dwell
thou? With Love. To whom belongest thou? to Love. From whence come thou? From
Love? Whether go thou? To Love, etc.

IV. It was well observed by a Learned and Judicious Person, That the Unity and
Peace, that was then, viz. in the early, and indeed the best Times of
Christianity amonst Christians) made Religion amiable in the judgment of
Impartial Heathens; Christians were then known by the Benignity and Sweetness
of their disposition, by the Candor and Ingenuity of their Spirits, by their
mutual Love, Forbearance and Condescension one to another. These were indeed
blessed Marks, but either this is not the practice of Christianity, ( viz. a
Duty the Christians are now bound to observe) or else it is not Calculated for
our Meridian, where the Spirits of men are of too high an Elevation for it; for
if Pride and Uncharitableness, if Wrath and Envy, if Animosities and
Contentions were but the marks of true Christians, Diogenes need never light
his Lamp at Noon to find out such among us; but if a Spirit of Meekness,
Gentleness and Condescension; if a stooping to the weaknesses and infirmities
of one another; if pursuit after Peace when it flies from us, be the
Indispensible Duties and Characteristical Notes of Christians, it may possibly
be a difficult Inquest to find out such, for the crowds of those that shelter
themselves under that Glorious Name.

V. Tertullian that Famour and Learned Apologist, published his Apology or
Defense of the Christians against the accusations of the Gentiles in the 10th.
Year of the Empire of Severus, in the Year of our Lord 204. Among many other
excellent sayings therein take these few.

It is equally forbidden us to wish to do evil, Chap. 36.
or to speak evil of our Neighbors, etc. and in Chap. 39. But it is a strange
thing that this Charity among us, gives occasion to some to blame us: See,
says he, how they Love one another? This astonisheth them, because they hate
one another. See (say they) how they are ready to Die one for another? But as
for them they are ready to Kill one another. It must not seem strange to you,
if we call one another Brethren, seeing we are all your Brethren by the right
of Nature, which is Mother to us all; we have the same Principles as you, but
you Renounce the Humanity common to to us, because you are evil Brethren to us.
But with how much more reason are they called and esteemed Brethren, who
acknowledge one and the same Father, to wit, the living God, that have received
the same Spirit of Sanctity, etc. But alas! it was not long when they
degenerated from both that Purity and Charity that appeared among them for the
1st. 2d. or 300. Years, and gave occasion to Heathens, both to see and say, how
they Hated, Tear'd, Devoured, and did Bite and Persecute one another, how they
Killed and Destroyed one another, and how they imposed upon, and insulted over
each other, according as they had the Civil Powers on their sides; and being
unhappily once broken into pieces and divided into separate Parties and
distinct Societies, then each side did strive to suppress others, and maintain
their own Interests, right or wrong, as might be largely Instanced from the
Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, etc. And alas! has it been much
better of late Years amongst Professors of Christianity? And how happy would it
be for Christendom, it were not so still even in our days!

VI. In the aforesaid History of Eusebius, l. 8. Chap. 1. is declared both the
happiness of the Primitive Christians, while they kept in Love and Unity
together, as also what miserable condition they were brought to by their mutual
hatred, etc. thus expressed: These thigns having thus prevailed (says he) and
daily increased ( viz. Favor and Reverence they had amongst all sorts of Men)
far and near, so that no Malice could intercept, no spiteful Fiend bewitch,
etc. as long as the Divine and heavenly hand of God upheld and visited his
People, whom as yet he worthily accepted. But after that our affairs through
too much Liberty, Ease, and Security degenerated from the natural rule of
piety, and after that one pursued another with open Contumely and Hatred, and
when that we impugned our selves by no other than our selves, This was in Ano.
Dom. 1301. some time before the 10th. great Persecution raised by Dioclesian.
with the Armor of Spite and sharp Spears, Opprobrious words, so that Bishops
against Bishops, and People against People, raised Sedition. Last of all, when
that cursed Hypocrisy and Dissimulation had swum over even to the brim of
malice, the heavy hand of Gods high Judgment after his wonted manner, began
softly a little and little to visit us, so that the Persecution that was raised
against us took his first original from the Brethren, which were under Banner
in Camp, whereas we were touched with no sense or feeling thereof, neither went
about to pacify God, we heaped Sin upon Sin, thinking like careless Epicures,
that God neither cared, neither would visit our sins. And they which seemed our
Shepherds, laying aside the rule of Piety, practiced Contention and Schism
among themselves, whilst they heaped these things, that is, Contention,
Threatenings, mutual hatred and enmity, and every one proceeded in Ambition much
like Tyranny it self: Then I say, Then the Lord according to the saying of
Jeremiah Lam. 2. made the Daughter of Sion obscure, and overthrew from above
the glory of Israel, etc.

VII. But O Friends, how contrary and directly opposite are such Fractions,
Divisions, Contentions, Discords, etc. (amongst those who declared themselves
to be Children of one Father, and followers of the same Lord Jesus) to that
solemn and most fervent prayer in John 17. which our blessed Master offered up
to his Father, in the Days of his External blessed appearance in that Holy Body
of Flesh, and which he poured out but a little before his Death? With what
fervency of Spirit does he pray for Unity among his Disciples, and all his
People that should believe on him? Its remarkable that no less than four times
does he repeat the same Supplication, and every time rises higher and higher,
and more and more earnest for it: First, that they might be one: Secondly, that
they may be one in us: Thirdly, that they may be one, even as we are one: And
Lastly, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the World may know that
thou have sent me, etc. And how much, and how often he recommends, and commands
loving one another, none can be ignorant who have read any of the Books of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, called the four Evangelists.

VIII. It was well observed by one, that our Savior has made the Doctrins of
Meekness and Charity, such ingredients in his Gospel, that he has made them the
Characters, by which his Disciples may be every where known; and this Spirit of
love is so diffused through the writings of the New Testament, that how hard
soever it may be to understand some of the other passages that are in them, yet
there is no Ambiguity at all in those that set this forth. There are some of
the Epistles that do not mention several of the Duties incumbent on Christians,
yet there is not one how short soever, in which this of love is not proposed in
Terms that are both strong and tender: And while the Church of Corinth was
almost rent asunder, by variety of Opinions, and by the different parties that
followed several Teachers that had been among them: The Apostle does not enter
much into the grounds of their Disputes, but recommends Love and Charity to
them. The Apostle John lived so long as to see a great deal of the first
fervor of the Christian Religion slacken; but when he wrote to revive that
Spirit, the Argument upon which he chiefly dwells, is to persuade all to love
one another; and he does that in the softest and most melting language that can
be.

IX. The Controversy concerning the Obligation that lay on the Gentiles, for
obeying the Mosaical Law, was judged by the Apostles, against the Judaizers;
and the inferences that depended on that Controversy, were such, that the
Apostle Paul says they went so far, as to make void the Death of Christ; yet
the same Apostle is Gentle to those that without seeing the extent of those
Consequences, were carried away by those Judaizers, so that he acknowledges
that in their observing them from a good motive, they were acceptable to God;
and that as the Kingdom of God, or the Gospel consisted not in scrupulous
distinctions of Meats and Drinks, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost, so he adds, that every Man was to endeavor to be fully persuaded
in his own Mind, and was not to Judge his Brother in such Matters, but to leave
him to the Judgment of God.

X. Anthony the Great (as Jerem witnesses) when he used Exhortations to the
People to stir them up to Godliness and Virtue; See Drexelius his
considerations upon Eternity Chap. 3.174.
was wont to wish them always to keep in Mind, and often meditate upon that
Saying of the Apostle, Sol non occidat super Iracundiam vestram, let not the
Sun go down upon your wrath; and this Prohibition he did not restrain to wrath
only, but made it general, let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath, Hatred,
Malice, Envy, Lust, or any other Sin, lest it depart from you as a Witness
against you.

Now Friends, if all those, whoever they be, that are Implacable and of an
Irreconcilable and Untreatable Temper, and who through that too powerful
Influence, that Prejudice, Enmity, and Revenge which has so deeply prevailed
upon their Spirits are wholly averse to a Reconciliation or Peace one with
another; and not only so; but can very securely and unconcernedly (which indeed
is strange, but that such seem to be hardened in their Enmity) spend Days and
Nights one after another, nay and Months, and Years, to live at such an
Unnatural, Unneighbourly, Unfriendly, and Unchristian like Distance,
Strangeness and Antipathy, and in Discord and variance; did they, I say, but
once seriously consider with themselves, and had that due, weighty sense of
Launching into Eternity, in such a sad, deplorable State, as aforesaid; and how
suddenly that Morning, Evening, or Hour may come (least of all thought thought
of by too many) as of all things we know Death is most uncertain, both as to
the time and manner thereof) wherein such may be summoned, by that undeniable
Messenger to remove for ever from off the Stage of this World; had they a right
ponderous Sense of this upon their Spirits; O how could they give Sleep to
their Eyes, or slumber to their Eyelids, or take their natural rest securely or
comfortably for one Night, or one hour, till they found the universal tender
love of God, and that Good will spring up in their Souls, and that Charitable
Disposition raised up in them toward all, even those whom they may account as
their greatest Enemies; in which they could heartily desire, and as freely and
fully forgive them all their Trespasses or Offenses, as they themselves would
be forgiven of God.

XI. In which tender Christian frame of Spirit, they could not be at all
satisfied in their Minds, nor think all ever well with them (nor indeed can it
ever be well with any, let them pretend or say what they will, and make this or
the other thing as the reason of their excuse; and it may be pleaded that the
quarrel is on Gods, or Truths account, though in the bottom, if it were well
searched into, there is a great deal of personal prejudice, grudge, dislike,
etc. secretly entertained) till they had made their Peace, and were reconciled
to all with whom they be at varience, and at a distance (let it be upon what
account it will) or at least ways had done what lies in their power, and to the
utmost labored and used all possible endeavors, and reasonable means on their
part for attaining the same. And wherein any has done amiss in acting contrary
to Truth, we are to leave them to answer to God for it, whom they have chiefly
offended, having in a Christian frame of Spirit cleared our consciences, and in
true tenderness discharged that incumbent Duty toward them, in order to their
recovery; and however we are not in the least to approve of the evil in any
(nor even in our selves) nor stand by them or countenance them therein; yet we
must beware of Hatred, Enmity or Prejudice to the Persons, which is a hard
lesson for many to learn, who do not know what it is to forgive, or if they do
know, yet do not practice it.

For by forgiving is meant (as one well observes) the not avenging of injuries
or contumelies, not suffering their Trespasses against Men; Nay, nor sins
against God, to cool or lessen my Charity and Mercy to them; but loving and
compassionating; and showing all effects of true Christian mercy (such
especially as may do them most good) as well to Enemies and sinners, as to
Friends: This alas has been, and is still too too much wanting among many
Professors of Christianity.

XII. And I pray God that all were of the same good Charitable Considerate
Mind, as is reported of one John, Patriarch of Alexandria to be of, who had a
certain Controversy, with one Nicetas, a Chief Man of that City; And it being
such a very remarkable and imitable Passage, and worthy of deep Consideration,
it deserves to be Transcribed, (though something large) and added to the
foregoing Testimonies, it is thus. The matter was to be tried at Law; John was
for the Poor, Nicetas for his Money (the Reader may easily judge whose Cause was
best) but for Peace sake, there was a Private Meeting and Hearing appointed, to
see if they could come to some Composition and Agreement; they Met, they fell
to Words, they were hot at it, a great deal of Choler and Stomach was shown on
both parts; neither would yield a jot, nor depart an inch from his Right; a
great Conflict there was between them, many hours spent to little purpose, they
were further off from agreement at length than before, for neither would yield
to Conditions Propounded by either. Well, it grew late, they departed more
offended and displeased one with another than before (as indeed is too usual
the effects of such Meetings of Controverting Matters, etc.) and so left the
Suit pendent. Nicetas thought it hard to part with his Money, and the Patriarch
seemed to be in the right, and to stand out in the Cause of God and the Poor.

XIII. Note this well.
But yet when Nicetas was gone, the good old Bishop weighed the matter better
with himself, and condemned himself for his Pertinacy (how few will do so now)
and though he was in a good Cause, and knew it also, yet said, Can I think that
God will be pleased with this Implacable Wrath, The Bishops Christian sayings.
that is impious, and not according to the Council of the Apostle? So the good
Prelate could not be at rest till he had sent to Nicetas; for he out of hand
sent Messengers of good esteem, and gave them this Charge, That they should say
no more to him, but only this, Domine, Sol ad occasum est, that is, Sir, the
Sun is going down. Upon the hearing of which Message there was such a sudden
alteration wrought in Nicetas, that his stomach came down presently, he began
to melt, his eyes did stand full swollen with tears, and he had much ado to keep
them in; out of doors he ran presently after the Messengers, for he made have
to speak with the Patriarch, and coming to him in humble manner saluted him
thus, Holy Father, Observe what good effects the Patriarchs first Condescending
and seeking Peace and reconciliation which Nicetas, produce'd, etc.
I will be ruled by you in this or any other matter: Whereupon the Patriarch
made him very Welcome, and so they Embraced each other very lovingly, and
became good Friends.

XIV. Great, surely (says my Author Drexelius upon the place aforesaid, in his
7. Consideration upon Eternity, page 174.) and speedy was the Operation of
these few words, The Sun is going down, for presently upon the hearing thereof,
a Peace was Concluded betwixt them, which was sought for before with multitude
of Words, but could not be effected; so do thou (says he) whosoever thou art
that know thy self guilty of any grievous sin, call to mind these operative
words, The Sun is going down, for what know thou whether thou shall rise
again with the Sun or no; and if thou die in the Night without Repentance, it
is a question in which Eternity thou shall have thy part, whether of the
Blessed or of the Cursed; wherefore do what thou have to do quickly, The Sun is
going down. But have a care it go not down upon thy Lust or Luxury, Envy or
Blasphemy, Detraction, Theft, Malice, Hatred, Pride or Revenge, etc. or upon
any other grievous Sin unrepented of.

XV. But besides what may be said as a Motive or Argument, and that weighty
enough too in its place, as with respect to the going down of the outward or
Natural Sun, to persuade all to be of a tractable and reconcilable Temper, of a
Charitable, Sweet, Loving and Peaceable Disposition toward all. Something
further might be also said, and that of a far more weighty Consequence, and
that is, as concerning the setting or going down of the spiritual Sun, I mean
when the Heavenly divine and saving Light, sweet Healing Influences, and pure
Comfortable Rays, reviving and refreshing Beams thereof are wholly withdrawn
from such a Man, or Woman, who wilfully persists from time to time in any
Irreconcilable, Implacable, Envious and Revengeful mind, so as at last they
provoke the Lord to leave them, and suffer that dismal Night of Darkness and
Obscurity to overtake and come over them, where the light of Gods glorious
Countenance shall never again be seen to shine upon their Tabernacles, nor the
divine Sun of Righteousness ever rise or appear any more upon their Horizon or
Habitations. And this indeed is most sad and dreadful, and how suddenly this
Judgment (the most fearful of all) may be inflicted upon them, who do go on and
continue in that which is highly offensive to the Lord, as no doubt all kind of
Enmity, Malice Hatred and Uncharitableness, Prejudice and Revenge are very
great evils in his sight, wherever the same appears, let them be covered with
what specious pretense or excuse soever.

It is that O Man, and O Woman, whoever thou be, that is found guilty hereof
before him that may provoke the Righteous God to shorten the day of thy
visitation of his Love and Grace to thee, and that before thou be aware of it,
if so be thou still persist therein. And although for a time, to such, Revenge
may seem pleasant, and be as a sweet Morsel, yet it will be bitter in the end,
and be as Gall of Asps within them. And its possible also that such may live as
to the natural Life, and the outward Sun often both rise and set, even after
the Lord has thus left them wholly to themselves, and his Spirit ceased
striving any more in, or with them, and so in this respect, the spiritual Sun
forever to be set, or go down as to them, although it never sets or goes down as
to it self; but its divine Light, Splendour and Glory, is from everlasting to
everlasting, and which forever purely shines, in and upon the Souls of the
Righteous, and all such as are of a Tender, Merciful, and Compassionate frame
of Spirit, and full of Bowels, and live and die in true Love, Good Will and
Charity toward all.

XVI. And may it not be fitly said concerning Reconciliation, Hillar. de vera
paceificat.
Peace, etc. (as says one of the Ancients,) That it is the Muniment of a
Common wealth, the Staff of Policy, the very Badg of Christianity? The very
name of it (says the most Eloquent of all the Roman M. Tullius Cicer.
Orators) is lovely, and the nature of it (says the most divine among the
Heathen L. Anneus Seneca de tranquilitate.
Philosophers, as he is called) is Heavenly.

The same Philosopher says, it is the part of a silly and miserable man to
bite him, that biteth him. To strive against our Equals is a matter doubtful,
against our Superiors it is fury, against our Inferiors it is baseness. The
displeasure suddenly quelleth, when as the one part forbeareth to contend: Heth
he stricken thee, fly back, for in striking again thou shall give both occasion
to strike often, and an excuse for striking; Seneca de ira. lib. 2. cap. 4.
and so King Solomon, that was much wiser, long since told us, and which we
know by experience to be true, That the beginning of Strife, is as when one
lets out Water; Prove. 17.74.
therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with: For as in the breach
of a Watercourse, if stopped in time, will prevent the following abroad, which
otherways must needs break out; so in the breach of Peace and Concord, when it
first appears, if there be not a present and prudent stop, it will break forth
into open Contention, for a small spark, if not quenched in time, may blow up a
whole City.

XVII. It is a noted Rule in Physic, Hypoc. Aphoris.
that all Immoderations are enemies to Health; and it is as true a rule in
Divinity, That all Immoderations and extremes are enemies unto both quietness
of Mind in ones own particular, and also to Peace and Concord with others, and
which have been always very prejudicial to all Societies; therefore that
seasonable and Apostolical Admonition is needful to be minded and practiced by
all, viz. Let your moderation be known to all men, Phil. 4.5.
(and why) because the Lord (who is the great Judge of all) is at hand, he is
near. This does not only relate to our Eating, Drinking, etc. appertaining to
the outward Man, but also respects an Immoderate or Blind Zeal, in such who are
apt to be too forward and severe in their Judging, Censuring, and Condemning of
others. Such may also read the 14th. Chap. Virtusstat. in medio.
of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, especially the 4, 5, and 10. verses. And as
one wisely observes, that in Nature we see all Heat Consumes, all Cold Kills,
that three degrees of Cold and two of Heat allays the heat, but introduces the
contrary quality, and overcools by a degree, but two degrees of Cold to two of
Heat, make; a poize in Elements, and a balance in Nature, etc. Besides, as the
Maxim is, nullum extremum est perpetuum, There is no Extreme that is lasting, as
we have had many experiences.

XVIII. Plutarch Apoth.
Notable and very Remarkable is that passage concerning Silurnus an Heathen
Parent (so called,) who having many Children and fearing lest some unquietness
should grow between them; to the end he might the better persuade them to
entertain a constant Peace and Concord between themselves, he took a Sheaf of
many Arrows and offerded it to each of his Children one after another, willing
them to break it, but they could not so long as the Arrows were altogether in
one Bundle. At last, pulling forth the Arrows one by one, it was an easy matter
for them to break them all one after another; even thus said their Father it is
with you, so long as you remain united and love each other, no Man can hurt or
break you; Note this well.
but if once ye be dissevered one from another, by strife or variance, every
Man may easily destroy you.

Strife and Variance between Brethren, whether upon a Natural or Spiritual
account, is a thing most barbarous and prodigious; and all Enmity, says a wise
Heathen (so termed) breeds within our selves a thousand tormenting passions,
Plutarch.
but especially between Brother and Brother.

XIX. When Socrates saw Cherephom and Cherecrates, two Brethren, Zenoph. lib.
2. de dict. and fact. Soerat.
jarring and warring each with other, he said unto them, ye do now as if the
Hands which were created to help one the other, should hinder and hurt each
other; or as if the Feet which were framed to bear one another burden, should
supplant one another; or as if the Ears, Coadjutors of mutual good, should wax
deaf to hear good one of another; or as if the Eyes, which are fellow-spies for
the good each of other, should look asquint at the good one of another.

Let none hold together like Simeon and Levi, Brethren in evil and mischief,
but like David and Jonathan, to preserve one another from evil, etc. Its said
of the former two in Gen 49.5. Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.
Or (as in the Margin) their words are Weapons of Violence. O my soul, come not
thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united:
for in their anger they slew a Man, and in their selfwill they dug down a
wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, Isa. 59.8, 9,
etc.
for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Pray Friends read and consider the Characters of those of old, concerning whom
it is said, that the way of Peace they know not, and if we do know it and yet
do not walk in it, nor pursue peace, it will be far worse for us.

XX. O let not our Lord when he comes find any of us smiting or beating our
Fellow Servants, neither let any give just cause to say of them as of him of
old: It is thou and thy Fathers House that troubles Israel, etc. that do
chiefly obstruct that peace, Concord and Reconciliation amongst us, which is so
earnestly desired by many on both sides; such may be said to be (as observed by
one) neither Actively Peceable, nor Passively Peaceable, neither as
Peacemakers, nor Peace-takers; and so in some sense may be accounted, also the
Peace-breakers. And these are they that both raise and keep up Strife and
Contention, and Discord among Brethren. Ja. 3.81.
Whose Tongues are fall of deadly Poison; which sets on Fire the course of
nature, Prove. 12.18.
it self being set on Fire of Hell. For though there be that speak like the
piercings of a Sword; yet their words may be sometimes even smoother than Oil.

XXI. The Tongue (as Petrarch says) is the mighty Bellows to blow up strife,
etc. and grievous words, says the wise Man, stir up anger. But the discretion
of a Man differs his Anger, or is seen by his patience, as some render it,
Prove. 19.11.
and it is his glory to pass over a transgression. And as there is a generation
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet not washed from their filthiness (of
both Flesh Spirit) O how lofty are their Eyes and Eyelids lifted up; so there
is a generation, Whose Teeth are as Swords, and their Jaw-Teeth as Knives;
Psalm. 55.21.
and are there not some whose words are smoother than Butter and softer than
Oil, and yet be they very swords, etc.

XXI. Remarkable is that Golden sentence of that Golden Mouthed Father
Chrysostom, as he is called; Did thou know (says he) the worth of Peace and
Quietness, or consider the sweetness of it, thou would sell all that thou
have to buy it; were it present thou woudlst welcome it; were it absent, thou
would make search after it; were it lost, thou would never leave until thou
had recovered it; were it to be bought, thou would think no Silver or Gold
too much to procure it.

XXII. Let us also take notice what Luther, Page 299.
that worthy and famous Reformer, says in his Commentary on 133 Psalm. It is,
says he, a commendation of Peace and Unity, to the end we should esteem it as
an excellent and Holy gift, and that we should rather sustain the loss of all
things else, than give occasion of Dissension and Discord; for if we must
suffer any loss, it ought to be born patiently in this respect, that all other
things through Peace are recovered, and reslored again, as one said very well,
I never bought any thing better cheap than Peace, for to the Buyer it brings
most plentiful Fruit; for we see oftentimes in our private affairs, that if a
Man be content to lose ten or twenty Crowns, that he may live in Peace and
quietness, he wins thereby great Gain and Commodity, etc. He also says in
another place, That truth is not lost by teaching, but by disputing and
contending, the Minds of Men being carried away by the heat thereof; they
neglect those things whichmost of all they ought to regard, etc.

XXIII. And indeed, would it not be both far more profitable to all People, in
general, and more conducing to Peace, Concord and Reconciliation one with
another, to have fewer Books and Papers (and a happy day and time when there
will be none at all) of Controversies, of Replies and Rejoynders pro and con,
which do for the most part of them (proceeding from either the heat or wisdom
of Man's Spirit) exceedingly confound, and cloud the plainess, simplicity and
glory of Truth, and perplex and bewilder the Minds of poor People, and which
also has too too often in them, much of self-passion or undecent
Recriminations, or glory of Reputation, by-ends, interests or some private
advantages or other proposed, which makes many unwilling to yield, though
possibly convinced in their judgments, etc. And if there were more practical
Treatises (instead of the Controversial ones as aforesaid) tending to promote
Piety, Peace, Love, Unity, Concord, and Friendship, See the Causes of the decay
of Christian Piety Page 321.
in the Life of Righteousness: For as an ingenuous Writer well observes, That
our Divisions have grown upon us, by the neglect of practical Duties: For as
every age degenerated more from Primitive Piety; So they advanced further in
nice inquiries and new opinions; and as the Zeal of practice grew cool, so that
of dispute gathered head and vigor. So that if we consider how far our good
works fall short of these first Christians, we need not wonder to see our
Controversies so far exceeding them; that time which was gained from the one,
being employed in hammering, and forging the other, and the true Gospel Graces
of Meekness, Peaceableness and Universal Charity are accounted earthly;
phlegmatic qualities; we disclaim that Holy Ghost which descends in the
appearance of a Dove; Nay or in the Fire either, unless it be like that of
Elijah, to consume all that disgust us, etc.

It had been well (as W. P. says) if Men had entertained equal Zeal against
Impiety, and been but half as much Enemies to their Sins, as they have been one
against another: See his Address to Protestants, Page 63. the whole is well
worth reading, but especially the 2d. part; which is a very substantial
excellent Treatise, and plain against all imposition, etc. in matters of Faith,
etc.

XXIV. It is easy (as I remember an ancient moderate Friend said) to judge, but
hard to save; and also, says he, Obs
that is most in the Life of the Son is most sensible of the hurts of others,
and most touched with the feeling of their Wounds, Not slightly passing by,
like the Priest, but Mercifully, Pitying, and healing like the good Samaritan;
for it is a Symton of hardness of him that slights the Wounds and Bruises of
his Brethren, thereby pouring Brine into their Wounds rather than Oil of Love
and Tenderness. Such Physicians rather help to fester than cure the hurt, and
to increase the pain than to stop the spreading of the Disease; whereby a
little slip does prove as a dangerous Sprain, and a small Bruise sometimes to
the loss of a Member, and grieving of the whole Body, and all for want either
of skill or Sense (or both). Where skill is wanting, there he may administer
that which does increase the Distemper, and thereby both disparage himself, and
endanger the Patient: And where Sense is wanting, there austerity and rigidness
is usually met withal: But rather says he, Obs
Gentleness and forbearance must be used as by the application (not of
harshness and present judging or standing at a distance but) of warm Clothes
and suppling Oils used by a gentle Hand, with much pains and often exhortation
in the Stirrings of Love, and Risings of the Life, and yet feeds not the
benummedness or senselessness, but cherishes the Life, and so recovers the
Sense, whereby it is restored to the former office in the Body, and more filled
with compassion, usefulness and diligence than before, and the other Members
are now made more sensible of the benefit of Patience and Long-sufferings, and
sees from whence that springs that would limit unto Seven times, and how narrow
and short it is of the fullness of Mercy it self, that is unlimited, but binds
the limiting Spirit unto the perfecting of the Praises of the God of
everlasting Goodness and Mercy.

SECT. III.
Some Objections fairly Stated, with their Answers, as also diverse weighty
Considerations proposed.

Object. I. BUT then there are some Objections that seem difficult to Answer;
And 1st. some may be apt to say, and all will conclude, that Peace and
Reconciliation amongst us, is far to be preferred to Strife and Contention; and
that as it is in Temporals, so it is in Spirituals, Peace brings Plenty, but
Wars always the contrary, Ruin, Scarcity and Poverty upon a Spiritual account:
Also we are sensible that Reconciliation is very desirable, and a good Work;
and a happy People were we, could both these be obtained. But alas, (here lies
the difficulty, and truly it is so) Who shall begin this good Work first, and
how shall it be carried on, suppose it were begun? Its true, if every one would
but submit to that Eternal Power which first reached to us, and visited us, and
made us near and dear one to another, that alone would soon both begin, carry
it on, and finished it: But alas, each side pleads so much for themselves (there
lies the pinch and obstruction,) and one party placing all, or most of the
blame on the other, and yet neither side will readily grant to be in the fault,
or blameworthy, and both are apt to say in the mean time, we want not Charity;
if any have done amiss and wronged us, let them confess and amend; we have
Charity enough to forgive, and we would be glad to have them Reconciled to us
as Brethren, etc.

Answ. Now this great and chief Objection, Friends, you must needs acknowledge
is fairly Stated, and it contains two or three Parts: Something in short to
each Part: As to the first, who shall begin it, etc. There are some who through
mercy, are neither so Strait, nor so Prejudiced, or Biased in their Spirits to
any Party, but will be free to Stoop and Condestend to be the first, yea
rejoice in it and be glad too to help forward or begin so acceptable, so
necessary and profitable a Work, could they but see any probability, or had any
reasonable Ground, to prospect its being further proceeded in, or encouraged by
others concerned; which otherwise you know, would be but as labor in vain,
fruitless in that respect, to offer any such thing where it is not likely to be
accepted. But as was already hinted; if every one did join with, and sink down
in their minds to that peaceable Power or Wisdom of God, there would be a great
readiness and propensity to Reconciliation, and truly till that be known to
work both a willingness and desire (in those chiefly concerned) toward the
same, the difficulty will still remain, though many others were very hearty and
really much inclined to it.

And to help to answer the second part, How shall it be carried on? This is
proposed; let all such Friends on both sides, whose hearts the Lord has
inclined hereunto, and who are very willing to comply with the aforesaid, or
any other Christian reasonable Proposals, they may see needful to be concluded
on and added with joint consent; its hoped that there are diverse such, and if
they please they may signify the same by Word, or Writing to any Friend, or
Friends they think fit to acquaint therewith, though its but meet that those also
should know it, whom they believe are like-minded with them in this Concern:
And likewise those who have so far proceeded in it as to publish some Proposals
in order to promote the same, if they please, they may apply themselves to any
of us herein concerned, and they may be further satisfied about it.

Now by this Method, it may be seen plainly, who are free, willing, and
desirous after a Reconciliation, and who are not; who are the Obstructers and
who the Incouragers of the said on both sides, and so even let the fault and
blame herein be laid on those to whom it belongs, and who do let and hinder
such a good Work.

And as to the third part of the Objection, viz. That both Parties plead their
Innocence, and neither willing to confess to be in the fault, or the cause of
the Difference, but both shift it off from themselves, and throw it upon one
another; little need be said of this; for if there be any others (beside some
particular Persons) that do apprehend so, that one side only ^s altogether to
be blamed, and the other wholly blameless, they must needs be certainly either
very Ignorant of matters, or else too deeply engaged more to a Party, than the
naked Truth, and swayed by some more sinister self-interest, or by private
affection (which blinds the Judgment, and darkens the Understanding) than by
sound Reason, or an impartial Examination and fair Hearing of things; so take
all upon mere trust, believe implicity what such a one says, or reports, see
with others eyes, and not by their own; and besides, too much to be feared,
(which is very bad) they are likewise plunged too deeply into that dangerous
and hurtful thing, called Prejudice, etc. But besides, were it needful or
serviceable to any, (as at present it is not) the contrary might be fully
evinced by too plain Particulars, (to be much lamented) and that by undeniable
matters of Fact too, that both sides, less or more are blameable, and have been
in the wrong, have been Imprudent and Indiscreet in managing Matters, have been
too Uncharitable, Harsh and Sower, etc. one toward another: This is so
palpable and so well known, even to the World, that to mention the same in the
Particulars (how far some on each side have digressed from both that Golden
Rule, from that Royal Law of Love and Kindness, and from many other Excellent
and Blessed Laws, also Professed equally by both) would be as well too tedious
and large, as it might tend to exasperate each Party, which all along herein
from first to last of this Work is avoided, as much and as carefully as
possibly can be, as to any personal and particular Reflections, that so neither
Partiality nor Uncharitableness might in the least appear.

However it may be safely said (and without any breach of Charity) reasonably
and modestly concluded, as being what is but impartial and according to Truth,
that it has been visible to all, and even plain to a demonstration to all the
unbyassed, That neither the one nor the other side can justly plead themselves
wholly clear; but that both less or more have offended and given occasion to
each other, of Provocations and of causing a Disreconciliation and this unhappy
Separation, either in the first Fomenting or Raising, or Heightning, and
keeping up the Differences, and Controversies to this day amongst Friends.

And those who may reckon themselves clearest, or least concerned herein, have
no cause (if all things be duly and calmly considered) to upbraid others,
(saying) had it not been for the too hot, ungoverned heat, or Zeal of one, or
the Impatience and Imprudence of another, or the indiscreet Conduct, or the
Moroseness, Sraitness, Sullenness, and Shiness of others, etc. it had never
been so or so amongst us: Now Friends, were it not really more Christian like
to lay aside all manner of aggravations or personal reflections, and learn now
to be of that excellent Charitable Temper, which we find Moses and David were
of, that they were not provoked neither to upbraid or be revengeful against
those, who had so insolently affronted and abused them, when they had an
opportunity to do either or both toward them. Moses, it is said, Numb. 12.13.
cried unto the Lord to heal Miriam, saying, heal her now O God I beseech thee;
she appears with Aaron, had murmured and reflected foolishly upon him, which
highly provoked the Lord; and when his Hand was laid on her for it, It was then
that Moses entreated and interceeded for her; he was so far from insulting over
her, or desiring the punishment to be either Continued, Increased, or
heightened. And as concerning David, Sacred History gives a large account how
merciful, and how exceeding tender hearted he was even toward his great
outward Adversary, Saul, and would never by any means take revenge upon him,
though he might of ten have easily done it, had he been so disposed. Another
great instance we have of his princely Clemency and good nature, after he was
restored again to his Kingdom: Abishai was mighty importunate, that Shimei
should be put to Death, because (says he) he cursed the Lords anointed, and
indeed he railed at him, and that when he was under adversity, 2 Samuel 19.21, 22.
and that was base indeed, most bitterly and extravagantly, saying, Come out,
come out thou Bloody Man, and thou Man of Belial, etc. yet for all this David,
that good Man, was so far from revenging himself, or remembering old faults so
as to bear any hatred, or improve them to the disadvantage of his offenders,
that he reproved those smartly and counted them as his adversaries, that
labored to stir him up to the same, What have I (says he) to do with you, ye
Sons of Zerviah, that ye should this day be Adversaries to me, etc. therefore
the King said unto Shimei thou shall not die, and he swear unto him.

So we may see here was no upbraiding or raking up of old Misdemeanors, or
faults of one another, nor the least appearance of a revengeful Spirit, or
retaliating again; and therefore it is well advised, and O that all would take
the good Counsel in, Prove. 24.29 Say not, I will do so to him as he has done
to me: I will render to the Man according to his work. We are to leave that to
the Lord; though its said he gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not; and
we are to overcome evil with good. A soft answer, Prove. 15.19.11.
says Solomon, turns away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. The
discretion of a Man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over a
transgression. Hard to hard (says one) never does well; a gentle Rain will
allay a Boisterous Wind; as its unnatural to hate them that love us, so its
natural to love them that love us; but its supernatural to love them that hate
us; for we are enjoined by Christ, not only to love or salute our Friends, but
even our Enemies also; and those of our Friends, whom we esteem as our Enemies
we ought so to love them as to forgive them, and be likewise reconciled to
them, if possible, at least to use our utmost endeavors for the same, that if
it be not effected the fault may be theirs, Plut. in vita Alexandri.
and not ours. It is a Kingly thing (says a great King) to bear evil when thou
do good. O Friends, let us all in the love of God, and for his sake and the
truths sake, which we all jointly profess, delay no longer being at Peace one
with another, and Cordially reconciled together: We can none of us be
insensible how many disadvantages we all lie under, and what grievous Censures
and Reflections we are all exposed to, both by professors and profane; how
those common Enemies, both to Truth and us, all rejoice at our Divisions,
expecting, as (...) they may conjecture and conclude, the dismal Consequence
may be next to hear of our downfall. O how do they warm their Hands at the Fire
of our Contentions, and say, ha, ha! so we would have it.

I. Let us also seriously consider, how highly provoking these things are in
the sight of the Lord. Ob^. Let love be without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. and
let us not live in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. 1 John.
3.18.
And that it is a great evil that so much of Love, and Tenderness, Charity,
Humility, Patience, Long-suffering, etc. is professed, pretended to, and talked
of by many, and yet in the mean time so very little of these in truth, and in
deed is practiced and brought forth in real Fruits of love, etc. but a great
deal of the Contrary. It may not be long before God, who greatly abhors all
such Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation, take his Rod as well as shake it (as he has
often and especially of late given us both loud, (...) and frequent Warnings)
and severely correct and punish for these things.

Does a Fountain send forth at the same place sweet Water and bitter? Can the
Fig tree, my Brethren, bear Olive-berries? Either a Vine, Figs? So can no
Fountain both yield salt Water and fresh. Ja. 3.11, 12.
So that as their Faith is dead, and like the Body without the Soul (that has
no motion) which is without works; even so is their Charity, etc. but cold and
faint without its Demonstrative effects and Fruits; and still we may rationally
conclude whether the Fountain be bitter or sweet (though its easy for many) to
put the one for the other (as they may imagine) by its streams which flow from
it. And has not the just God in all ages, manifested his soar displeasure,
because of such Divisions, etc. Its no wonder, says one, if a Father after a
long patience be at last provoked, to turn all his Children out of Doors, when
they cannot be quiet nor agree together; so it was heretofore when there was
such siding one against another, Bishop against Bishop, some engaged in one
Faction, some in another, till, as one observes, the Brethren of the Camp,
brought Dioclesians persecution, which devoured them all. Its a common
observation among Shepherds, that when the Sheep push at one another, a storm
speedily ensues; and when that comes, it drives them altogether, whereas before
they might be scattered asunder, some feeding in one place and some in another.

II. Moreover, to be plain, Do not these Animosities, Divisions, and
Contentions egregiously reflect upon our selves, bespeaking us too plainly to
be such as the Apostle complained of in his time, who were divided amongst
themselves? For, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12, 13.
(says he) it has been declared unto me of you, my brethren, (how gently does
he treat them) that there are contentions amongst you. That every one of you
says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: Is
Christ divided? etc. Chap. 3.3, 4.
For whereas there is among you envying, and strife and divisions, are ye not
Carnal and walk as Men? And this he repeats to them three times, and in one of
them says positively that they were as yet Carnal; and to draw them off from
admiring and following one person more than another, to the breach of Concord,
he tells them, who then is Paul, and who is Apollos? But Ministers in whom ye
believed, even as the Lord gave to every Man? I have Planted, Apollos watered,
but God gave the increase; and so goes on further upon this in the 7, 8, 9.
etc. verse. And though the Galatians we find were once very zealous in affecting
Paul, yet (says he) to them, am I become your enemy because I tell you the
truth? What Turn-coats (observes one upon this) were these? But a while since
they would have pulled out their own Eyes, and given them to Paul; and now they
would have as it were pulled out his Eyes, who told them the truth.

III. And Friends, amongst many of the disadvantages which do attend this
unhappy Division and Separation, this one is not the least (viz.) that as many
simple, honest-hearted Friends on the one Hand are disappointed of the benefit,
and comforts of the Labors and Testimonies of those that are sent amongst us,
and in the Universal Love of God are moved to visit us; so on the other hand,
many of the Servants of the Lord have been straightened to come amongst us;
because they have not that full opportunity of clearing themselves, and
imparting of their spiritual gifts to all, as in other parts; so that in this
respect, we among our selves, and many others are useless, and as it were dead
to one another, while alive: O how comfortable is it, for the Lords People to
meet often together in Love, Peace and Quietness, and open their Hearts freely
one to another, and tell their experiences one to each other, what the Lord
has done for their Souls. Thus it was once amongst Friends in this Town, and
its hoped it will be so again one time or other: After this manner (some say)
the Art of Medicine was first found out; as any one met with a Herb and
discovered the Virtue of it by an accident, he was to Post it up, and so the
Physicians still were perfected by a Collection of those Posted Experiments.
But alas, some, and too many there are, who are ready to Post up, and Publish
abroad each others weaknesses and failings or infirmities, to the shame and
reproach both of themselves and their Profession.

IV. Let us also Consider, how many have been discouraged and stumbled from
owning the Truth, when they observe such an irreconcilable Temper, and have
such Wrath and Envy, Enmity and Prejudices, such Wranglings and Divisions, such
Whisperings, Back-bitings, such Supplanting and Undermining each others
Reputations, such malicious Aggravations and improvements of all advantages one
against another, such uncharitable Censures and Apprehensions, such unfriendly
Deportments, unchristian-like Treatments, such a fowr and un-neighbourly-like
Behavior and unhandsome Carriage toward one another, such odious Comparisons,
opprobrious Reflections and Characters cast one upon another, such groundless
Jealousies and Surmisings, etc. Its true, Men are but Men, and Women but Women,
and the best of them may Err, and do amiss one way or other; but such things as
reflect upon a whole Society or Meeting, as being culpable of the aforesaid,
and charged as Guilty thereof, is of far worse Consequences than any particular
Persons Misdemeanour, both by how much the more one single Person may sooner
and easier Repent, Reform and amend, than many can do; And also that Envy and
Pride (especially spiritual Pride) has been evermore deadly and more hurtful
to, and amongst Gods People, than any other thing.

V. For from thence these four great Evils have sprung up, and which gradually
succeeded each other in former Ages among the Primitive Christians, and have
been ever since too much predominant in Christendom; and these are, 1st. the
Ambition or Pride, that first appeared then. 2dly Contention with Confusion
followed. 3dly. Afterward Imposition of Numerous Creeds one upon another: And
last and worst of all, and as the sad effects of all these cruel Persecutions
one of another; all these things may be plainly observed by those that are
acquainted in the least with Ecclesiastical History, as of Eusebius, Socrates,
etc. Geo. Bishops Looking-Glass for the Times, etc. a special Book.

Now Friends, have not all these things happened, all these Disorders Divisions
and Confusions, etc. by not keeping near to the Lord, in Unity, and near one to
another, and being gone from the measure of that divine Light and Grace, in
their own Hearts; then there was a departure from the Charity and into harsh
Apprehensions and Constructions one against another; and not being content with
that place and Station, the Lord allotted for them, then an aspiring mind got
up and sought to be higher, then there was a Grudging and Envying others, and
thus also the Humility was lost, and so all Love and Tenderness one toward
another decayed: Loftiness of Spirit with hardness of Heart prevailed, even to
the grieving and vexing, both of the Spirit of God in themselves, and also of
one another; so that there could be no longer any more comfortable Society, or
Christian Fellowship together, the great Bond of Peace being broke, and that
Heavenly invisible Tie, which Knits together being dissolved: What then behoved
to follow but Divisions and separations one from another? We may likewise read
how the Apostle blames the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.7.
for their being of so Contentious and Striving humor, insomuch that thereby
they reduced themselves to this at last, that those were set up even as their
Judges, who were least esteemed of in the Church (and God knows how many raw,
young, unexperienced sort of Persons are got up, or set up of late into the
Judgment Seat amongst us in this our Day) and we wish that there were not cause
to say the same, as he tells them plainly thus; I speak to your shame, is it so
that there is not a Wise Man, (nor a patient Condescending bearing Man) among
you; no, not one that is able to Judge between his Brethren, etc. why do you
not rather take wrong than, (as if he had said) be thus Litigious, Striving,
Quarrelsome, even to go to Law one with another, and that before the
Unbelievers too? which was utterly a fault (as he says) amongst them: He says
also, that the whole Law is fulfilled in one word, Gal. 5.14, 15.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. But if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another.

VII. But to leave these things, relating to former Times, and much more that
might be mentioned, let all beware, and take warning in time to come of
splitting on the same Rock, as others before us have done, both in this and
former Ages, and let the Cause wherever it is, or whatever it be, or has been,
be searched out by every particular, and labor by the power of God, to have it
removed, and then no doubt, but all these sad evil and hurtful effects that
proceed there from, will quickly cease and come to an end.

Object. 2d. Some also may be ready to argue thus, and say, It is altogether
vain to suppose or expect that all Differences, Contentions, or Quarrels upon a
Religious action, can ever be Composed so, as to be brought to one end; and it
may be said of them, as the Apostle spoke of Heresies, which he said must be
amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.19.
That they which were approved, may be made manifest, though its true at the same
time, he blamed them for their Divisions, etc.

Answ. But one may as well reason, and say, that because thou know there is
already a Fire broke out, and that one tells thee there will be another after
that, that therefore thou oughst not to endeavor what possibly thou can to
help to extinguish both that or any other Fires, that might be supposed for
certain would happen still one after another; so the Apostle does not by the
aforesaid Text design to discourage any from laboring to heal breaches, to
remedy divisions, to stop Contentions, and to make Peace and Reconciliation,
but (as observed by a late Author upon the aforesaid Scripture) he declares
plainly what we must expect from the ill disposition of the Spirits of Men,
(which is the cause of the disunion) by reason of the high esteem they have of
their own sufficiency, and of their inclination to render themselves
considerable, etc. The Providence of God is hereby is also seen, which draws
good out of evil, and light out of darkness, the thickest darkness, and to
distinguish suc has truly belong truly to him, and that Faithfulness and
Constancy manifested. In this sense also it is (says he) that Jesus Christ
declares to us, the necessity of Scandals and Tribulations arising in the
Church, otherways the Gospel, which is the Ministry, of Grace, and a word of
Reconciliation and Peace, does not of it self purpose any thing, but Union,
Amity and Concord. Besides, the Apostle did not say, that there must always be
Heresies, or forever in the Church of Christ: Is it not enough, that it has
taken place for so many Ages, it is not time now to stop its Course, and see an
end of it? So will the Prophecy have had its accomplishment in our Fathers
Days, and shall in ours enjoy the Calm after all these Tempests. Let us add
hereunto, that as the Scripture foretells us these Divisions, so it also makes
us hope for an Estate of Peace and Quiet in the Church. It makes Times of
refreshment and ease to succeed all these great disturbances, and assures us
that there shall be such a firm Peace in the Earth, that we shall see the Woolf
dwell with the Lamb, etc.

For it is prophesied, That in the last days the Mountains of the Lords House,
Isa. 2.3, 4.
shall be established in the Top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above
the Hills, and that the Lord himself shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke
many People, and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shears, and their
Spears into pruning books. Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more: Isa. 11.9.
And it is said also, That they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy
Mountain. O this will be a blessed day, and happy Times indeed, when all that
which hurts or destroys upon any account, comes to be destroyed, and reproved:
Then may it be hoped that all these many uncomfortable and fruitless
Contentions, Controversies and Quarrels, will come to an end true, and Love,
Peace, Concord, Union, and Reconciliation, prevail and take place. Which, O God
of Infinite Love hasten to bring to pass amongst us and all People every where,
for thy Dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, who is the great Prince of Peace, who
came to Reconcile Mankind to thee, and one to another, and who tasted Death for
every Man, and shed his most precious Blood, by and through which all might be
brought nigh to the Lord, and one to another, out of all the enmity, strife,
variance, hatred, prejudice and envy, and to live together in Love, Peace, and
Friendship in his pure fear and holy dread, to the praise of his great Name,
who over all and by all is alone worthy to be Reverenced and renowned, exalted
and adored forever and ever more. Amen.

Object. 3d. There is another Objection still behind to be answered, and that
is, if it be said, suppose all be true as above cited concerning both parties
to be less or more blameworthy, yet ought not those who are most in the wrong,
and have been the greatest cause of those Jumbles, etc. and given the lightest
Provocations in diverse respects, should not these begin first, and acknowledge,
etc. Whatever weight this may have (as is usually urged amongst the great and
proud ones, and State-Politicians of this World, whose Grandeur and Honor
makes them very loath to bend or bow one to another; when they have quarrelled,
one thinks it below him (and so another the same) to submit first; yet sure it
ought not to have any place amongst us or any true Christians.

Ans. All must conclude this to be a good work, to make Peace or
Reconciliation. Now Friends, which of the two is really most capable first to
begin the same, those that have most, or those that have least transgressed?
whom shall we expect to be most Instrumental herein? But certainly whoever they
are that begin first, and endeavor most to promote this blessed Work, whether
they are the most or least to be blamed, will however in this deserve to be
most praised and commended, and will conduce most both to their true Peace and
Honor, and never will have cause to repent how forward, how humble and
condescending they were in this matter, and are willing, though in many things
innocent, to come under, and seem more to be blamed than really they deserve.
Let us remember what Paul that humble Apostle said, and how far he condescended
to be made all things to all Men.

To the weak he became as weak, 1 Cor. 9.22.
etc. We know that Condescension, Lowliness, Tenderness, Humility, etc. is very
much both commended and pretended to by many; but alas, is it not as little
practiced? Now here is a Trial for us all, who will be really most in the
Christian exercise of it. However it will be well for those that do their part;
and if others refuse to do theirs and be obstinate, churlish, refractory, stiff
and, wilful and appear still implacable, captious and Irreconcilable, let them
look to it, the weight of it will certainly be heavy on their Heads at last.
And whoever they are (here are none named) that have been or still are the
chief occasion, or cause of being a let to, and preventing of Reconciliation,
and of its being stopped, and not prosecuted nor accomplished amongst us,
doubtless the Lord God the most Just, Righteous and impartial Judge of all, who
is no respecter of Persons, will require it of them one day, and call them to
an account, and they must answer to him for it; and unless in time repented of,
they must bear the weight of it, however at present, or for a time they may
slight it and put it off, at an overly rate, and account themselves Innocent,
as those of old did, though they were very guilty, and yet had great confidences,
in whose very skirts was found the Blood of the Souls of the poor Innocents:
Jer. 2.35. etc.
(O the Blood of the Souls of many poor Innocents that have been hurt and
wounded on the one Hand, and stumbled on the other Hand by these things amongst
us) and instead of pursuing Peace, do reject all Christian and reasonable
offers of making Peace; so let all such as find themselves concerned herein,
whosoever they be, look about them and see to it in time, if so be as yet it be
not too late, for really the Matter is of greater importance and of a far
weightier concern and consequence than possibly they may at present be aware
of. But there is another objection still, and which is the last though none of
the least or weakest, but what may seem to some to be the most weighty of all,
and its thus farely stated.

Obj. 4. It may then be said by some, To what purpose should we so much as
think of meeting all together again, either in the old public Meeting House or
any where else, UNLESS there might be first some certain ground to expect, that
our meetings woudl be more quiet, peaceable, and comfortable to us than they
were some time before we parted? It is not yet forgot by many amongst us, what
sad Distractions and Confusions, what public Oppositions and open Contentions,
Smitings and Clashings appeared in our solemn Assemblies, when we came together
to wait upon and worship the great God: O what sad Reflections and aggravations
one against another, both to the great dishonor of the Name of the Lord, and
also to our shame and reproach of our holy profession? And with what grief and
sorrow of Heart did these things cause many to go away from each other in a
mournful condition, to see some bitterly exasperated and inflamed one against
another, others grievously wounded, and not a few stumbled, insomuch that some
might with a bowed down Spirit cry out and say, O that I had a Cottage in the
Wilderness, or that I had the Wings of a Dove, that I might flee away and be at
rest* Now the thing is thus, and here lies indeed the great Obstruction, say
some: In short its this, we are jealous and afraid that it will be so again,
and till we be sure that we can meet together in the same ancient love and life
of Truth as in the beginning, better it is for us to continue as it is and
where we are.

Ans. By no means Friends, pray do not reason so; and to avoid all manner of
Controversy, it is not proper here to enter into the merit of the cause of
these Quarrels, Confusions, etc. on either Hand: However let not the remedy be
worse than the disease, neither ought any upon what pretense soever to do evil
that good may come do you think that we ever can be brought near in Love and
Friendship one to and with another by keeping still at a distance, and by being
as it were afraid of each other? Let us all but once lay aside our Fears,
Jealousies, Doubts and Reasonings, and in that Faith which can remove Mountains
let us come once more all together again, and wait in the Faith, and see what
may be the Blessed effects thereof; who knows but that it may be a good means
of raising that ancient Love and Life amongst us, which is stronger than Death
it self? Pray consider what hurt will it be to try this expedient, and if it
does not answer what is proposed or desired, we will be but where we were
before, and where now we are: If you seriously compare the advantages of being
altogether, and the disadvantages in many respects of meeting asunder, or on
the contrary, the supposed Conveniences of the latter, with the real and great
inconveniences of the former, surely there is great odds either way, and the
one should reasonably be thought quickly to overballance the other; that is to
say, there is a great deal more can be said for meeting all together, than can
be alleged to the contrary: And suppose (upon trial) it should prove to be as
formerly, and as objected, we can (as is said) but meet asunder again as now we
do, if there should not be that Prudence, Patience and Charity to bear up and
carry through it all: And we shall however have this advantage by it, to be
more excusable both in the sight of God, and all sober impartial People, when
they see we have tried all possible means in order to obtain a Reconciliation,
and to have peaceable and quiet Meetings together: And besides, if the same
cannot be had, it may be the more manifest what has been or is still the cause
or occasion thereof. But is it not to be hoped and reasonably expected, that
most Friends on both sides are by this time heartily inclined to
Reconciliation, and to manage matters with more Wisdom and Prudence, and with
more Moderation and Discretion, and as it was agreed to, that all occasions of
public differences, as much as in us lies, be avoided on all Hands, for time
to come, and that the truth or Gospel of our Lord Jesus be only and alone
declared and preached to and amongst Friends and People, and all Personal
Reflections or Matters Disputable or in Controversy laid aside, or at least
suspended for a time, and discoursed of more privately, and that they will keep
the Feasts not with the old sower Leaven, neither with the Leaven of malice,
Zech. 13.6.
etc. that none shall have cause any more, either to ask what are these wounds
in thine Hands? Nor any to Answer; Those with which I was wounded in the House
of my Friends.

And though it was so or so before, as abovesaid: It does not therefore follow,
that it should always be so. Certainly Friends, there is neither a necessity
nor any reason for it; unless it be an unhappy Fate of some persons, that can
no more live without Contention, than the Salamander can live but in the Flames
of Fire, as is said, or a Fish in Water: Have we not all had time and leisure
enough to bethink our selves, and come into a more calm, sedate, cool and
temperate frame of Spirit, and to be at least more patient, and so wise and
unconcerned with these things that do but disturb our inward Peace, and
disquiet our Minds, if any imprudently or indiscreetly do manage Matters or run
into unseemly Reflections, in bearing, and prudently, slighting Provocations,
as if they were not given, or no notice taken of them, and then they will be
sure to return on themselves that give them (if not at all minded) with a
double weight, and in time make them weary of them? If we cannot be so
charitable in being so friendly, kind and loving one to another, as we ought to
be, and as we ought to live together as Brethren, let us however for our own
particular Content and quiet, bear and contemn all Injuries, etc. satisfying
our selves as well as the Apostle Paul, who seemed not at all to be disturbed
or disquieted with the rash Censures of others, who had this to answer as a
Salve to them all, who says in 1 Cor. 4.3. But with me it is a very small
thing that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment, etc. So let all
concerned seriously consider of what is here in universal good will and true
tender love to all proposed, before it be too late, and our differences prove
as fatal to us or any of us, upon a spiritual account, as its reported that War
did upon a temporal account to the Duke of Burgundy, which began between him
and the Swissers for a very small trifle, even but for a load of Sheepskins,
wherein the Duke (refusing all offers of accord) lost in three Battles, Honor,
Life and Wealth; See Historical Contemplations, Page 55.
on which the Historian makes this Observation, not unsuitable to the present
subject. Of how great (says he) advantage to us while we are in this World, is
Moderation, whereby even easily those differences are accommodated, and
mischiefs avoided, which our frowardness and obstinacy, widen unmeasurably and
many times involve us in utter ruin past recovery. It is said in Judges 5.15,
16. For the Divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of Heart. For the
Divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of Heart. And may it not be
said also that for our sad Divisions, the grievous Distractions, Quarrels, etc.
in this place there has been, and still there are great thoughts of concerning
the same; whatever true searchings of Heart have been, or however surely ought
to have been, and yet still one time or other must be, even after the Cause, or
what that has been which has occasioned and continued these things, so as to
this very day they are amongst us; and O that the Lord would be pleased yet
more and more both to search that out, and also remove it whatever it be, and
wherever it is, which hinders our Peace, Concord and Reconciliation together
both here and every where.

And Friends, must not this at last be the Result of all, and be concluded on
by all the impartial and unbyassed on every Hand, that the whole fault and the
greatest and most principal Cause, why Peace and Reconciliation is not
obtained, nor can be at present effected and brought to pass, must be laid on
some few particular persons, and we wish there be not such a deep rooted and
inveterate prejudice, and irreconcilable Rancor and Enmity between them, as
some have observed and lamented: Insomuch that they cannot look upon one
another with a friendly Countenance, nor converse together neither upon a
Religious or civil account. But we forbear to mention any Names: So that the
cunning, crafty, and subtle Contrivances and designs of some who carry on
their own private ends, and politic projects of exalting them selves, and
drive on under specious pretenses some sinister or popular interest, together
with the Whisperings, Backbitings and Surmisings, of tatling busy Bodies,
whose chief business is to beget Jealousies and hard thoughts, etc. one against
another, has been none of the least of the Engines and Methods which the grand
Disturber and Enemy of us all has used both first, to foment, and also to keep
up and heighten differences, and then to divide, rend, and break into pieces,
and run into parties one after another, which alas, many are more zealous to
maintain, when once engaged therein, either by affection, interest, or
relation, and are more eager and earnest by far to promote the same, than
purely the interest of naked Truth it self.

And is it not a great pity that such a substantial commodious Meeting House as
the old one is, both for Situation, Largeness, and several other Conveniences,
should altogether be as useless, and lie waste and desolate, as already for
some years, and may be more (a great injury both to the living and the dead)
and in the mean time Friends on both sides put to the charge and inconveniency
of having two distinct public Meeting-places? O how will some be able to
answer for this in the day of the Lord!

SECT. IV.
Some Friendly Counsel and tender advice to Professors of Truth, with one or
two more substantial Testimonies.

I. LEt us therefore, Friends, every one of us lay aside all manner of
Peevishness of Spirit, and let not a haughty kind of a sullen morose Humor
prevail upon any of us, neither let an impatient, insolent, or insulting Temper
appear in us: But let us all be as tender and complying, as affectionate and
good natured toward all, as possibly we can be, that so by an obliging
Civility and courteous Behavior, as well as a melting kindness, it may be
apparent that we do sincerely desire the good and well-fair one of another.

And were we all but once brought to be of this excellent and truly
Christian-like Temper, viz. to judge charitably, to bear patiently, to be
moderately inclined, freely and fully to forgive, tenderly compassionate,
meekly condescend, and humbly submit to, and prefer one another; then we should
soon see things grow better amongst us; then there would not be such shyness,
distance, and straitness, nor such Contentions, Confusions, Distractions, etc.
amongst us.

And had it not been for these evil, hurtful, and stumbling practices, would
not the Truth have prevailed generally in this place, as much as in any? And
before these sad divisions happened, were there many Country Meetings, like to
this here, and that in diverse respects both for freshness and largeness? And
certainly could it ever have come to such a loss, either as to the one or the
other, had that Innocence, Lowliness, Simplicity, Lamb-like nature, Tenderness
and Charity, which first appeared, been really by all kept to, which alas for
some time past has been too much on the decaying hand, and in the place thereof
too much of Human Wisdom, Carnal Policy, Subtle Contrivances, and Cunning
Projects, together with Sourness, Loftiness, Prejudice, Enmity, Envy, Self
exaltation, Obs. But the Blessed Truth is still the same as ever, and must not
be blamed for these things.
etc. has alas too much prevailed, as to some here, and been on the increasing
hand; Insomuch that the one, viz. the latter, has even almost overpowered the
other.

O Friends, this indeed is sad and very grievous to consider, but it is really
too true (though a mournful) observation. And would to God that it could be
proved by any to be but either a mistake or a misrepresentation, or a too rash
Conclusion, or severe groundless Censure, or what might be supposed, to be but
the product of dissatisfaction or prejudice, as doubtless some will be ready
enough to judge so.

But the Instances and Effects of the aforesaid (the greater is the pity) being
so public and notoriously seen and observed, as they have been and are, and
that too almost daily, There is neither that ground to suggest any one of these
as other ways there might be, nor can any rationally conclude, that what is
here mentioned only in general concerning the same, is done either from Malice
or Ill Will toward any: And there are but few (if any) amongst us here, but
must confess to the Truth thereof, and that it is too often manifest in one
Action or other, which ought indeed to be much lamented by all the sincere and
honest hearted Friends of Truth; and surely it is cause of great grief and
sorrow to all such as consider of things, both seriously and impartially, and
are of one Universal public Spirit, and concerned for the good of all, and not
biased to interests or parties, etc. And Friends, happy would we all be, that
as we profess to be followers of blessed Jesus, who suffered for us, leaving us
an example that we should follow his steps, so we may really demonstrate that
we are truly such as imitate him, and that the same mind be in us, which was in
him, who (though he did no Sin, neither was Guile ever found in his Mouth) yet
when he was reviled, he reviled not again; 1 Pet. 2.21, 23.
when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that Judges
righteously, and most meekly and patiently endured the contradictions of
Sinners, Luke 23.25.
and prayed (according to his own injunction to us) for his enemies, even those
that Crucified him, and said, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do.

And as holy the Apostle, after he had with a great deal of excellent good
arguments pleaded for Compassion and Condescension, as in Romans 13. In the
Wisdom of God he gave forth this Conclusion and Determination, in the first
Verse of the next Chap. We then (says he) that are strong, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every of us please
his Neighbor for his good, to Edification; for, (observe) even Christ pleased
not himself; but, as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached
thee, fell on me.

And those that are stronger and wiser than others, must we not also bear with
some of their natural infirmities sometimes? for where is the Man, or Woman
wholly exempt or free from them? but less or more for want of that due and
constant watchfulness one time or other, appears in them; and therefore the
same Apostle tenderly counseled the Galatians to bear one another Burdens,
and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Gal. 6.2, 3.
For if any Man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives
himself.

Which, if rightly considered, none have cause to be proud, self conceited or
exalted in themselves. And to prevent and exclude all vain glorious boasting,
or insulting, or being lifted up, either upon a spiritual or temporal account
in any, whatever may be their Gifts, Seize, Abilities, or Qualifications,
let the best, the wisest, the strongest or richest Man or Woman, ponder
seriously in their minds, but these two or three Queries of the Apostle Paul in
his own words, or rather such as God by his Spirit moved him to utter, and
answer them, so as they should be, and see then if they can justly brag, or
vainly boast or insult over others.

6. The Apostle, after he had given the Corinthians a very seasonable caution
in the beginning of the 1st. 1 Cor. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Chapter to beware of rash, censorious and forward Judging one another: Next of too
fondly or foolishly admiring any Man's Person, as in the 6th, Verse, Or as in
the Margin distinguishes.
These things (says he) Brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self,
and to Apollo, for your sakes, that ye might learn in us (observe) not to think
of Men above that which is written, That no one of you be puffed up one against
another. Then in the next Verse he comes to his close Queries. For who makes
thee (O Man, or O Woman whosoever thou be) to differ from another? 2dly. And
what have thou that thou did not receive it? (As most certain it is we all
have received, whatever we enjoy or whatever we are upon any account, it is
from him, and by him, the great and blessed Benefactor to all mankind, from
whom all good and perfect gifts come, and who is rich and liberal to all) But
3dly. Why do thou then glory, as if thou had not received it?

7. So it seems, there were some in his days that were puffed up, and forgot
both the giver and themselves too, and its like were ready to trample upon,
rejoice, and insult over others, as if they had merited what they were, Ja.
4.16.
and what they enjoyed; for some rejoiced in their boasting, which was evil
rejoicing. Now says the Apostle to them in verse 8. Ye are full now, ye are
rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God ye di^ reign,
that we might also reign with you: We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are
wise, etc.

And the same Apostle says in the same Epistle, Let him that thinks he
stands, Chapter 10, 12.13. verse.
take heed lest he fall; for there has no temptation taken you, but such as is
common or incident, (as the margin has it) to Man; Considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted; and as in the 13th. Chap. to the Heb. in another Cause,
as being your selves also in the Body. For whatever happens to one Man, may
happen to every Man.

And had that Christian good advice taken place, or yet could be regarded and
followed, which was given some years ago, by a very good tenderhearted
devoutand ancient Friend, Loved and Respected, (by most, if not all that knew
him) it would neither ever have been so as it has been, nor would it continue
long so, as now it is amongst us.

Its worth both the pains of Transcribing and seriously perusing, is as
follows, viz. Let all strive to excel in tenderness and and long-suffering,
and to be kept out of hard and evil thoughts one of another, and from harsh
interpretations, concerning any thing relating to one another. Oh this is
unworthy to be found in an Israelite toward an Egyptian, but exceeding
shameful and inexcusable to be found in one Brother toward another. How many
weaknesses does the Lord pass by in us, how ready is he to interpret every
thing well concerning his Disciples, that may bare a good Interpretation? The
Spirit, says he is willing, but the flesh is weak, when they had been all
scattered from him upon his death, he did not afterward upbraid them, but
sweetly gathered them again. O dear Friends, have we received the same Life of
sweetness, let us bring forth the same sweet fruits, being ready to excuse and
receive what may tend toward the excuse of another in any doubtful Cause; and
where there is any evil manifest, O wait to overcome it with good: O let us not
spend the strength of our Spirits, in crying out of one another, because of
evil, but watch, and wait where the Mercy and healing Virtue will please to
arise: So the living God, the God of Israel, the God of everlasting ten-Bowels
and Compassions to Israel, fill the Vessels of his Heritage with his Life, and
cause the Peace and Love of his holy Nature and Spirit to descend upon their
dwellings, and to spring up powerfully in them toward his living Truth and
toward one another. O Lord my God, when thou have shown the wants of Israel in
any kind sufficiently (whether in the particular or in the general,) bring
forth the supply thereof from thy fullness, so ordering it in thine eternal
Wisdom, that all may be ashamed and abased before thee, and thy Name praised in
and over all. See the Book called many deep Considerations, etc.

VIII. One more Testimony, and it is of a singular person, as profound in the
knowledge, both of Natural and Supernatural or Heavenly Divine Mysteries, as any
in this age; And indeed there are but few that can equal or come near him in
either.

Whose name as well as the formers is omitted, because some may like the Matter
of both their Testimonies, but may be (though groundlesly) prejudiced against
them otherwise; and possibly the greatest reason they can give for it is,
because they were or are not of their party, as usually is said, such a one, is
a good Man, and such a one is a wise discreet Man: But still there follows an
if and a but he is of this or the other side, Opinion, etc. This brings to my
remembrance what one observes, that under the Papacy, any Sins find easy
absolution if the person be not suspected of Protestantism, and any Opinions
have tolerable favor, if not degenerated from Papal Authority. How often
(besides by Jehu) has that question been past, Who is on my side? And if the
party have been right for that Cause, if his Religion be that of Mahomet, or
his life like that of Apicius, he need not doubt but he shall find fair
entertainment.

IX. But to return to the Matter before proposed: It would be too large to
insert the whole Testimony, (being two or three Pages) here is the last and
least part of it, but what is very material and of a general Service to all,
and would help much to put a final end to all Controversies, Disputes, etc. if
practiced; if this (says he) were but one received amongst those called
Christians, and that nothing should be required by one sort from another, as an
Article of Faith, or Doctrine, or Principle of the Christian Religion, in common
to be believed, but as what is expressly delivered in the Scriptures, in plain
Scripture terms, of how great advantage might it be to a true Reconcilement
amonst them, and beget true Christian Unity, Peace, Love, and Concord? And as
for the consequential part of peculiar Doctrins, whether true or false, to
leave every one a freedom, without imposing upon them the Affirmative, or
Negative, as any Bond or Tie of Christian fellowship (this is a purely
Primitive, and truly Apostolic like Testimony) for if such consequential
Doctrine be false, it is most unreasonable to impose it, and therefore in that
Case a Dissenter should have his liberty to differ in Judgment, Obs.
and without any Breach of Brotherly Unity and Society: And if it be true, yet
not being opened or revealed to another, it cannot be in Justice, pressed or
urged upon him where God has not given him the true freedom and clearness of
Mind to receive it; and to do otherwise (that is, to Impose, Press, or urge any
thing, that is purely Matter of Conscience, upon any is to transgress that
Golden Rule, delivered by Paul, viz. To walk by the same Rule according to what
we have attained. And if any be otherwise minded, says he, God will reveal it
to him; and if this advice could find place (and a great pity but it should
amongst all) it would bring the Differences amongst those called Christians, in
point of Judgment, into a very small and narrow compass, and they would
understand one another far better than now they do.

THE CONCLUSION.
I. But now to conclude the whole (for indeed a great deal more might be
enlarged on this Subject, but have already much exceeded, by what was at first
intended in this Expostulation and persuasive, etc.) remember what the Apostle
tenderly exhorts unto: Brethren (says he) if any Man be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are Spiritual, restore, (not rejoice, or insult over) such a one: And
how? In the Spirit of Meekness; not then in the Spirit of Ruggedness,
Harshness, Uncharitableness, etc. And why? Because considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted; bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Royal
Law, and with all Lowliness and Meekness, forbearing one another in love.

II. And above and beyond all, let us hear, hearken to and obey what our great
and Blessed Lord and Master Christ Jesus Commands us, Take my Yoke (says he)
upon you, and learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly in Heart, Mat. 11.29. He is
the best Master that ever was or can be, and a most blessed and profitable
Lesson for all to Learn, to be Meek and Lowly, and of a Patient Spirit. Which
all Christ's Scholars, or such as are Disciplined in his School, are instructed
in: And says he also, A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. And in the next
Verse he presses the same again, and have peace one with another. Ye have heard
it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, etc. but I say unto you resist not evil;
John 13.34.
and be Merciful, as your Father also is Merciful. Judge not, and ye shall not
be Judged: Condemn not and ye shall not be Condemned, which must needs relate
to unjust, sower and uncharitable Judgment, etc. as by these following words;
forgive and ye shall be forgiven, Luke 6.36, 37.
and have Peace one with another.

3. If all Friends would but look well at home, examine Matters there
Impartially, and mind the Prosperity of Truth, and of the work of God to be
carried on in their own Hearts, and be more concerned to feel all that Judged
down and wrought out in themselves by his pure eternal power, which is contrary
to him and obstructs their inward Peace, with him were every one thus truly and
daily exercised, as they ought to be, then certainly they would not look out so
much at others, or be so Uncharitably Censorious in their severe and harsh
Judging and condemning of others, who possibly may be at last in the great day
of the Lord, found to be more justified and approved of by him the great Judge
of all, than they themselves may be; for his ways and thoughts are not as Man's
ways and thoughts are, neither are his doings like unto Mortals; but as there
is as great, if not a greater Disproportion, betwixt the one and the other, as
there is distance between Heaven and Earth, so oftententimes it has proved to
be too true, that those whom Men do Countenance, Reject, Condemn and Judge as
Reprobates, may be Countenanced, Received, and Chosen of the Lord, And so on
the contrary Hand whom Men may Commend, etc. by God may be Discommended,
Disowned, etc.

And now the God of Love and Peace, grant a Reconciliation together amongst all
Friends, that do profess his Holy, Peaceable Truth; and that the Hearts of all
may be sincerely disposed, and cordially inclined thereunto, that so we may all
call upon his reverent pure Name, and serve him with one Consent; and that
being like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, we may with
one Mind and one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 15.5, 6. This is the earnest and fervent desire of him, who is an
impartial Friend and Well-wisher to all.

POSTSCRIPT Containing an Advertisement, with something further relating to the
aforesaid Expostulation, etc.
I. BE pleased to Observe (Friendly Reader) in order to prevent any groundless
misapprehensions, and to remove mistakes, That notwithstanding of what is so
largely expressed, as with respect to a meek, charitable bearing and forgiving
each other, etc. we do not however in the least hereby intend that whatever
has appeared, does or may appear in any that is manifestly contrary to, and
incosistent with the Holy, Pure Truth professed amongst us, ought to be
Connived at, or Countenanced, without a faithful Testimony given forth against
the same, according to Gospel order, as likewise even against those who do act
above their proper Sphere, and out of their places in the Concerns of Truth, by
exalting themselves beyond their Stations in the Church of Christ, in which the
Lord has placed them, and in all humility ought to abide, and in lowliness of
mind therein keep, but by departing therefrom, as too many have done in all
Ages, and as in this of ours some do, has caused much trouble and exercises to
the Lords People, and has been one of the chiefest occasions of the Divisions,
Contentions, Strifes and Animosities amongst them; such ought to be Cautioned
and Advised, and also Warned of the great Hurt and Prejudice they do in many
respects, both to themselves and others, and if they continue stiff and
obstinate, and instead of receiving the tender Council and Admonition from any
Friend, or Friends, concerned in the Love of God, to give the same, they rather
grow higher minded and more into self Exaltation, Conceitedness, and spiritual
Pride, they are then to be zealously detected and testified against: But still
we say all this should be done in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, and with
true Christian Prudence and Discretion, and nothing given away to harbor in
the least any Personal Prejudice or Enmity on the one hand, (which is to be as
carefully watched against as Partiality or Hypocrisy, two great Evils, and too
ready on the other hand to creep in.)

II. That so upon the Reforming, growing better, and mending what has been
amiss in any upon any account, there may be both a friendly and kind receiving
and embracing one another again into true Love, Friendship and Unity, and also
in that sweet Christian and Charitable frame of spirit, forgive what is past, and
never upbraid or remember it any more against them. It is said in Eccles. 28.2,
3. Forgive thy Neighbor the hurt that he has done unto thee, so shall thy
Sins be forgiven, when thou prayest. One Man bears hatred against another,
and does he seek pardon from the Lord? he shows no mercy to a Man that is
like himself, and does he ask forgiveness of his own Sins?

III. See Charrons Book of Wisdom chap. 34. page 104.
There is nothing (as Charron well observes) so honorable as to know how to
Pardon: To give Grace, to Remit and Forgive, belongs to a Sovereign Prince,
if thou will be a King of Kings themselves, do an act that may become a King:
Pardon freely, be Gracious toward him that offends thee: But indeed if God
were not more merciful and favorable, of greater Compassion and Pity toward
us, than we are often toward one another, alas who then could be saved? For
have we not all greatly grieved and provoked him, much more than any can
provoke or grieve us? Is it not very unbecoming for us to be Quarrelling and be
Implacable one toward another when he is both willing and ready to be
Reconciled to, and at Peace with us, after such innumerable Transgressions
against him, which we all have been found guilty of? Come Friends, seeing then
he is so ready to forgive us (upon a sincere Repentance) all our former
provocations; Let us therefore also forgive one another, be Reconciled unto,
and at Peace one with another.

IV. As also we desire it may be observed, that we plead for no other Unity,
Peace, Concord or Reconciliation with any, but that which we believe to be
consistent with, and agreeable to the Truth, even that which the Holy Apostles
exhorted all to endeavor after and to be found in, which is the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace. And that is both much more comprehensive, and of
greater weight, than many either understand, or would have it to be. This
blessed Unity, etc. which stands in Righteousness, we really desire forever to
Prize, and do value above and beyond all other Unities or Vniformities
whatsoever, in which we are and hope ever to be in true Unity (in the Ground)
withal the Faithful, Sincere and Upright hearted People of God every where.

V. And we know that the True Spiritual, Invisible Fellowship and Communion of
Saints (which consists in the Divine Light or Spirit of Christ Jesus) is not
Confined to any External Visible Form, etc. For as J. Hales of Eaton, See his
Golden Remains Page 49, 50.
a Worthy and Learned Man well observes, that it is the Unity of the Spirit, in
the Bond of Peace, and not the Identity (or oneness) of Conceit which the Holy
Ghost requires of at the Hands of Christians, etc. Concerning which much more
might be said, but let this suffice for the present, having enlarged already
far beyond what was first intended.

The Reader is also desired to observe, that what is expressed in the
aforesaid, concerning Heats, Animosities, Prejudices, etc. one against another,
only Relates to those amongst Friends and such places, where the Unhappy and
sad Difference has fallen out, as in this and some other parts.

VI. So shall Conclude all as in the Beginning of the Preface, 1 Cor. 16.14.
and 14.1.
with the Apostles advice; Let all your things be done with Charity; and follow
after it. Concerning which one of the Ancients spoke very excellently: For
unprofitably (says he) has he all, who wants that one (viz. Charity) whereby
he should use all; and how great is Love? for if that be wanting all other
Graces lose their Grace; but if present, all are profitable.

VII. And as we find the Holy Apostles did neither affect nor seek of Men
Glory, neither, says Paul, to the believing Thessalonians, of you, 1 These. 2.5,
6.
nor yet of others; neither at any time used we flattering words: So likewise
he tells them, but we were Gentle amongst you, even as a Nurse Cherishes her
Children. And according to this their Practice they exhorted others as in,
Titus 3.2. To speak evil of no Man, to be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all Men. And in 2 Timothy 24. It is said, Observe this well.
the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to
teach, Patient in Meekness, instructing those that opposed themselves; etc. nor
must be self willing, nor soon angry, etc. These Divine Blessed Qualifications
ought all that profess to be Ministers, and followers of Christ Jesus to be
Endowed with, who should also walk worthy of the Vocation, unto which they are
called, with all humbleness of mind and meekness, and with Long-suffering and
Patience, etc. Forbearing (or as some read it Supporting) one another through,
or in Love.

THE END.
The CONTENTS of the Book.
I. THE Introduction by way of Preface. page 1. II. The Copy of a Letter and a
Paper, Containing some Christian and Reasonable Proposals for an accommodation
of Differences. page 8. III. A tender and healing Epistle from Friends of
Bristol to Friends of Reading, advising them to meet all together again. page
13. A seasonable Expostulation to Peace and Reconciliation, directed
particularly to Friends of Reading. page 15. Sect. I. Contains several weighty
Motives, showing the great need and necessity of Reconcilation. Ibid. Sect. II.
A Collection of diverse remarkable Testimonies, suitable to the Subject treated
on. page 31. Sect. III. Some Objections fairly Stated, with their Answers, as
also diverse weighty Considerations proposed. page 46. Sect. IV. Some Friendly
Council, and tender Advice, to Professors of Truth, with one or two more
substantial Testimonies. page 63. The Conclusion. page 69. A Postscript,
Containing an Advertisement, with something further relating to the said
Expostulation, etc. page 71.

